Fifth  Edition 

With  Preface  by  Robert  P.  Pula 

SCIENCE 

AND 

SANITY 

AN  INTRODUCTION  TO 
NON-ARISTOTELIAN  SYSTEMS  AND 
GENERAL  SEMANTICS 

BY 

ALFRED  KORZYBSKI 

AUTHOR,  Manhood  of  Humanity 
FOUNDER,  INSTITUTE  OF  GENERAL  SEMANTICS 

INSTITUTE  OF  GENERAL  SEMANTICS 

“The  progress  of  modem  science,  including  the  new  science  of  man  as  a  time-binder , 
has  been  due  uniquely  to  the  freedom  of  scientists  to  revise  their  fundamental 
assumptions ,  terminologies,  undefined  terms,  which  involve  hidden  assumptions,  etc., 
underlying  our  reflections,  a  freedom  prohibited  in  ‘primitive  sciences’  and  also  in 
dictatorships,  past  and  present.” 

From  Manhood  of  Humanity 

“The  aim  of  the  work  of  Aristotle  and  the  work  of  the  non-aristotelians  is  similar,  except 
for  the  date  of  our  human  development  and  the  advance  of  science.  The  problem  is 
whether  we  shall  deal  with  science  and  scientific  methods  of  350  B.C.  or  of  [today].  In 
general  semantics,  in  building  up  a  non-aristotelian  system,  the  aims  of  Aristotle  are 
preserved  yet  scientific  methods  are  brought  up  to  date.” 

From  the  author’s  Introduction  to  the  2nd  Edition 

“General  semantics  is  not  any  ‘philosophy’,  or  ‘psychology’,  or  ‘logic’,  in  the  ordinary 
sense.  It  is  a  new  extensional  discipline  which  explains  and  trains  us  how  to  use  our 
nervous  systems  most  efficiently.  It  is  not  a  medical  science,  but  like  bacteriology,  it  is 
indispensable  for  medicine  in  general  and  for  psychiatry,  mental  hygiene,  and  education 
in  particular.  In  brief,  it  is  the  formulation  of  a  new  non-aristotelian  system  of 
orientation  which  affects  every  branch  of  science  and  life.  The  separate  issues  involved 
are  not  entirely  new;  their  methodological  formulation  as  a  system  which  is  workable, 
teachable  and  so  elementary  that  it  can  be  applied  by  children,  is  entirely  new.” 

From  the  author’s  Introduction  to  the  2nd  Edition 

Information  on  the  Institute  and  its  programs  and  publications  available  from: 

Institute  of  General  Semantics 
86  85th  Street 

Brooklyn,  New  York  11209-4208 
USA 

Phone:  718-921-7093 
Fax:  718-921-4276 
Email:  Institute@General-Semantics.org 
Web:  www.General-Semantics.org 

Leading  A  Revolution  in  Human  Evaluating ™ 

ISBN  0-937298-01 -8 

9  780937  298015 

9  0  0  0  0  > 

“I  must  stress  that  I  give  no  panaceas,  but  experience 
shows  that  when  the  methods  of  general  semantics  are 
applied ,  the  results  are  usually  beneficial,  whether  in 
business,  management,  etc.,  medicine,  law,  education  on 
all  levels,  or  personal  inter-relationships,  be  they  in 
family,  national  or  international  fields.  If  they  are  not 
applied,  but  merely  talked  about,  no  results  can  be 
expected. 

“In  general  semantics  we  are  concerned  with  the  sanity  of 
the  race,  including  particularly  methods  of  prevention; 
eliminating  from  home,  elementary,  and  higher  education 
inadequate  aristotelian  types  of  evaluation  which  too 
often  lead  to  the  un-sanity  of  the  race,  and  building  up  for 
the  first  time  a  positive  theory  of  sanity,  as  a  workable 
non-aristotelian  system. 

“The  task  ahead  is  gigantic  if  we  are  to  avoid  more 
personal,  national,  and  even  international  tragedies  based 
on  unpredictability,  insecurity,  fears,  anxieties,  etc., 
which  are  steadily  disorganizing  the  functioning  of  the 
human  nervous  system.  Only  when  we  face  these  facts 
fearlessly  and  intelligently  may  we  save  for  future 
civilizations  whatever  there  is  left  to  save,  and  build  from 
the  ruins  of  a  dying  epoch  a  new  and  saner  society. 

“A  non-aristotelian  re-orientation  is  inevitable;  the  only 
problem  today  is  when,  and  at  what  cost.” 

From  the  author’s  Preface  to  the  Third  Edition  and 
Introduction  to  the  Second  Edition 

“ . . .  Korzybski  was  not  only  a  bold  innovator,  but  also  a 
brilliant  synthesizer  of  available  data  into  a  coherent 
system.  This  system,  when  internalized  and  applied,  can 
create  a  saner  and  more  peaceful  world,  justifying  the  title 
of  this  book,  Science  and  Sanity 

From  the  Preface  to  the  Fifth  Edition  by  Robert  P.  Pula 

SCIENCE 

AND 

SANITY 

KORZYBSKI 

5™ 

Edition 

_ A _ 

INSTITUTE  OF  GENERAL  SEMANTICS 

THE  INSTITUTE  OF  GENERAL  SEMANTICS  was  founded 
in  1938  in  Chicago  and  is  now  located  in  Brooklyn,  New  York. 
The  seminar  training  program  continues  to  be  carried  on,  and 
an  increasing  number  of  universities,  colleges,  secondary  and 
elementary  schools  offer  courses  in  general  semantics,  or 
integrate  the  methodology  in  the  teaching  of  other  courses. 

ALFRED  KORZYBSKI 
belonged  to  an  old  Polish 
family  which  had  produced 
mathematicians,  engineers, 
scientists,  etc.  for 
generations.  Bom  in  Warsaw 
in  1879,  he  was  trained  as  an 
engineer,  and  during  the  First 
World  War  was  attached  to 
the  General  Staff  Intelligence 
Department  of  the  Second 
Russian  Army.  Later  he 
served  in  various  military 
capacities  in  this  country  and 
Canada.  After  the  publication  of  Manhood  of  Humanity  in 
1921,  he  remained  in  the  United  States  and  developed  the 
methodology  by  which  his  new  theory  of  time-binding  could 
be  applied.  These  studies  culminated  in  Science  and  Sanity  in 
1933.  He  was  the  Founder  and  Director  of  the  Institute  of 
General  Semantics,  established  in  1938  as  the  center  for 
training  in  his  work,  and  continued  to  lecture  and  write  until 
his  death  in  1950. 

ALSO  BY  THE  AUTHOR 

Manhood  of  Humanity ,  1921;  2nd  Ed.  Institute  of 
General  Semantics,  1950. 

Time-Binding:  The  General  Theory.  Two  Papers,  1924- 
1926. 

“The  Role  of  Language  in  the  Perceptual  Processes.”  Topic 
IX,  Clinical  Psychology  Symposium  1949-1950  in 
Perception:  An  Approach  to  Personality.  Ronald 
Press,  New  York,  1951. 

Alfred  Korzyhski:  Collected  Writings,  1920-1950 ,  Coll.  & 

Arr.  by  M.  Kendig.  F‘  Ed.  Institute  of  General 
Semantics,  1990. 

INTERNATIONAL  NON-ARISTOTELIAN  LIBRARY 

INSTITUTE  OF  GENERAL  SEMANTICS 

SCIENCE  AND  SANITY 

International  Non-Aristotelian  Library 

Founder:  Alfred  Korzybski  Executive  Editor:  Charlotte  S.  Read 

VOLUMES  ALREADY  PUBLISHED 

Published  or  Distributed  by  the  Institute  of  General  Semantics 

Manhood  of  Humanity:  The  Science  and  Art  of  Human  Engineering. 

E.  P.  Dutton,  New  York,  1921;  2nd  Ed., 

Institute  of  General  Semantics  (IGS),  Distributors,  1950  . by  A.  Korzybski 

Time-Binding:  The  General  Theory,  1924-1926  . . by  A.  Korzybski 

Science  and  Sanity . by  A.  Korzybski 

Selections  From  Science  and  Sanity,  1948,  by  A.  Korzybski .  Compiled  by  G.  E.  Janssen 

General  Semantics  Seminar  1937:  Transcription  of  Notes  from  Lectures 

in  General  Semantics  Given  at  Olivet  College . by  A.  Korzybski 

Papers  from  the  First  American  Congress  on  General  Semantics,  1938 . Ed.  by  H.  Baugh 

Papers  from  the  Second  American  Congress  on  General  Semantics:  Non- Aristotelian 

Methodology  (Applied)  for  Sanity  in  Our  Time,  1943  .  Ed.  by  M.  Kendig 

Introductory  Lectures  on  General  Semantics,  1944  . by  Francis  P.  Chisholm 

Levels  of  Knowing  and  Existence:  Studies  in  General  Semantics.  Harper, 

New  York,  1959;  2nd  Ed.,  IGS,  1973  .  by  Harry  L.  Weinberg 

Words  and  What  They  Do  to  You:  Beginning  Lessons  in  General 
Semantics  for  Junior  and  Senior  High  School.  Row,  Peterson, 

Evanston,  1953;  2nd  Ed.,  IGS,  1965  .  by  Catherine  Minteer 

General  Semantics  Monographs  III,  A  Theory  of  Meaning  Analyzed,  1942 

Foreword .  by  A.  Korzybski  and  M.  Kendig 

Three  Separate  Papers .  by  T.  C.  Pollock,  J.  G.  Spaulding  and  Allen  Walker  Read 

General  Semantics  Monographs  IV,  Scientific  Epistemologic  Backgrounds  of  General 

Semantics,  1959  . by  Marjorie  Swanson 

Alfred  Korzybski:  Collected  Writings,  1920-1950, 1990  . Coll,  and  Arr.  by  M.  Kendig 

Graduate  Research  in  General  Semantics,  1992 .  Comp,  by  Kenneth  Johnson 

Thinking  CreAtically,  1991  . Ed.  by  Kenneth  Johnson 

General  Semantics  Bulletin: 

Journal  of  the  Institute  of  General  Semantics  . Ed.  by  James  D.  French 

By  Other  Publishers 

Language  Habits  in  Human  Affairs:  An  Introduction  to  General  Semantics.  Harper 
New  York,  1941;  2nd  Ed.  by  Sanford  Berman,  Ed.,  1994,  International  Society 

for  General  Semantics  (ISGS)  .  by  Irving  J.  Lee 

People  In  Quandaries:  The  Semantics  of  Personal  Adjustment. 

Harper,  New  York,  1946;  7™  Printing,  ISGS,  1996  . by  Wendell  Johnson 

How  to  Develop  Your  Thinking  Ability. 

McGraw  Hill,  New  York,  1950  . by  Kenneth  S.  Keyes,  Jr. 

The  Art  of  Awareness.  Wm.  C.  Brown,  Dubuque,  1966;  3rd  Ed.  1978  . by  J.S.  Bois 

Teaching  General  Semantics.  ISGS,  1969  . Ed.  by  Mary  Morain 

Making  Sense:  Exploring  Semantics  and  Critical 

Thinking.  Globe,  New  York,  1974  .  by  Robert  Potter 

Classroom  Exercises  in  General  Semantics.  ISGS,  1980  . Ed.  by  Mary  Morain 

Drive  Yourself  Sane:  Using  the  Uncommon  Sense  of  General  Semantics,  2nd  Ed., 

Extensional  Publishing,  Pasadena,  2001.  by  Susan  Presby  Kodish  and  Bruce  I.  Kodish 

VOLUMES  IN  PREPARATION 

General  Semantics  in  Psychotherapy . Ed.  by  Isabel  Caro  and  Charlotte  S.  Read 

Knowledge,  Uncertainty  and  Courage:  Selected  General  Semantics  Writings  of  Robert  P. 

Pula  .  by  Robert  P.  Pula 

The  Non-Identifying  Person:  Personal  Self-Restructuring  for  the  Extra-Planetary  Era 

.  by  Robert  P.  Pula 

Time-Binding:  A  Revolutionary  Approach  to  Human  Evaluating  by  Jeffrey  A.  Mordkowitz 

SCIENCE  AND  SANITY 

AN  INTRODUCTION  TO 
NON-ARISTOTELIAN  SYSTEMS  AND 
GENERAL  SEMANTICS 

BY 

ALFRED  KORZYBSKI 

AUTHOR,  MANHOOD  OF  HUMANITY 
FOUNDER,  INSTITUTE  OF  GENERAL  SEMANTICS 

FIFTH  EDITION 

With  Preface  by  ROBERT  P.  PULA 
and  revised  and  expanded  index 

INSTITUTE  OF  GENERAL  SEMANTICS 

International  Non-Aristotelian  Library 

INSTITUTE  OF  GENERAL  SEMANTICS 

Brooklyn,  New  York,  USA 

Copyright,  1933, 1941,  1948  by  Alfred  Korzybski 
Copyright,  1958  by  Charlotte  Schuchardt  Read 

Diagrams  on  Pages:  388,  391,  393,  396,  398, 414, 427,  471  Copyright  1924, 
1926, 1933,  1941, 1948  by  Alfred  Korzybski 

Copyright,  1958  by  Charlotte  Schuchardt  Read 

Preface  to  Fifth  Edition  and  Index  to  Fifth  Edition  Copyright  Institute  of  General  Semantics, 

All  International  Rights  Reserved 

First  Edition  1933 
Second  Edition  1941 
Third  Edition  1948 
Fourth  Edition  1958 
Fifth  Edition  1994 
Second  Printing  2000 

ISBN  0-937298-01-8 

Information  on  the  Institute  of  General  Semantics  and  its 
programs  and  publications  available  from; 

Institute  of  General  Semantics 

Leading  A  Revolution  in  Human  Evaluating ™ 

1994 

Library  of  Congress  Catalog  Card  Number  58-6260 

TO  THE  WORKS  OF 

Aristotle 

Cassius  J.  Keyser 

M.  Faraday 

C.  Judson  Herrick 

Ludwig  Wittgenstein 

WHICH  HAVE  GREATLY  INFLUENCED  MY  ENQUIRY, 
THIS  SYSTEM  IS  DEDICATED 

,,  A  T  my  alighting,  I  was  surrounded  with  a  crowd  of  people ;  but  those 
who  stood  nearest  seemed  to  be  of  better  quality.  They  beheld  me 
n  with  all  the  marks  and  circumstances  of  wonder,  neither,  indeed, 
was  I  much  in  their  debt ;  having  never,  till  then,  seen  a  race  of  mortals  so 
singular  in  their  shapes,  habits,  and  countenances.  Their  heads  were  all 
reclined  either  to  the  right  or  the  left ;  one  of  their  eyes  turned  inward,  and 
the  other  directly  up  to  the  zenith.  Their  outward  garments  were  adorned 
with  the  figures  of  suns,  moons,  and  stars,  interwoven  with  those  of  fiddles, 
flutes,  harps,  trumpets,  guitars,  harpsicords,  and  many  other  instruments 
of  music,  unknown  to  us  in  Europe.  I  observed,  here  and  there,  many  in 
the  habit  of  servants,  with  a  blown  bladder  fastened  like  a  flail  to  the  end 
of  a  short  stick,  which  they  carried  in  their  hands.  In  each  bladder  was  a 
.mall  quantity  of  dried  pease,  or  little  pebbles  (as  I  was  afterwards  in¬ 
formed).  With  these  bladders  they  now  and  then  flapped  the  mouths  and 
ears  of  those  who  stood  near  them,  of  which  practice  I  could  not  then  con¬ 
ceive  the  meaning ;  it  seems,  the  minds  of  these  people  are  so  token  up  with 
intense  speculations,  that  they  neither  can  speak,  nor  attend^  to  the  dis¬ 
courses  of  others,  without  being  roused  by  some  external  taction  upon  the 
organs  of  speech  and  hearing;  for  which  reason,  those  persons,  who  are 
able  to  afford  it  always  keep  a  flapper  (the  original  is  clitnenole)  in  their 
family,  as  one  of  their  domestics,  nor  ever  walk  abroad,  or  make  visits, 
without  him.  And  the  business  of  this  officer  is,  when  two  or  three  more 
persons  are  in  company,  gently  to  strike  with  his  bladder  the  mouth  of  him 
who  is  to  speak,  and  the  right  ear  of  him  or  them  to  whom  the  speaker 
addresseth  himself.  This  flapper  is  likewise  employed  diligently  to  attend 
his  master  in  his  walks,  and,  upon  occasion,  to  give  him  a  soft  nap  on  his 
eyes,  because  he  is  always  so  wrapped  up  in  cogitation  that  he  is  m  mani¬ 
fest  danger  of  falling  down  every  precipice,  and  bouncing  his  head  against 
every  post  ;  and  in  the  streets,  of  jostling  others,  or  being  jostled  himself, 

into  jj?^^ecessary  tQ  gjve  the  reader  this  information,  without  which  he 
would  be  at  the  same  loss  with  me,  to  understand  the  proceedings  of  these 
people,  as  they  conducted  me  up  the  stairs  to  the  top  of  the  island,  mid  from 
thence  to  the  royal  palace.  While  we  were  ascending,  they  forgot  several 
times  what  they  were  about,  and  left  me  to  myself,  till  their  memories  were 
again  roused  by  their  flappers;  for  they  appeared  altogether  unmoved  by 
the  sight  of  my  foreign  habit  and  countenance,  and  by  the  shouts  of  the 
vulgar,  whose  thoughts  and  minds  were  more  disengaged.  > 

And  although  they  are  dextrous  enough  upon  a  piece  of  paper  in 
the  management  of  the  rule,  the  pencil,  and  the  divider,  yet,  in  the  common 
actions  and  behaviour  of  life,  I  have  not  seen  a  more  clumsy,  awkward, 
and  unhandy  people,  nor  so  slow  and  perplexed  in  their  conceptions  upon 
all  other  subjects,  except  those  of  mathematics  and  music.  They  are  very 
bad  reasoners,  and  vehemently  given  to  opposition,  unless  when  they  happen 
to  be  of  the  right  opinion,  which  is  seldom  their  case.  Imagination,  fancy, 
and  invention  they  are  wholly  strangers  to,  nor  have  any  words  m  their 
language  by  which  those  ideas  can  be  expressed;  die  whole  compass  of  their 
thoughts  and  mind  being  shut  up  within  the  two  forementioned  sciences. 

Jonathan  Swift  ( Gulliver's  Travels ,  A  Voyage  to  Laputa) 

PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION  1933  . lxxxix 

PREFACE  TO  THE  FIFTH  EDITION,  1993 

Six  decades  have  passed  since  this  book  appeared  in  1933.  In  the  interim 
many  thousands,  in  varying  degrees  of  breadth  and  depth,  have  interacted  with 
the  formulations  first  presented  herein.  As  of  these  hours  of  writing,  people 
in  every  continent  (save,  perhaps,  Antarctica)  are  studying  and  applying 
general  semantics. 

Those  who  have  been  attracted  to  and  worked  with  Korzyb ski’s 
formulations  have  largely  come  from  the  evaluationally  energetic  and  self- 
selecting  segment  of  our  populations.  They  have  tended  to  be  leaders  or  those 
training  to  be  leaders  in  a  broad  range  of  interests  and  disciplines.  Through 
their  efforts  as  teachers,  managers,  researchers,  etc.,  Korzyb  ski’s  formulations 
have  explicitly  and  implicitly  reached  many  thousands  more. 

Some  aspects  of  general  semantics  have  so  permeated  the  (American) 
culture  that  behaviors  derived  from  it  are  common;  e.g.,  wagging  fingers  in  the 
air  to  put  ‘quotes’  around  spoken  terms  which  are  deemed  suspect.  Original 
korzybskian  terms  are  seen  used  without  attribution,  as  if  part  of  the  general 
vocabulary;  e.g.,  a  paragraph-long  explanation  of  “time-binding”  appearing  in 
a  high  school  social  studies  text. 

Some  of  Korzybski’s  coinages,  particularly  “neuro-linguistic,”  are  now 
common  coin  and  have  extended  the  subset  of  English  with  the  “neuro”  prefix. 
(The  Random  House  Dictionary  of  the  English  Language ,  2nd  Edition,  p. 
1291,  mistakenly  gives  “1960-65”  as  the  dates  of  origin  for  “neuro-linguistic” 
and  the  offspring  terms,  “neuro-linguistics”  and  “neuro-linguist.”) 

During  the  depth  of  the  recent  “Cold  War”  an  interview  about 
Korzybski’s  work  was  broadcast  by  Harry  Maynard  and  Wladyslaw  Marth  to 
Poland  over  Radio  Free  Europe.  A  new  study  by  a  Polish  scholar,  Karol 
Janicki,  credits  Korzybski  with  being  a  precursor  of  what  Janicki  calls  Non- 
Essentialist  Sociolinguistics. 1 

Science  and  Sanity  has  by  now  spawned  a  whole  library  of  works  by  other 
time-binders.  Some  of  them  have  been  listed  in  previous  editions.  Since  the 
publication  of  the  Fourth  Edition,  this  ‘parenting5  has  continued.  Books, 
doctoral  dissertations,  masters  theses,  scholarly  papers,  essays  and  journal 
articles  abound.  The  primary  journals  for  on-going  discussion  and 
development  of  general  semantics  are  the  General  Semantics  Bulletin , 
published  by  the  Institute  of  General  Semantics,  and  ETC.:  A  Review  of 
General  Semantics ,  published  by  the  International  Society  for  General 
Semantics.  Other  journals,  popular  and  scholarly,  publish  general  semantics 
materials,  pro  and  con. 

I;or  a  sampling  of  books  dealing  with  general  semantics  published  since 
1 970,  see  the  Bibliographic  Note.2  My  choices  do  not  reflect  my  evaluations 

PREFACE  TO  THE  FIFTH  EDITION 

of  the  books  listed.  They  are  included  to  indicate  the  continued  growth, 
discussion  of  and  influence  of  general  semantics.  Books  critical  of 
Korzybski/general  semantics  are  included.  They  are  tagged  thus:  (critique). 

I  consider  Korzybski’s  Collected  Writings  1920-1950  perhaps  the  most 
important  publication  in  general  semantics  since  Science  and  Sanity .3  This 
book  brings  together  all  of  Korzybski’s  known  published  writings  other  than 
his  major  books  and  a  set  of  seminar  lectures  given  at  Olivet  College  in  1 937 . 
The  940  page  book  is  a  'must5  for  anyone  undertaking  a  serious  study  of 
general  semantics. 

Three  works  scheduled  for  publication  in  1 993  and  1 994  include  those  of 
Susan  Presby  Kodish  and  Bruce  I.  Kodish,  Drive  Yourself  Sane!  Using  the 
Uncommon  Sense  of  General  Semantics,  Robert  P.  Pula,  Knowledge , 
Uncertainty  and  Courage:  The  Collected  General  Semantics  Writings  of 
Robert  P.  Pula ,  and  General  Semantics  in  Psychotherapy ,  edited  by  Isabel 
Caro  and  Charlotte  S.  Read. 

The  Institute  of  General  Semantics  remains  the  primary  center  for  training 
in  general  semantics.  Seminar-workshops,  weekend  seminars  and  colloquia 
continue.  An  Advanced  Studies  and  Teacher  Certification  Program  for 
training  leaders  and  teachers  in  general  semantics  has  been  established. 

The  distinguished  annual  Alfred  Korzybski  Memorial  Lecture  series, 
begun  in  1952,  continues  to  present  highly  regarded  speakers  whose  work 
directly  reflects  or  complements  korzybskian  orientations.  These  lecturers 
have  been  outstanding  in  the  fields  of  anthropology,  philosophy,  physics, 
chemistry,  physiology,  embryology,  medicine,  neurology,  surgery,  education, 
sociology,  linguistics,  psychology,  management,  library  science,  law, ...  etc.4 
Their  participation  bespeaks  the  growing  regard  for  Korzybski’s  contributions 
and  the  importance  of  general  semantics  as  a  major  twentieth  century  system. 

The  Index  to  this  Fifth  edition  has  been  enhanced  to  facilitate  general 
study  and  formulation  searches.  Grateful  thanks  are  due  to  Bruce  I.  Kodish 
and  Milton  Dawes  for  their  work  in  updating  the  Index,  and  to  Bruce  I.  Kodish 
and  Stuart  Mayper  for  creating  the  Index  of  Diagrams.  Grateful  thanks  also 
are  due  to  Marjorie  Zelner,  Executive  Secretary  of  the  Institute  of  General 
Semantics,  for  her  work  as  production  editor  of  this  Fifth  Edition. 

This  briefly  reviews  the  activities  in  the  field  of  general  semantics  and 
shows  that,  as  with  any  system  that  represents  a  challenge  to  its  own  culture, 
there  remains  much  work  to  be  done,  but  also  that  this  work  proceeds 
vigorously. 

In  the  sixty  years  since  Korzybski  offered  the  first  (not  the  last)  non- 
aristotelian  system  in  Science  and  Sanity  public  reaction  has  been  both 
enthusiastic  and  critical.  What  about  Korzybski’s  work  continues  to  generate 
such  interest  and  activity?  If  it  were  so,  as  some  critics  have  asserted,  that  "all’ 
he  did  was  to  organize  scattered  insights,  formulations  and  data  into  a  system. 

PREFACE  TO  THE  FIFTH  EDITION 

that  alone  would  have  constituted  a  major  achievement  worthy  of  the  gratitude 
of  succeeding  time-binders  for  centuries  to  come.  Korzybski  did  that.  He 
enunciated  a  system,  incorporating  aspects  of  but  going  beyond  its 
predecessors,  and  proposed  a  methodology  for  making  his  system  a  living  tool: 
general  semantics  (the  name  he  selected),  the  first  non-aristotelian  system 
applied  and  made  teachable. 

In  addition,  I  can  list  here  the  following  selected  formulations  and  points 
of  view ,  emphases ,  etc.,  which  I  consider  to  be  original  with  Korzybski.5 

1 .  Time-binding ;  time-binding  ethics.  Rejecting  both  theological  and 
zoological  definitions,  Korzybski  adopted  a  natural  science,  operational 
approach  and  defined  humans  by  what  they  can  be  observed  doing  which 
differentiates  them  from  other  classes  of  life;  he  defined  them  as  the  time¬ 
binding  class  of  life,  able  to  pass  on  knowledge  from  one  generation  to  another 
over  Time.’6 

Derived  from  this  definition,  which  evaluates  humans  as  a  naturally 
cooperative  class  of  life  (the  mechanisms  of  time-binding  are  descriptively 
social,  cooperative),  Korzybski  postulated  time-binding  'ethics’  —  modes  of 
behavior,  choices  appropriate  to  time-binding  organisms. 

2.  Korzybski  recognized  that  language  {symbolizing  in  general) 
constitutes  the  basic  tool  of  time-binding.  Others  before  him  had  noted  that 
language ,  in  the  complex  human  sense,  was  one  of  the  distinguishing  features 
of  humans.  WhatKotzybski  fully  recognized  was  the  central,  defining  role  of 
language.  No  language,  no  time-binding.  If  so,  then  structures  of  languages 
must  be  determinative  for  time-binding. 

3.  The  neurologically  focused  formulation  of  the  process  of 
abstracting .  No  one  before  Korzybski  had  so  thoroughly  and  unflinchingly 
specified  the  process  by  which  humans  build  and  evolve  theories,  do  their 
mundane  evaluating,  thrill  to  'sunsets’,  etc.  Korzybski’s  formulating  of 
abstracting,  particularly  in  the  human  realm,  can  constructively  serve  as  a 
guide  to  on-going  neuroscientific  research. 

4.  Asa  function  of  the  above,  but  deserving  separate  mention  with  the 
rigorously  formulated  notion  of  orders  of  abstracting,  is  the  concurrent 
admonition  that  we  should  not  confuse  (identify)  them.  Given  the  hierarchical, 
sequential  character  of  the  nervous  system  (allowing,  too,  for  horizontally 
related  structures  and  parallel  processing),  it  is  inevitable  that  results  along  the 
way  should  manifest  as  (or  'at’)  differing  orders  or  levels  of  abstracting.  These 
results  are  inevitable.  That  they  would  be  formulated  at  a  given  historical 
moment  is  not  inevitable.  Korzybski  did  it  in  the  1920’s,  publishing  his 
descriptions  in  their  mature  form  in  1933. 

5.  Consciousness  of  abstracting.  If  human  organisms-as-a-whole-cum- 
nervous  systems/brains  abstract  as  claimed  above  and  described  herein  (pp. 
369-45 1  and  passim ),  surely  consciousness  of  these  events  must  be  crucial  for 

xvi  PREFACE  TO  THE  FIFTH  EDITION 

optimum  human  functioning.  Animals  (non-time-binders)  abstract;  but,  so  far 
as  we  know  (1993),  they  do  not  know  that  they  abstract.  Indeed,  many  humans 
don’t  either  —  but  they  have  the  potentiality  to  do  so.  Korzybski  recognized 
this,  realized  that  consciousness  of  abstracting  is  essential  for  “fully 
functioning”  humans,  and  made  of  it  a  primary  goal  of  general  semantics 
training. 

6.  The  structure  of  language.  Among  Korzybski *s  most  original 
formulations  was  the  multiordinal  character  of  many  of  the  terms  we  most 
often  use.  He  insisted  that,  with  multiordinal  terms,  the  ‘meaning’  is  strictly 
a  function  of  the  order  or  level  of  abstraction  at  which  the  term  is  used  and  that 
its  ‘meaning’  is  so  context-driven  that  it  doesn’t  ‘mean’  anything  definite  until 
the  context  is  specified  or  understood. 

7.  Structure  as  the  only  ‘content*  of  knowledge.  This  represents  the 
height/depth  of  non-elementalism;  that  what  used  to  be  designated  as  ‘form’ 
(structure)  and  ‘content’  are  so  intimately  related  as  to  be,  practically  speaking, 
fused,  that  structure  and  ‘content’  are  functions  of  ‘each  other’.  Further,  and 
more  deeply,  all  we  can  ever  know  expresses  a  set  or  sets  of  relationships  and, 
most  fundamentally,  a  relationship  (‘singular’)  between  the  ‘known’  and  the 
knowing  organism:  the  famous  joint  product  of  the  observer-observed 
structure.  “Structure  is  the  only  ‘content’  of  knowledge”  may  qualify  as 
Korzybski’ s  deepest  expression  of  anti-essentialism.  We  can  not  know 
‘essences’,  things  in  themselves ;  all  we  can  know  is  what  we  know  as 
abstracting  nervous  systems .  Although  we  can  on-goingly  know  more,  we 
can  not  ‘transcend’  ourselves  as  organisms  that  abstract. 

8.  Semantic  reactions;  semantic  reactions  as  evaluations.  Growing  out 
of  his  awareness  of  the  transactive  character  of  human  evaluating  and  wishing 
to  correct  for  the  elementalistic  splitting  involved  in  such  terms  as  ‘meaning’, 
‘mental’,  ‘concept’,  ‘idea’  and  a  legion  of  others,  Korzybski  consciously, 
deliberately  formulated  the  term  semantic  reaction.  It  is  central  to  his  system. 

9.  The  mathematical  notion  of  function  as  applied  to  the  brain- 
language  continuum.  Boldly  grasping  the  neurophysiology  of  his  day, 
Korzybski  formulated  what  research  increasingly  finds:  language  is  a  function 
of  (derives  from,  is  invented  by)  brain;  reciprocally,  as  a  function  of  feedback 
mechanisms,  brain  is  a  function  of  (is  modified  by  the  electro-chemical 
structuring  called)  language. 

10.  Neuro-semantic  environments  as  environments.  The  neuro- 
semantic  environment  constitutes  a  fundamental  environmental  issue  unique 
to  humans. 

1 1 .  Non-aristotelian  system  as  system.  Korzybski  had  non-aristotelian 
predecessors,  as  he  well  knew.  What  distinguishes  his  non-aristotelian  stance 
is  the  degree  of  formulational  consciousness  he  brought  to  it,  and  the 

PREFACE  TO  THE  FIFTH  EDITION 

energetic  courage  with  which  he  built  it  into  a  system  —  offered  to  his  fellow 
humans  as  a  better  way  to  orient  themselves. 

12.  The  Structural  Differential  as  a  model  of  the  abstracting  process 
and  a  summary  of  general  semantics.  Korzybski  realized  the  importance  of 
visualization  for  human  understanding.  He  knew,  then,  that  to  make  some  of 
the  higher  order,  overarching  relationships  of  his  system  accessible,  visible , 
he  must  make  a  diagram,  a  model,  a  map ,  that  people  could  see  and  touch. 
Thus  the  Structural  Differential,  a  device  for  differentiating  the  structures  of 
abstracting.  As  far  as  I  know,  this  is  the  first  structurally  appropriate  model 
of  the  abstracting  process. 

1 3 .  Languages,  formulational  systems,  etc . ,  as  maps  and  only  maps  of 
what  they  purport  to  represent .  This  awareness  led  to  the  three  premises 
(popularly  expressed)  of  general  semantics: 

the  map  is  not  the  territory 

no  map  represents  all  of  ‘its’  presumed  territory 

maps  are  self-reflexive,  i.e.,  we  can  map  our  maps  indefinitely.  Also, 

every  map  is  at  least,  whatever  else  it  may  claim  to  map,  a  map  of  the 

map-maker:  her/his  assumptions,  skills,  world-view,  etc. 

By  ‘maps’  we  should  understand  everything  and  anything  that  humans 
formulate  —  including  this  book  and  my  present  contributions,  but  also 
including  (to  take  a  few  in  alphabetical  order),  biology.  Buddhism, 
Catholicism,  chemistry.  Evangelism,  Freudianism,  Hinduism,  Islam,  Judaism, 
Lutheranism,  physics,  Taoism,  etc.,  etc., ...! 

14.  AUness/non-allness  as  clear,  to  be  dealt  with,  formulations.  If  no 
map  can  represent  all  of  ‘its’  presumed  territory,  we  need  to  eschew  habitual 
use  of  the  term  ‘all’  and  its  ancient  philosophical  correlates,  absolutes  of 
various  kinds. 

15.  Non-identity  and  its  derivatives,  correlates,  etc.  At  every  turn  in 
Korzybski ’s  formulating  we  encounter  his  forthright  challenge  to  the  heart  of 
uristotelianism  —  and  its  non-Westem,  equally  essentialist  counterparts. 
“Whatever  you  say  a  thing  is,  it  is  not”  This  rejection  of  the  Taw  of  identity’ 
(’everything  is  identical  with  itself)  may  be  Korzybski ’s  most  controversial 
formulation.  After  all,  Korzybski’s  treatment  directly  challenges  the  ‘Laws  of 
Thought*,  revered  for  over  two  thousand  years  in  the  West  and,  differently 
expressed,  in  non-Westem  cultures.  Korzybski’s  challenge  is  thus  planetary. 
Wc  ‘Westerners’  can’t  (as  some  have  tried)  escape  to  the  ‘East’. 
Identifications,  confusions  of  orders  of  abstracting,  are  common  to  all  human 
nervous  systems  we  know  of 

16.  Extension  of  Cassius  Keyser's  " Logical  Fate”:  from  premises, 
conclusions  follow,  inexorably.  Korzybski  recognized  that  conclusions 
constitute  behaviors ,  consequences,  doings ,  and  that  these  are  not  merely 
logical  derivatives  but  psycho-logical  inevitabilities.  If  we  want  to  change 

xviii 

PREFACE  TO  THE  FIFTH  EDITION 

behaviors ,  we  must  first  change  the  premises  which  gave  birth  to  the 
behaviors.  Korzyb ski’s  strong  version  of  Keyser’s  restrictedly  iogicaF 
formulation  was  first  adumbrated  in  Korzybski’s  paper,  “Fate  and  Freedom” 
of  1 923  and  received  its  full  expression  in  the  “Foreword”  (with  M.  Kendig) 
to  A  Theory  of  Meaning  Analyzed  in  1942,  both  available  in  the  Collected 
Writings.  Both  expressions  well  antedate  Thomas  Kuhn’s  “paradigm  shifts” 
and,  more  pointedly  than  Kuhn,  formulate  the  behavioral  implications  of 
logical  and  philosophical  systems. 

17.  The  circularity  of  knowledge  (spiral-character-in- ‘time’). 
Korzybski  noted  that  our  most  ‘abstract’  formulations  are  actually  about  non¬ 
verbal  processes/events,  and  that  how  we  formulate  about  these  at  a  given  date, 
how  we  talk  to  ourselves,  through  neural  feedback  mechanisms,  relatively 
determines  how  we  will  subsequently  abstract-formulate:  healthfully  if  our 
abstracting  is  open,  non-finalistic  (non-absolute);  pathologically  if  not. 

18.  Electro-colloidal  (macro-molecular-biological)  and  related 
processes.  Korzybski  emphasized  awareness  of  these  as  fundamental  for 
understanding  neuro-linguistic  systems/organisms. 

19.  Non-elementalism  applied  to  human  organisms-as-a-whole-in-an- 
environment.  Some  of  Korzybski’s  predecessors  in  the  study  of  language  and 
human  error  may  have  pointed  to  what  he  labeled  ‘elementalism  (verbally 
splitting  what  cannot  be  split  empirically)  as  a  linguistically-embedded  human 
habit,  but  none  I  know  of  had  so  thoroughly  built  against  it  and  recommended 
replacing  it  with  habitual  non-elementalism.  Korzybski  s  practical  insistence 
that  adopting  non-elementalistic  procedures  and  terms  would  benefit  the 
humans  (including  scientists)  who  adopt  them  is  original  and,  for  him,  urgent. 

20.  Extensions  of  logics  (plural)  as  subsets  of  non-aristotelian 
evaluating,  including  the  limited  usefulness  (but  usefulness )  of  aristotelian 
logic.7 

21.  Epistemology  as  centered  in  neuro-linguistic ,  neuro-semantic 
issues.  Korzybski  built  squarely  on  the  neuroscience  of  his  day  and  affirmed 
the  fundamental  importance  of  epistemology  (the  study  of  how  we  know  what 
we  say  we  know)  as  the  sine  qua  non  for  any  sound  system  upon  which  to 
organize  our  interactions  with  our  children,  students,  friends,  lovers,  bosses, 
trees,  animals,  government  —  the  ‘universe’.  Becoming  conscious  of 
abstracting  constitutes  applied  epistemology:  general  semantics. 

22.  The  recognition  of  and formulation  of  extensional  and  intensional 
orientations  as  orientations.  Here  we  see  Korzybski  at  his  most  diagnostic 
and  prognostic.  Realizing  that  a  person’s  epistemological-evaluational  style , 
a  person’s  habitual  way  with  evaluating  determines  how  life  will  go,  he 
recommends  adoption  of  an  extensional  orientation,  with  its  emphasis  on 
4 facts’.  If  a  person  is  over-committed  to  verbal  constructs,  definitions, 
formulae,  'conventional  wisdom*,  etc.,  that  person  may  be  so  trapped  in  those 

PREFACE  TO  THE  FIFTH  EDITION 

a  priori  decisions  as  to  be  unable  to  appropriately  respond  to  new  data  from 
the  non-verbal,  not-yet-anticipated  world.  By  definition,  the  extensionally 
oriented  person,  while  remaining  as  articulate  as  any  of  her/his  neighbors,  is 
habitually  open  to  new  data,  is  habitually  able  to  say,  “I  don’t  know;  let’s 
see.”  As  an  aid  toward  this  more  healthy  orientation,  Korzybski  formulated  the 
“extensional  devices”  explained  in  his  Introduction  to  the  Second  Edition 
herein. 

23.  Neuro-linguistic  and  neuro-semantic  factors  applied  to 
psychotherapeutic  procedures  and  to  the  prevention  of  psycho-logical 
problems. 

24.  Mathematics.  Korzybski ’s  use  of  mathematical  formulations  and 
point  of  view  qualifies  as  one  of  his  most  daring  contributions. 

25.  Science  and  mathematics  as  human  behaviors.  Perhaps  showing 
some  korzybskian  influence  (much  of  it  has  come  to  be  ‘in  the  air’),  writers  on 
science  and  mathematics  are  increasingly  addressing  the  human  being  who 
does  science  and/or  mathematics.  But  Korzybski  seems  the  first,  to  the  degree 
that  he  did,  to  point  to  understanding  these  human  behaviors  as  a  necessary 
prerequisite  or  accompaniment  to  fully  understanding  science  and  mathematics 
as  such.  As  Gaston  Bachelard  observed. 

The  psychological  and  even  physiological  conditions  of  a 
non-Aristotelian  logic  have  been  resolutely  faced  in  the 
great  work  of  Count  Alfred  Korzybski,  Science  and 
Sanity .8 

26.  Limitations  of  subject-predicate  languages  (modes  of 
representation)  when  employed  without  consciousness  of  abstracting. 
Korzybski  addresses  this  central  formulation  fully  in  his  book. 

27 .  Insistence  on  relative  ‘ invariance  under  transformation  ’ .  Korzybski 
was  concerned  that  invariance  of  relations  not  be  confused  with  ‘invariance’ 
of  processes. 

28.  General  uncertainty  (all  statements  merely  probable  in  varying 
degrees)  as  an  inevitable  derivative  of  korzybskian  abstracting ,  non-identity , 
etc.  Korzybski,  drawing  partly  on  his  Polish  milieu,  anticipated  and  exceeded 
Heisenberg’s  mid-nineteen-twenties  formulation  of  (restricted)  uncertainty. 

29.  The  mechanism/machine-ism  distinction .  This  may  seem  too  simple 
to  list  as  an  ‘original’  or  even  major  point.  Yet  it  is  vital,  indicating  as  it  does 
Korzyb ski’s  strong  commitment  to  finding  out  how  something  works  as 
opposed  to  vague,  ‘spiritual’  explanations. 

Korzybski  and  some  of  his  Institute  successors  who  have  worked  to 
present  korzybskian  general  semantics  have  sometimes  met  this  resistance: 
"I’m  not  a  machine!”  People  trained  in  the  myriad  ‘intellectual’,  ‘mystical’  in 
varying  degrees  systems/traditions  they  bring  to  seminars  often  react  as  if  they 
fear  to  lose  their  ‘humanity’  by  being  asked  to  consider  the  mechanisms  which 

PREFACE  TO  THE  FIFTH  EDITION 

underpin  or  constitute  their  functioning.  Korzybski  took  pains  to  explain  that 
mechanism  should  not  be  confused  with  ‘machine-ism’.  His  concern  for 
investigations  at  this  level  was  bracing  and  central  to  his  approach. 

30.  ‘Infinite ’-valued  evaluating  and  semantic  methods  of  science  ( not 
‘content’  of  science  or  non-professional  behavior  of  scientists  at  a  given  date) 
as  methods  for  sanity.  Thus  the  title  of  his  book.  General  semanticists  are 
obliged  to  evaluate ,  to  analyze,  criticize  and  sometimes  reject  the  products  of 
‘science’  at  a  given  date.  The  approach  is  scientific,  not  scientistic. 

31.  Predictability  as  the  primary  measure  of  the  value  of  an 
epistemological formulation .  Korzybski  was  by  no  means  an  ‘anti-aesthete’. 
He  was  deeply  sensitive  to  (and  knowledgeable  about)  music,  married  a 
portrait  painter,  read  literature  (Conrad  was  a  favorite)  including  poetry,  and 
even  liked  to  relax  with  a  good  detective  story.  But  he  insisted  that,  for  life 
issues,  beauty  or  cleverness  or  mere  consistency  (logical  coherence,  etc.)  were 
not  enough. 

Korzybski  offered  his  non-aristotelian  system  with  general  semantics  as 
its  modus  operandi  as  an  on-going  human  acquisition,  negentropic,  ordering 
and  self-correcting  through  and  through,  since  it  provides,  self-reflexively,  for 
its  own  reformulation,  and  assigns  its  users  responsibility  to  do  so  should  the 
need  arise. 

The  above  considerations  have  led  me  to  the  conclusion  that  Korzybski 
was  not  only  a  bold  innovator,  but  also  a  brilliant  synthesizer  of  available  data 
into  a  coherent  system.  This  system,  when  internalized  and  applied,  can  create 
a  saner  and  more  peaceful  world,  justifying  the  title  of  this  book.  Science  and 
Sanity. 

Robert  P.  Pula 

September  1993 

END  NOTES 

1 .  Karol,  Janicki,  Toward  Non-Essentialist  Sociolinguistics.  Berlin  and  New 

York:  Mouton  de  Gruyter,  1990. 

2.  Bibliographic  Note:  sample  of  books  since  1970. 

J.  Samuel  Bois,  Breeds  of  Men:  Toward  the  Adulthood  of  Humankind, 
Harper  and  Row,  1970 

Lee  Thayer,  ed..  Communication:  General  Semantics  Perspectives , 
Spartan/Macmillan,  1970  (critique) 

William  Youngren,  Semantics,  Linguistics,  and  Criticism ,  Random 
House,  1972  (critique) 

Kenneth  G.  Johnson,  ed.,  Research  Designs  in  General  Semantics , 
Gordon  and  Breach,  1974 

PREFACE  TO  THE  FIFTH  EDITION 

xxi 

Donald  E.  Washburn  and  Dennis  R.  Smith,  eds..  Coping  With  Increasing 
Complexity :  Implications  of  General  Semantics  and  General 
Systems  Theory ,  Gordon  and  Breach,  1 974 
Kenneth  G.  Johnson,  Lineamenti  di  Semantica  Generate,  Roma:  Editore 
Armando  Armando,  1978 

Ross  Evans  Paulson,  Language ,  Science ,  and  Action :  Korzybski's 
General  Semantics  — A  Study  in  Comparative  Intellectual  History , 
Greenwood  Press,  1 983  (critique) 

Harold  L.  Drake,  General  Semantics  Views ,  Millersville,  PA:  Millersville 
State  College,  1 983 

Mary  Morain,  ed.,  Bridging  Worlds  Through  General  Semantics , 
International  Society  for  General  Semantics,  1 984;  and  Enriching 
Professional  Skills  Through  General  Semantics ,  International 
Society  for  General  Semantics,  1 986 
Gerard  I.  Nierenberg,  Workable  Ethics ,  Nierenberg  and  Zeif,  1 987 
Sanford  I.  Berman,  ed.,  Logic  and  General  Semantics :  Writings  of  Oliver 
Reiser  and  Others ,  International  Society  for  General  Semantics, 
1989 

Karol  Jamcki,  Toward Non-Essentialist  Sociolinguistics,  Berlin:  Mouton 
de  Gruyter,  1990 

Kenneth  G.  Johnson,  ed..  Thinking  Creatically :  A  Systematic , 
Interdisciplinary  Approach  to  Creative-Critical  Thinking , 
“Foreword”  by  Steve  Allen,  Institute  of  General  Semantics,  1991 
D.  David  Bourland,  Jr.  and  Paul  Dennithome  Johnston,  eds..  To  Be  or 
Not:  An  E-Prime  Anthology ,  International  Society  for  General 
Semantics,  1991 

3.  Korzybski,  Alfred,  Collected  Writings:  1920-1950.  Collected  and  arranged 

by  M.  Kendig.  Final  editing  and  preparation  for  printing  by  Charlotte 
Schuchardt  Read,  with  the  assistance  of  Robert  Pula.  Englewood,  NJ: 
Institute  of  General  Semantics,  1 990. 

4.  The  following  have  delivered  lectures  in  the  series  (listed  chronologically): 

William  Vogt,  M.  F.  Ashley  Montagu,  F.  J.  Roethlisberger,  F.  S.  C. 
Northrop,  Buckminster  Fuller,  Clyde  Kluckhohn,  Abraham  Maslow, 
Russell  Meyers  (twice),  Warren  S.  McCulloch,  Robert  R.  Blake,  Harold 
G.  Cassidy,  Henri  Laborit,  Joost  A.  M.  Meerloo,  Henry  Lee  Smith,  Jr., 
Alvin  M.  Weinberg,  Jacob  Bronowski,  Alastair  M.  Taylor,  Lancelot  Law 
White,  Gregory  Bateson,  Heniy  Margenau,  George  Steiner,  Harley  C. 
Shands,  Roger  W.  Wescott,  Ben  Bova,  Elwood  Murray,  Don  Fabun, 
Barbara  Morgan,  Thomas  Sebeok,  Robert  R.  Blake  and  Jane  Srygley 
Mouton,  Allen  Walker  Read,  Karl  H.  Pribram,  George  F.  F.  Lombard, 
Richard  W.  Paul,  Jerome  Bruner,  William  V.  I  laney,  Warren  M.  Robbins, 
Albert  Ellis,  Steve  Allen,  and  William  Lutz.  The  following  have 

XXII 

PREFACE  TO  THE  FIFTH  EDITION 

participated  in  colloquia  in  the  series:  William  J.  Fry,  James  A.  Van  Allen, 
Charles  M.  Pomerat,  Jesse  H.  Shera,  Allen  Kent,  Paul  Ptacek,  J.  Samuel 
Bois,  Elton  S.  Carter,  Walter  Probert,  Kenneth  G.  Johnson  and  Neil 
Postman. 

5.  For  Korzybski  as  a  system-builder,  see  Dr.  Stuart  A.  Mayper,  “The  Place  of 

Aristotelian  Logic  in  Non-Aristotelian  Evaluating:  Einstein,  Korzybski 
and  Popper,”  General  Semantics  Bulletin  No.  47,  1980,  pp.  106-110. 
For  discussions  of  the  continuing  appropriateness  of  ‘ Korzybski’ s 
science’,  see  Stuart  A.  Mayper,  “Korzybski’ s  Science  and  Today’s 
Science,”  General  Semantics  Bulletin,  No.  51,1 984,  pp.  6 1  -67  ;  Barbara 
E.  Wright,  “The  Heredity-Environment  Continuum:  Holistic  Approaches 
at  ‘One  Point  in  Time’  and  ‘All  Time’,”  General  Semantics  Bulletin  No. 
52,  1985,  pp.  36-50;  Russell  Meyers,  MD,  “The  Potentials  of  Neuro- 
Semantics  for  Modem  Neuropsychology”  (The  1 985  Alfred  Korzybski 
Memorial  Lecture),  General  Semantics  Bulletin,  No.  54,  1989,  pp.  13-59, 
and  Jeffrey  A.  Mordkowitz,  “Korzybski,  Colloids  and  Molecular  Biology: 
A  View  from  1985,”  General  Semantics  Bulletin ,  No.  55,  1990,  pp.  86- 
89.  For  a  detailed  updating  in  the  neurosciences  by  a  non-general- 
semanticist  which  shows  Korzybski ’s  1933  formulations  as  consistent 
with  1 993  formulations,  see  “Part  I”  of  Patricia  Smith  Churchland’s 
Neurophilosophy.  Toward  a  Unified  Science  of  the  Mind/Brain,  MIT 
Press,  1986,  pp.  14-235.) 

6.  Korzybski,  Alfred,  Manhood  of  Humanity. 

7.  See  Dr.  Mayper ’s  paper:  “The  Place  of  Aristotelian  Logic  in  Non- 
Aristotelian  Evaluating...,”  listed  above,  and  his  earlier  “Non-Aristotelian 
Foundations:  Solid  or  Fluid?”  ETC.:  A  Review  of  General  Semantics,  Vol. 
XVIII,  No.  4,  Feb.,  1962,  pp.  427-443. 

8.  Bachelard,  Gaston,  The  Philosophy  of  No.  Translated  from  the  French  by 

G.  C.  Waterson.  New  York:  Orion  Press,  1968,  p.  108. 

PREFACE  TO  THE  FOURTH  EDITION  1958 

A  quarter  of  a  century  has  now  elapsed  since  the  first  edition  of 
Alfred  Korzybski’s  principal  work,  Science  and  Sanity ,  appeared.  The 
second  edition  was  published  in  1941  and  the  third  was  prepared  in  1948, 
two  years  before  the  author’s  death.  Although  the  second  and  third  edi¬ 
tions  provided  clarification  and  amplification  of  certain  aspects  of  the 
non-aristotelian  orientation  originally  proposed  by  the  author,  and  while 
they  cited  important  new  data  illustrating  the  rewards  accruing  to  cer¬ 
tain  fields  of  human  endeavor  (e.g.,  psychotherapy)  in  consequence  of 
the  utilization  of  the  orientations  earnestly  espoused  by  him,  they  repre¬ 
sented  no  important  departures  from  the  first  edition  in  respect  of  basic 
principles  at  theoretic  and  pragmatic  levels.  Nor,  in  serious  retrospec¬ 
tion,  did  any  such  appear  to  have  been  indicated. 

Considering  that  the  author  himself,  in  applying  the  formulation  of 
‘the  self -reflexive  map’  to  his  own  work,  asserted  on  more  than  one  occa¬ 
sion  that  perceptible  revisions  of  his  formulations  must  be  anticipated 
and  that  such  would  very  likely  prove  fairly  compelling  within  a  period 
estimated  at  twenty-five  years,  it  comes  as  something  of  a  surprise  that 
as  the  1958  reprinting  of  Science  and  Sanity  goes  to  press  no  major  al¬ 
terations  seem  as  yet  to  be  required.  In  this  modern  world  of  rapid 
change — in  which  Man  has  acquired  information  regarding  the  intra-  and 
extraorganic  realms  of  his  Universe  at  an  unprecedented  exponential 
rate ;  in  which  the  Atomic  Age  has  come  into  actual  being ;  in  which  con¬ 
quests  of  space  that  were  but  fanciful  dreams  only  yesteryear  have  be¬ 
come  astonishing  realities;  in  which  new  specialties,  bridging  freely 
across  the  gaps  of  the  unknown  between  conventional  scientific  disci¬ 
plines,  have  sprung  into  life  and  become  full-fledged  within  a  matter  of 
months;  and  in  which  far-seeing  men  of  good  will  have  organized  their 
endeavors  to  unify  the  sciences,  arts  and  humanitarian  pursuits-at-large 
and  appear  as  never  before  determined  (despite  recalcitrant  and  reac¬ 
tionary  private  interests)  to  implement  a  One  World  such  as  might  befit 
the  dignity  of  humanity  in  its  manhood — the  continuing  substantiality  of 
Korzybski’s  1933  formulations  must  be  regarded  as  a  tribute  to  his  vision 
and  integrative  genius.  Now  that  we  are  able  to  stand  a  little  apart  from 
historical  developments  and  view  his  life’s  work  in  some  perspective,  it 
can  hardly  be  doubted  that  he  grasped,  as  few  had  done  before  him  and 
certainly  none  had  so  systematically  and  comprehensively  treated,  the 
abiding  significance  of  linguistic  habits  and  the  communicative  processes- 

xxiii 

XXIV 

PREFACE  TO  THE  FOURTH  EDITION 

in-general  to  all  of  Man’s  thinking-and-doing,  from  his  loftiest  metaphysi¬ 
cal,  epistemological  and  mathematical  efforts  to  the  most  casual,  trivial 
and  mundane  performances  of  his  everyday  living. 

Like  a  skillful  diagnostician,  Korzybski  penetrated  deeply  into  the 
etiologic  and  pathologic  substrates  of  what  he  perceived  to  be  the  more 
serious  deterrents  to  current  human  endeavors  and  there  succeeded  in 
identifying  certain  grave  strictures  imposed  upon  Man’s  creative  poten¬ 
tials  and  problem-solving  proclivities  by  one  of  the  least  suspected  of  all 
possible  agencies,  namely,  the  academically-revered  and  ubiquitously- 
exercised  aristotelian  formulations  of  logic.  This  diagnostic  act  was,  of 
course,  the  analogical  equivalent  of  finding  a  positive  Wasserman  reac¬ 
tion  in  the  blood  serum  of  some  long  honored  and  beloved  patriarch.  Its 
disclosure  promised  and,  in  point  of  fact,  proved  to  be  no  more  popular. 
In  this  sense,  Korzybski’s  position  was  wholly  comparable  to  that  of 
Copernicus  and  Galileo,  who  had  been  impelled  by  their  private  inquiries 
during  the  early  Renaissance  to  challenge  the  popular  ptolemaic  cos¬ 
mology  and  aristotelian  mechanics  of  their  day.  It  required  an  uncom¬ 
mon  personal  integrity,  an  unusual  brand  of  courage  and  a  plenum  of 
physical  energy  to  spell  out  the  overt  and  covert  effects  produced  by 
these  widely-pervading,  pathologic  neuro-semantic  processes  in  the  com¬ 
munity  of  humans.  Korzybski  was,  as  we  now  know,  quite  up  to  this 
formidable  task. 

To  have  made  the  diagnosis  constituted-in  itself  an  intellectual  triumph. 
But  Korzybski  did  more  than  this.  His  analyses  enabled  him  to  write 
effective  prescriptions  for  both  the  prevention  and  treatment  of  the  dis¬ 
orders  he  encountered  round  about  and  within  the  community  of  humans. 
These  disorders,  including  cultural  and  institutional  as  well  as  personal 
misevaluations  and  delusions,  he  regarded  as  essentially  those  of  inept 
semantic  reactions.  They  were  for  him  the  unmistakable  marks  of  un¬ 
sanity,  however  ‘normal’  they  might  appear  to  be  in  a  statistical  sense. 

The  side-effects  of  Korzybski’s  formulations  were  hardly  less  sig¬ 
nificant  than  the  prophylactic  and  therapeutic  devices  engendered  by 
them.  Among  other  things,  they  cast  much  needed  light  on  the  psychol¬ 
ogy  of  perception,  child  psychology,  education,  the  cultural  theories  of 
modern  anthropology,  scientific  method  and  operational  ethics.  As  of 
the  time  of  writing  this  introduction,  a  revolution  in  neurology,  psy¬ 
chology,  psychiatry  and  related  disciplines,  comparable  in  every  way  to 
that  which  broke  upon  the  discipline  of  physics  in  the  early  years  of  the 
present  century,  appears  both  imminent  and  inevitable.  The  stirrings  to¬ 
ward  such  appear  to  have  been  derived  largely  from  a  general  semantic 
orientation,  which  lias  sufficiently  influenced  advanced  investigators  in 

PREFACE  TO  THE  FOURTH  EDITION 

XXV 

these  areas  to  make  its  impact  apparent  in  their  writings  and  in  the  char¬ 
acter  of  their  researches.  The  old  dichotomies  which  have  been  for,  lo ! 
these  many  years  the  bed-rock  terms  of  intellectual  discourse,  to  which 
others  referred  and  from  which  they  derived  their  meanings — e.g.,  mental 
and  physical,  conscious  and  unconscious,  thought  and  speech,  structure 
and  function,  intellect  and  emotion,  heredity  and  environment,  organic 
and  functional,  reality  and  unreality,  male  and  female,  autonomic  and 
cerebrospinal,  pyramidal  and  extrapyramidal,  motor  and  sensory,  idio¬ 
pathic  and  symptomatic,  voluntary  and  involuntary,  etc. — have  exhibited 
visible  signs  of  disintegration.  New  and  operationally  verifiable  formu¬ 
lations  are  beginning  to  emerge  in  their  place  and  field  theory,  commen-  *  ^  page  xii 
surate  wth  that  now  being  developed  in  the  realm  of  nuclear  physics,  be¬ 
gins  to  accommodate  data  heretofore  considered  unconnected.  Nowhere 
is  it  more  apparent  than  in  neurology,  psychology  and  closely  related 
disciplines  that  ‘the  word  is  not  the  thing.’ 

It  would  be  a  mistake,  of  course,  for  the  reader  to  suppose  that, 
because  no  major  alterations  in  or  additions  to  Korzybski’s  methodologic 
and  applied  formulations  have  appeared  necessary  up  to  the  present,  his 
students  and  others  who  find  his  views  empathetic  with  their  own  em¬ 
brace  the  inordinate  faith  that  such  will  not  eventually  be  required. 

Quite  to  the  contrary.  They  are  persuaded  that  modifications,  major  as 
well  as  minor,  must  come  as  newly  acquired  information  necessitates ; 
and  they  have  deliberately  provided  for  them.  From  its  very  inception, 
the  discipline  of  general  semantics  has  been  such  as  to  attract  persons 
possessing  high  intellectual  integrity,  independence  from  orthodox  com¬ 
mitments,  and  agnostic,  disinterested  and  critical  inclinations.  On  the 
whole,  they  have  been  persons  little  impressed  with  intellectual  authority 
immanent  within  any  individual  or  body  of  individuals.  For  them,  au¬ 
thority  reposes  not  in  any  omniscient  or  omnipresent  messiah,  but  solely 
in  the  dependability  of  the  predictive  content  of  propositions  made  with 
reference  to  the  non-verbal  happenings  in  this  universe.  They  apply 
this  basic  rubric  as  readily  to  korzybskian  doctrine  as  to  all  other  ab¬ 
stract  formulations  and  theories  and,  like  good  scientists,  they  are  pre¬ 
pared  to  cast  them  off  precisely  as  soon  as  eventualities  reveal  them  to  be 
incompetent,  i.e.,  lacking  in  reliable  predictive  content.  This  circum¬ 
stance  in  itself  should  abrogate  once  and  for  all  the  feckless  charges 
sometimes  made  by  ill-informed  critics  that  general  semantics  is  but  one 
more  of  a  long  succession  of  cults,  having  its  divine  master,  its  disciples, 
a  bible,  its  own  mumbo-jumbo  and  ceremonial  .rites.  For,  if  there  is  any 
one  denominator  that  can  be  regarded  as  common  to  all  such  cults,  it  is 
the  self-sealing  character  of  their  dogmas,  which  a  priori  must  stand  as 

XXVI 

PREFACE  TO  THE  FOURTH  EDITION 

eternal  verities,  regardless  of  the  advent  of  incompatible  experiences.  In 
antithetic  contrast,  general  semanticists  are  fully  sensible  of  the  man- 
fashioned  origin  of  general  semantics  and  have  taken  pains  to  keep  its 
structure  open-ended.  Far  from  being  inclined  to  repel  changes  that 
appear  to  menace  the  make-up  of  general  semantics,  they  actively  antici¬ 
pate  them  and  are  prepared  to  foster  those  that  seem  to  promise  better 
predictions,  better  survival  and  better  adaptation  to  the  vicissitudes  of 
this  earthly  habitat. 

One  cannot  help  but  be  aware,  in  1958,  that  there  is  far  less  suspicion 
and  misgiving  among  intellectuals  concerning  general  semantics  and  gen¬ 
eral  semanticists  than  prevailed  ten  and  twenty  years  ago.  Indeed,  a 
certain  receptivity  is  noticeable.  The  term  ‘semantics'  itself  is  now  fre¬ 
quently  heard  on  the  radio,  TV  and  the  public  speaking  platform  and  it 
appears  almost  as  frequently  in  the  public  print.  It  has  even  found  a 
recent  ‘spot'  in  a  Hollywood  movie  and  it  gives  some  promise  of  becom¬ 
ing  an  integral  part  of  our  household  jargon.  This  in  no  sense  means 
that  all  such  users  of  the  term  have  familiarized  themselves  with  the 
restricted  meaning  of  the  term  ‘semantics,’  much  less  that  they  have  inter¬ 
nalized  the  evaluative  implications  and  guiding  principles  of  action  sub¬ 
sumed  under  general  semantics.  A  comparable  circumstance  obtains,  of 
course,  in  the  layman’s  use  of  other  terms,  such  as  ‘electronics.’ 

But  more  palpable  gains  than  these  can  be  counted.  We  have  alluded 
to  some  of  these  as  they  bear  on  psychology,  anthropology  and  the  medical 
sciences.  The  years  since  the  close  of  World  War  II  have  similarly 
witnessed  the  access  of  general  semantics  not  only  to  academic  curricula 
of  the  primary,  secondary  and  collegiate  levels  of  the  North  and  South 
American  continents,  parts  of  Western  Europe,  Britain,  Australia  and 
Japan,  but  to  the  busy  realms  of  commerce,  industry  and  transportation : 
of  military  organization  and  civil  administration ;  of  law,  engineering,  soci- 
ology,  economics  and  religion.  These  constitute  no  negligible  extensions 
of  general  semantics  into  the  world  of  ‘practical’  affairs.  Large  business 
enterprises,  looking  toward  the  improvement  of  intra-  and  extramural 
relations,  more  satisfying  resolutions  of  the  complicated  problems  that 
arise  between  labor  and  management,  and  the  enhancement  of  service  to 
their  immediate  constituents  and  fellow  men  in  general  have  found  it 
rewarding,  in  many  instances,  to  reorganize  their  entire  structure  so  as  to 
assure  the  incorporation  of  general  semantic  formulations.  Several 
organizations  now  in  existence  make  it  their  sole  business  to  advise  and 
provide  help  in  the  implementation  of  such  changes.  The  core  of  their 
prescriptions  consists  in  the  appropriate  application  of  general  semantics. 
It  is  becoming  a  routine  for  the  high  and  intermediate  level  executives  of 

PREFACE  TO  THE  FOURTH  EDITION  xxvii 

certain  industries,  advertising  agencies,  banking  establishments  and  the 
like  to  retreat  for  several  days  at  a  time  while  they  receive  intensive  in¬ 
struction  and  participate  in  seminar-workshops  designed  to  indoctrinate 
them  with  the  principles  of  general  semantics.  Comparable  courses  of 
instruction  have  been  provided  within  recent  years  for  the  officers  of 
the  U.S.  Air  Academy,  the  traffic  officers  of  the  Chicago  Police  Depart¬ 
ment  and  the  sales  forces  of  several  large  pharmaceutical  and  biochemical 
houses.  These  innovations  in  business  procedure  entail,  of  course, 
enormous  outlays  of  time,  energy  and  money.  They  must  in  time  pay 
perceptible  dividends  or  suffer  abandonment.  That  they  are  steadily 
on  the  increase  appears  to  offer  eloquent  testimony  of  their  effectiveness. 

Other  evidences  of  the  growth  and  widening  sphere  of  influence  can 
be  pointed  to.  Membership  in  the  two  major  organizations  concerned 
with  the  development,  teaching  and  utilization  of  general  semantics, 
namely,  the  Institute  of  General  Semantics  located  at  Lakeville,  Connect¬ 
icut  and  the  International  Society  for  General  Semantics,  with  its  central 
office  at  Chicago,  has  slowly  but  steadily  increased  over  the  years  and, 
gratifyingly,  has  generally  avoided  the  ‘lunatic  fringe'  that  appears  ever 
ready  to  attach  itself  to  convenient  nuclei.  The  two  current  publications 
of  these  organizations,  the  General  Semantics  Bulletin  and  ETC.:  A 
Review  of  General  Semantics ,  continue  to  provide  cogent  original  articles 
and  synopses  of  progress  in  the  field.  Their  subscription  lists  now  in¬ 
clude  libraries  scattered  over  the  entire  globe. 

In  1949,  the  Third  American  Congress  on  General  Semantics  was 
held  at  the  University  of  Denver.  This  turned  out  to  be  the  last  occa¬ 
sion  at  which  Alfred  Korzybski  made  a  public  appearance.  During 
these  stimulating  sessions  he  had  the  satisfaction  of  hearing  numerous 
reports  of  investigations  by  his  former  students  and  others  who  had 
profited  roundly  from  their  familiarity  with  the  non-aristotelian  formu¬ 
lations.  Many  of  these  papers,  representing  a  wide  and  eclectic  coverage 
of  human  interests,  were  subsequently  published  in  the  General  Seman¬ 
tics  Bulletin.  Two  additional  conferences  of  national  scope  have  been 
held  in  the  interim — one  in  Chicago  in  1951  and  another  in  St.  Louis  in 
1954.  Another  conference  of  international  scope  is  planned  for  August, 
1958.  Meanwhile,  numerous  sectional  conferences  have  been  held  in 
various  cities  each  year  and  the  number  of  courses  sought  and  offered  in 
general  semantics  is  definitely  on  the  increase. 

All  in  all,  then,  a  healthy  state  of  affairs  appears  to  prevail  in  respect 
of  general  semantics.  The  impact  of  Korzybski's  work  on  Western  cul¬ 
ture  is  now  unmistakable  and  there  is  every  reason  to  be  optimistic  that 
his  precepts  will  be  read  by  ever-widening  circles  of  serious  students 

XXV111 

PREFACE  TO  THE  FOURTH  EDITION 

and  that  the  latter,  in  their  turn,  must  deeply  influence  generations  of 
students  yet  to  come.  It  remains  to  be  seen  what  effects  the  regular  im¬ 
plementation  of  these  precepts  will  bring  to  mankind.  Many  of  us  are 
convinced  that  they  will  prove  highly  salutary. 

Russell  Meyers,  M.D. 

Division  of  Neurosurgery 
College  of  Medicine 
State  University  of  Iowa 
Iowa  City,  Iowa 
October,  1957 

BIBLIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE,  1958 

In  the  second  edition  of  this  book,  published  in  1941,  a  short  list  of  re¬ 
prints  and  monographs  available  at  the  Institute  of  General  Semantics  was 
included — almost  the  only  literature  then  on  general  semantics  since  Science 
and  Sanity  first  appeared.  (See  page  lxxxvi  in  this  volume.)  Since  that 
date  the  number  of  books,  papers,  and  reviews  has  grown  profusely,  and  no 
attempt  is  made  here  to  record  them  fully. 

The  principal  articles  in  the  field  have  appeared  in  Papers  From  the 
Second  American  Congress  on  General  Semantics ,  M.  Kendig,  Editor 
(1943),  in  the  General  Semantics  Bulletin  and  other  materials  published  by 
the  Institute  for  its  Members,  and  in  ETC.:  A  Review  of  General  Semantics , 
the  official  organ  of  the  International  Society  for  General  Semantics. 

The  General  Semantics  Bulletin ,  founded  and  edited  by  M.  Kendig,  is  the 
official  journal  of  the  Institute  of  General  Semantics,  published  since  1949 
‘for  information  and  inter-communication  among  workers  in  the  non-aris- 
totelian  discipline  formulated  by  Alfred  Korzybski.’  It  contains  papers  on 
many  aspects  of  general  semantics,  theoretical  and  practical,  as  well  as  re¬ 
ports,  discussions,  news,  book  comments,  etc.  Numbers  One  &  Two  through 
Eighteen  &  Nineteen  have  been  issued  to  date. 

Some  of  the  articles  distributed  by  the  Institute,  1947-1949,  previous  to 
the  founding  of  the  Bulletin  are  listed  below : 

Korzybski,  Alfred,  General  Semantics:  An  Introduction  to  Non-aristote- 
lian  Systems,  1947. 

-  ‘Author’s  Note’  introducing  Selections  from  Science  and  Sanity, 

1948. 

- Understanding  of  Human  Potentialities,  Key  to  Dealing  with  Soviet 

Union,  1948.  Summary  of  an  address,  and  introduction  by  Stuart  Chase. 

-  General  Semantics :  Toward  a  New  General  System  of  Evaluation 

and  Predictability  in  Solving  Human  Problems.  American  People's 
Encyclopedia,  1949  edition. 

English,  Earl,  A  General  Semantics  Course  in  4he  School  of  Journalism, 
University  of  Missouri,  1949. 

Kelley,  Douglas  M.,  The  Use  of  General  Semantics  and  Korzybskian 
Principles  as  an  Extensional  Method  of  Group  Psychotherapy  in 
Traumatic  Neuroses.  The  Journal  of  Nervous  and  Mental  Disease, 
Vol.  114,  No.  3,  1951. 

La  Brant,  Lou,  A  Genetic  Approach  to  Language,  1951. 

Loomis,  William  F.,  A  Non-aristotelian  Presentation  of  Embryology, 
Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology,  1949. 

Newton,  Norman  T.,  A  Non-aristotelian  Approach  to  Design.  Introduc¬ 
tory  lectures  in  a  course,  School  of  Architecture,  Harvard  University, 
1948. 

Kead,  Allen  Walker,  An  Account  of  the  Word  ‘Semantics’.  WORD, 
August  1948. 

Skynner,  Robin,  Choice  and  Determinism.  Distributed  to  Institute  Mem¬ 
bers  1948;  published  in  Rationalist  Annual  (England),  1949. 

XXIX 

XXX 

BIBLIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE 

Also  bv  Korzybski  and  others,  not  included  elsewhere : 

Pollock,  Thomas  C.,  A  Theory  of  Meaning  Analyzed:  Critique  of  I.  A. 
Richards'  Theory  of  Language,  and  Spaulding,  J.  Gordon,  Elemental- 
ism  :  The  Effect  of  an  Implicit  Postulate  of  Identity  on  I.  A.  Richards' 
Theory  of  Poetic  Value.  With  a  supplementary  paper  by  Allen 
Walker  Read,  The  Lexicographer  and  General  Semantics.  Foreword 
by  Alfred  Korzybski  and  M.  Kendig.  General  Semantics  Monographs 
No.  Ill,  1942. 

Korzybski,  Alfred,  The  Role  of  Language  in  the  Perceptual  Processes, 
Chapter  7  in  Perception:  An  Approach  to  Personality  Ed.  by  Robert  R. 
Blake  and  Glenn  V.  Ramsey,  Ronald  Press,  1951. 

PREFACE  TO  THE  THIRD  EDITION  1948 

If  thinkers  will  only  be  persuaded  to  lay  aside  their  prejudices  and  apply 
themselves  to  studying  the  evidences  ...  I  shall  be  fully  content  to  await 
the  final  decision.  (402)  Charges  S.  Peirce 

For  the  mass  of  mankind  ...  if  it  is  their  highest  impulse  to  be  intellec¬ 
tual  slaves,  then  slaves  they  ought  to  remain.  (402)  Charles  S.  Peirce 

In  spite  of  the  fact  that  since  1933  a  great  many  new  discoveries  in 
sciences  have  been  made,  to  be  analysed  in  a  separate  publication,  the 
fundamental  methodological  issues  which  led  even  to  the  release  of 
nuclear  energy  remain  unaltered,  and  so  this  third  edition  requires  no 
revision  of  the  text. 

Soon  after  the  publication  of  the  second  edition  in  1941,  the  Second 
American  Congress  on  General  Semantics  was  held  at  the  University 
of  Denver.  The  papers  presented  there  have  been  compiled  and  edited 
by  M.  Kendig1  and  show  applications  in  a  wide  variety  of  fields.  A  third 
congress,  international  in  scope,  is  being  planned  for  1949.  Students 
of  our  work  who  have  made  applications  in  their  fields  of  interest  are 
invited  to  submit  papers  to  the  Institute.  The  rapid  spread  of  interest, 
by  now  on  all  continents,  has  indicated  the  need  for  the  new  methods 
set  forth  here,  and  many  study  groups  have  been  formed  here  and  abroad. 

As  the  center  for  training  in  these  non-aristotelian  methods,  the 
Institute  of  General  Semantics  was  incorporated  in  Chicago  in  1938. 
In  the  summer  of  1946  the  Institute  moved  to  Lakeville,  Connecticut, 
where  its  original  program  is  being  carried  on. 

I  must  stress  that  I  give  no  panaceas,  but  experience  shows  that  when 
the  methods  of  general  semantics  are  applied ,  the  results  are  usually 
beneficial,  whether  in  law,  medicine,  business,  etc.,  education  on  all  levels, 
or  personal  inter-relationships,  be  they  in  family,  national,  or  international 
fields.  If  they  are  not  applied,  but  merely  talked  about,  no  results  can  be 
expected.  Perhaps  the  most  telling  applications  were  those  on  the  battle¬ 
fields  of  World  War  II,  as  reported  by  members  of  the  armed  forces, 
including  psychiatrists  on  all  fronts,  and  especially  by  Dr.  Douglas  M. 
Kelley ,*  formerly  Lieutenant  Colonel  in  the  Medical  Corps,  who  reports 
in  part  as  follows: 

General  semantics,  as  a  modern  scientific  method,  offers  techniques 
which  are  of  extreme  value  both  in  the  prevention  and  cure  of  such 
f  pathological]  reactive  patterns.  In  my  experience  with  over  seven  thou¬ 
sand  cases  in  the  European  Theater  of  Operations,  these  basic  principles 

*  Chief  Consultant  in  Clinical  Psychology  and  Assistant  Consultant  in  Psychiatry 
to  the  European  Theater  of  Operations;  also  Chief  Psychiatrist  in  charge  of  the 
prisoners  at  Nuremberg.  Author  of  22  Cells  in  Nuremberg ,  Greenberg,  New  York, 
1047. 

XXXI 

xxxii  PREFACE  TO  THE  THIRD  EDITION 

were  daily  employed  as  methods  of  group  psychotherapy  and  as  methods 
of  psychiatric  prevention.  It  is  obvious  that  the  earlier  the  case  is  treated 
the  better  the  prognosis,  and  consequently  hundreds  of  battalion-aid 
surgeons  were  trained  in  principles  of  general  semantics.  These  principles 
were  applied  (as  individual  therapies  and  as  group  therapies)  at  every 
treatment  level  from  the  forward  area  to  the  rear-most  echelon,  in  front¬ 
line  aid  stations,  in  exhaustion  centers  and  in  general  hospitals.  That 
they  were  employed  with  success  is  demonstrated  by  the  fact  that  psychiat¬ 
ric  evacuations  from  the  European  Theater  were  held  to  a  minimum. 

The  origin  of  this  work  was  a  new  functional  definition  of  man ,  as 
formulated  in  1921, 3  based  on  an  analysis  of  uniquely  human  poten¬ 
tialities;  namely,  that  each  generation  may  begin  where  the  former  left 
off.  This  characteristic  I  called  the  ‘time-binding’  capacity.  Here  the 
reactions  of  humans  are  not  split  verbally  and  elementalistically  into  sep¬ 
arate  ‘body’,  ‘mind’,  ‘emotions’,  ‘intellect’,  ‘intuitions’,  etc.,  but  are  treated 
from  an  organism-as-a-whole-in-an-environment  (external  and  internal) 
point  of  view.  This  parallels  the  Einstein-Minkowski  space-time  integra¬ 
tion  in  physics,  and  both  are  necessitated  by  the  modern  evolution  of 
sciences. 

This  new  definition  of  ‘man’,  which  is  neither  zoological  nor  mytho¬ 
logical,  but  functional  and  extensional  (factual),  requires  a  complete 
revision  of  what  we  know  about  humans.  If  we  would  judge  human 
reactions  by  statistical  data  of  psychiatric  patients,  or  many  other  special 
groups,  our  understanding  of  ‘human  nature’  must  be  completely  twisted. 
Both  the  zoological  and  mythological  assumptions  must  limit  human 
society  to  animalistic  biological,  instead  of  time-binding  psycho-biological 
evaluations,  which  involve  socio-cultural  responsibilities  and  thus  may 
mark  a  new  period  of  human  development.* 

In  Manhood  of  Humanity  I  stressed  the  general  human  unique  char¬ 
acteristic  of  time-binding,  which  potentially  applies  to  all  humans,  leav¬ 
ing  no  place  for  race  prejudices.  The  structure  of  science  is  interwoven 
with  Asiatic  influences,  which  through  Africa  and  Spain  spread  over 
the  continent  of  Europe,  where  it  was  further  developed.  Through  the 
discovery  of  factors  of  sanity  in  physico-mathematical  methods,  science 

*  Some  readers  do  not  like  what  I  said  about  Spengler.  It  is  perhaps  because 
they  did  not  read  carefully.  Spengler,  the  mathematician  and  historian,  dealt  with 
the  spasms  of  periods  of  human  evolution  which  paralleled  the  development  of 
science  and  mathematics,  and  his  erudition  must  be  acknowledged.  In  my  honest 
judgment,  he  gave  'a  great  description  of  the  childhood  of  humanity*,  which  he 
himself  did  not  outgrow.  In  1920  Sir  Auckland  Geddes  said,  ‘In  Europe,  we  know 
that  an  age  is  dying/  And  in  1941  I  wrote,  ‘The  terrors  and  horrors  we  are  wit¬ 
nessing  in  the  East  and  the  West  are  the  deathbed  agonies  of  that  passing  epoch.' 
With  Spengler’s  limitations,  no  wonder  the  Nazis  joined  hands  with  him.  Thej 
made  good  death-bedfellows,  demonstrating  empirically  the  ‘Decline  of  the  West*. 

PREFACE  TO  THE  THIRD  EDITION 

XXXlll 

and  sanity  became  linked  in  a  structurally  non-aristotelian  methodology, 
which  became  the  foundation  of  a  science  of  man . 

We  learned  from  anthropology  that  the  degrees  of  socio-cultural 
developments  of  different  civilizations  depend  on  their  capacity  to  pro¬ 
duce  higher  and  higher  abstractions,  which  eventually  culminate  in  a 
general  consciousness  of  abstracting ,  the  very  key  to  further  human 
evolution,  and  the  thesis  of  this  book.  As  Whitehead  justly  said,  ‘A 
civilisation  which  cannot  burst  through  its  current  abstractions  is  doomed 
to  sterility  after  a  very  limited  period  of  progress.’ 

In  mankind’s  cultural  evolution  its  current  abstractions  became 
codified  here  and  there  into  systems,  for  instance  the  aristotelian  system, 
our  main  concern  here.  Such  systematizations  are  important,  for,  as  the 
Talmud  says,  'Teaching  without  a  system  makes  learning  difficult.’  In 
analysing  the  aristotelian  codifications,  I  had  to  deal  with  the  two-valued, 
‘either-or’  type  of  orientations.  I  admit  it  baffled  me  for  many  years, 
that  practically  all  humans,  the  lowest  primitives  not  excluded,  who 
never  heard  of  Greek  philosophers,  have  some  sort  of  'either-or*  type 
of  evaluations.  Then  I  made  the  obvious  'discovery’  that  our  relations 
to  the  world  outside  and  inside  our  skins  often  happen  to  be,  on  the  gross 
level,  two-valued.  For  instance,  we  deal  with  day  or  night,  land  or  water, 
etc.  On  the  living  level  we  have  life  or  death,  our  heart  beats  or  not, 
we  breathe  or  suffocate,  are  hot  or  cold,  etc.  Similar  relations  occur 
on  higher  levels.  Thus,  we  have  induction  or  deduction,  materialism  or 
idealism,  capitalism  or  communism,  democrat  or  republican,  etc.  And 
so  on  endlessly  on  all  levels. 

In  living,  many  issues  are  not  so  sharp,  and  therefore  a  system  which 
posits  the  general  sharpness  of  ‘either-or*,  and  so  objectifies  ‘kind*, 
is  unduly  limited;  it  must  be  revised  and  made  more  flexible  in  terms 
of  'degree'.  This  requires  a  physico-mathematical  'way  of  thinking’, 
which  a  non-aristotelian  system  supplies. 

Lately  the  words  ‘semantics’  and  'semantic’  have  become  widely  used, 
and  generally  misused,  even  by  important  writers,  thus  leading  to  hope¬ 
less  confusion.  ‘Semantics’  is  a  name  for  an  important  branch  of 
philology,  as  complex  as  life  itself,  couched  in  appropriate  philological 
terms,  and  as  such  has  no  direct  application  to  life  problems.  The 
‘signifies’  of  Lady  Welby  was  closer  to  life,  but  gave  no  techniques  for 
application,  and  so  did  not  relate  linguistic  structures  to  the  structures 
of  non-verbal  levels  by  which  we  actually  live.  In  modem  times,  with 
their  growing  complexities,  a  theory  of  values,  with  extensional  tech- 

by  exposing  in  the  dramatic  finale  the  prevailing  outworn,  unrevised,  now  patho¬ 
logical,  doctrines  to  which  unfortunately  most  of  the  politicians  of  the  world  still 
subscribe. 

xxxiv  PREFACE  TO  THE  THIRD  EDITION 

niques  for  educational  guidance  and  self-guidance,  became  imperative. 
Such  a  theory,  the  first  to  my  knowledge,  required  a  modern  scientific 
approach,  and  this  was  found  in  physico-mathematical  methods  (space- 
time)  and  the  foundations  of  mathematics.  It  originated  in  1921  in 
Manhood  of  Humanity,  was  formulated  in  a  methodological  outline  in 
my  papers  in  1924,  1925,  and  1926,  and  in  1933  it  culminated  in  the 

present  volume.  , 

My  work  was  developed  entirely  independently  of  semantics, 

‘signifies’,  ‘semiotic’,  ‘semasiology’,  etc.,  although  I  know  today  and 
respect  the  works  of  the  corresponding  investigators  in  those  fields,  who 
explicitly  state  they  do  not  deal  with  a  general  theory  of  values.  Those 
works  do  not  touch  my  field,  and  as  my  work  progressed  it  has  become 
obvious  that  a  theory  of  ‘meaning’  is  impossible  (page  xv  ff.),  and 
‘signifies’,  etc.,  are  unworkable.  Had  I  not  become  acquainted  with 
those  accomplishments  shortly  before  publication  of  this  book,  I  would 
have  labelled  my  work  by  another  name,  but  the  system  would  have 
remained  fundamentally  unaltered.  The  original  manuscript  did  not  con¬ 
tain  the  word  ’semantics’  or  ‘semantic’,  but  when  I  had  to  select  some 
terms,  from  a  time-binding  point  of  view  and  in  consideration  of  the 
efforts  of  others,  I  introduced  the  term  ‘General  Semantics’  for  the  modus 
operandi  of  this  first  non-aristotelian  system.  This  seemed  appropriate 
for  historical  continuity.  A  theory  of  evaluation  appeared  to  follow 
naturally  in  an  evolutionary  sense  from  1)  ‘meaning’  to  2)  significance 
to  3)  evaluation.  General  Semantics  turned  out  to  be  an  empirical  natural 
science  of  non-elementalistic  evaluation,  which  takes  into  account  the 
living  individual,  not  divorcing  him  from  his  reactions  altogether,  nor 
from  his  neuro-linguistic  and  neuro-semantic  environments,  but  allocat¬ 
ing  him  in  a  plenum  of  some  values,  no  matter  what. 

The  present  theory  of  values  involves  a  clear-cut,  workable  discipline, 
limited  to  its  premises,  a  fact  which  is  often  disregarded  by  some  readers 
and  writers.  They  seem  also  often  unaware  of  the  core  of  the  inherent 
difficulties  in  these  age-old  problems,  and  the  solutions  available  through 
changing  not  the  language,  but  the  structure  of  language,  achieved  by  the 
habitual  use  of  the  extensional  devices  in  our  evaluational  reactions. 

For  instance,  in  Ten  Eventful  Years,  an  Encyclopaedia  Britannka 
publication,  appears  an  article  on  ‘Semantics,  General  Semantics’,  which 
considerably  increases  the  current  confusions  concerning  these  subjects. 
It  is  not  even  mentioned  that  ‘semantics’  is  a  branch  of  philology,  nor 
is  there  any  clarifying  discrimination  made  between  the  noun  ‘semantics’ 
and  the  adjective  ‘semantic’.  Moreover  it  has  many  misstatements  and 
even  falsifications  of  my  work  and  the  work  of  others,  and  some  state¬ 
ments  make  no  sense.  Fortunately  there  is  another  popular  publication, 

PREFACE  TO  THE  THIRD  EDITION 

XXXV 

the  American  People’s  Encyclopedia,  which  is  publishing  a  reliable 
article  on  general  semantics. 

It  is  not  generally  realized  that  with  human  progress,  the  complexities 
and  difficulties  in  the  world  increase  following  an  exponential  function 
of  ‘time’,  with  indefinitely  accelerating  accelerations.  I  am  deeply  con¬ 
vinced  that  these  problems  cannot  be  solved  at  all  unless  we  boldly  search 
for  and  revise  our  antiquated  notions  about  the  'nature  of  man*  and 
apply  modern  extensional  methods  toward  their  solution. 

Fortunately  at  present  we  have  an  international  body,  the  United 
Nations  Educational,  Scientific  and  Cultural  Organization,4  which  with 
its  vast  funds,  has  the  services  of  the  best  men  in  the  world,  and  a 
splendid  program.  It  is  true  that  they  are  very  handicapped  by  depend¬ 
ence  on  translations,  which  seldom  convey  the  same  implications  in  differ¬ 
ent  languages.  Yet  this  need  not  be  a  handicap,  for  the  methods  of  exact 
sciences  disregard  national  boundaries,  and  so  the  extensional  methods 
and  devices  of  general  semantics  can  be  applied  to  all  existing  languages, 
with  deep  psycho-logical  effects  on  the  participants  and  through  them 
on  their  countrymen.  Thus  the  world  would  gain  an  international  com¬ 
mon  denominator  for  inter-communication,  mutual  understanding,  and 
eventual  agreement.  I  would  suggest  that  students  of  general  semantics 
write  on  this  subject.  The  activities  of  this  international  body  after  all 
affect  all  of  us. 

We  need  not  blind  ourselves  with  the  old  dogma  that  'human  nature 
cannot  be  changed’,  for  we  find  that  it  can  be  changed .  We  must  begin 
to  realize  our  potentialities  as  humans,  then  we  may  approach  the  future 
with  some  hope.  We  may  feel  with  Galileo,  as  he  stamped  his  foot  on 
the  ground  after  recanting  the  Copernican  theory  before  the  Holy 
Inquisition,  eEppur  si  muove /’  The  evolution  of  our  human  development 
may  be  retarded,  but  it  cannot  be  stopped. 

A.  K. 

I  ^ikeville,  Connecticut 
<  Jctober,  1947 

REFERENCES 

I.  Kendig,  M.,  Editor.  Papers  from  the  Second  American  Congress  on  General 
Semantics.  Institute  of  General  Semantics,  1943. 

£  Korzybski,  A.  A  Veteran's  Re- Adjustment  and  Extensional  Methods.  ETC.: 
A  Review  of  General  Semantics,  Vol.  Ill,  No.  4.  See  also 

Saunders,  Captain  James,  USN  (Ret.).  Memorandum.  Training  of  Offi¬ 
cers  for  the  Naval  Service:  Hearings  Before  the  Committee  on  Naval 
Affairs,  United  States  Senate ,  June  12  and  13,  1946,  pp.  55-57.  U.  S.  Gov¬ 
ernment  Printing  Office,  Washington,  D.  C.,  1946. 

,1  Korzybski,  A.  Manhood  of  Humanity:  The  Science  and  Art  of  Human 
Engineering.  E.  P.  Dutton,  New  York,  1921 ;  2nd  ed.,  Institute  of  General 
Semantics,  Lakeville,  Conn.,  Distributors,  1950. 

4.  Huxley,  Julian,  UNESCO:  Its  Purpose  and  Its  Philosophy.  Public  Affairs 
Press,  Washington,  D.  G,  1947. 

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 

1941 

There  is  what  may  perhaps  be  called  the  method  of  optimism,  which 
leads  us  either  willfully  or  instinctively  to  shut  our  eyes  to  the  possibility 
of  evil.  Thus  the  optimist  who  treats  a  problem  in  algebra  or  analytic 
geometry  will  say ,  if  he  stops  to  reflect  on  what  he  is  doing ;  *1  know  I 
have  no  nght  to  divide  by  zero;  but  there  are  so  many  other  values  which 
by  w*“®h  1  am  dividing  might  have  that  I  will  assume  that 
the  isvil  One  has  not  thrown  a  zero  in  my  denominator  this  time.1 

MAXIMS  BdCHER* 

God  may  forgive  you  your  sins, 
but  your  nervous  system  toon’s. 

Old  Maxim. 

When  in  perplexity,  read  on. 

Old  Maxim. 

Section  A .  Recent  developments  and  the  founding  of  the  Institute  of 
General  Semantics. 

Science  and  Sanity:  An  Introduction  to  Non-aristotelian  Systems 
and  General  Semantics,  first  published  in  October,  1933,  was  intended  to 
be  a  textbook  showing  how  in  modern  scientific  methods  we  can  find 
factors  of  sanity,  to  be  tested  empirically.  Although  a  great  many  scien¬ 
tific  discoveries  have  been  made  since  the  first  publication,  it  did  not  seem 
necessary  to  revise  the  text  for  this  second  edition  because  the  method- 
ological  data  given,  important  for  our  purpose,  have  not  rha«ig»d  How¬ 
ever,  the  list  of  books  in  preparation  for  the  Non-aristotelian  Library 
has  been  revised,  and  in  this  introduction  I  indicate  some  new  develop¬ 
ments  in  general  semantics  and  include  a  short  new  bibliography,  supple¬ 
menting  the  bibliography  of  619  titles  given  on  page  767  ff. 

In  1935  I  began  to  conduct  seminar  courses  in  general  semantics  in 
schools,  colleges  and  universities,  and  before  various  groups  of  edu¬ 
cators,**  scientists,  and  physicians,  including  psychiatrists.  In  the 
year  a  group  of  students  of  Science  and  Sanity  organized  the  First  Amer- 

*  Congress  of  Arts  and  Science,  St  Louis,  1904,  Vol.  I,  p.  472. 

**I  the  word  'educator'  in  its  standard  English  sense;  namely,  'one  who  or 
that  which  educates’.  I  use  ‘educate’  in  the  sense  of:  “to  rear  .  .  .  king  19  from 
childhood,  so  as  to  form  habits,  manners,  mental  and  physical  aptitudes  ...  To 
provide  schooling  for  .  .  .  train  generally  .  .  .  train  so  as  to  develop  some  special 
aptitude,  taste,  or  disposition.’  Etc.  (The  Shorter  Oxford  English  Dictionary  on 
Historical  Principles,  Oxford,  at  the  Clarendon  Press,  1933.)  In  this  any 
teacher  from  nursery  school  through  university  professors  are  ‘educators’.  From  a 
life  point  of  view  this  would  include  even  parents,  nurses,  etc. 

xxxvu 

xxxviii  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 

ican  Congress  on  General  Semantics  at  the  Washington  College  of  Edu¬ 
cation  at  Ellensburg,  where  a  number  of  papers  from  various  fields  were 
presented.  The  present  writer  delivered  three  addresses  on  the  applica¬ 
tion  of  general  semantics  to  education  and  medicine,  which  are  printed 
in  the  proceedings  of  the  Congress.*  The  Second  American  Congress 
on  General  Semantics  will  be  held  at  the  University  of  Denver  in  August, 
1941.  This  Congress  is  organized  by  Professor  El  wood  Murray  of  the 
University  and  M.  Kendig,  Educational  Director  of  the  Institute. 

In  1938  the  Institute  of  General  Semantics  was  incorporated  in  Chi¬ 
cago  for  neuro-linguistic,  neuro-epistemologic,  scientific  research  and 
education.  Since  that  date,  as  director  of  the  Institute,  my  major  efforts 
have  been  concentrated  on  further  research  and  co-ordination  of  rapidly 
accumulating  empirical  data,  along  with  the  conduct  of  seminar  courses 
to  train  in  the  new  extensional  methods  for  application  in  personal  adjust¬ 
ment,  and  in  the  respective  special  fields  of  the  students.  At  present 
several  universities  are  offering  accredited  courses  in  general  semantics, 
and  in  a  number  of  other  universities  and  colleges  general  semantics  is 
incorporated  in  the  presentation  of  other  courses. 

From  scientific  necessity  this  book  was  written  inductively ;  the  semi¬ 
nar  courses  are  presented  deductively,  and  so  the  two  complement  each 
other.  The  seminars  include  much  illustrative  empirical  material  accu¬ 
mulated  in  the  five  years  of  application  of  the  system  by  my  co-workers 
and  myself,  together  with  the  pertinent,  factual,  newest  findings  of  other 
sciences. 

The  non-aristotelian  system  presented  here  has  turned  out  to  be  a 
strictly  empirical  science,  as  predicted,  with  results  which  have  greatly 
surpassed  even  my  expectations.  General  semantics  is  not  any  ‘philos¬ 
ophy*,  or  ‘psychology*,  or  ‘logic’,  in  the  ordinary  sense.  It  is  a  new 
extensional  discipline  which  explains  and  trains  us  how  to  use  our  ner¬ 
vous  systems  most  efficiently.  It  is  not  a  medical  science,  but  like  bac¬ 
teriology,  it  is  indispensable  for  medicine  in  general,  and  for  psychiatry, 
mental  hygiene,  and  education  in  particular.  In  brief,  it  is  the  formula¬ 
tion  of  a  new  non-aristotelian  system**  of  orientation  which  affects  every 

*  Distributed  by  the  Institute  of  General  Semantics,  Lakeville,  Connecticut. 

-**  The  terms  ‘era',  ‘epoch'  and  ‘system'  will  frequently  appear  here,  and  to  avoid 
confusion  it  may  be  advisable  to  indicate  in  what  sense  these  terms  are  used.  1)  Era: 
‘A  date  or  an  event,  which  begins  a  new  period  in  the  history  of  anything;  an  impor¬ 
tant  date.  ...  A  period  marked  by  the  prevalence  of  some  particular  state  of 
things.'  Etc.  2)  Epoch:  *.  .  .  a  period  of  history  defined  by  the  prevalence  of  some 
particular  state  of  things.  ...  A  period  ...  in  the  history  of  a  process.'  Etc.  3) 
System:  ‘A  set  or  assemblage  of  things  connected,  associated,  or  interdependent,  so 

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION  xxxix 

branch  of  science  and  life.  The  separate  issues  involved  are  not  entirely 
new;  their  methodological  formulation  os  a  system  which  is  workable, 
teachable  and  so  elementary  that  it  can  be  applied  by  children,  is  entirely 
new. 

The  experience  of  my  co-workers,  mostly  educators  and  psychiatrists, 
and  my  own,  shows  that  about  ninety  per  cent  of  those  who  train  them¬ 
selves  seriously  in  the  new  extensional  methods  definitely  benefit  in 
various  degrees,  and  in  ways  so  varied  as  to  be  unpredictable. 

Theory  and  empirical  results  show  that  these  new  methods  involve 
psychosomatic  factors  which  help  the  balancing  and  integration  of  the 
functions  of  the  nervous  system,  while  the  prevalent  and  traditional  in- 
tensional  methods  of  evaluation  tend  to  disintegrate  these  functions.  The 
nervous  mechanisms  involved  work  automatically  one  way  or  another, 
harmfully  or  beneficially,  depending  on  the  methods  with  which  we  utilize 
them.  This  has  not  been  fully  realized  before. 

The  new  methods  eliminate  or  alleviate  different  semantogenic  block¬ 
ages;  many  ‘emotional  disturbances*,  including  even  some  neuroses  and 
psychoses;  various  learning,  reading,  or  speech  difficulties,  etc.;  and 
general  maladjustments  in  professional  and/or  personal  lives.  These 
difficulties  result  to  a  large  extent  from  the  failure  to  use  ‘intelligence* 
adequately  so  as  to  bring  about  proper  evaluation. 

It  is  well  known  that  many  psychosomatic  symptoms  such  as  some 
heart,  digestive,  respiratory,  and  ‘sex*  disorders,  some  chronic  joint  dis¬ 
eases,  arthritis,  dental  caries,  migraines,  skin  diseases,  alcoholism,  etc.,  to 
mention  a  few,  have  a  semantogenic,  and  therefore  neuro-semantic  and 
neuro-linguistic  origin.  In  general  semantic  training  we  do  not  go  into 
the  medical  angle  as  such.  We  eliminate  the  harmful  semantogenic 
factors,  and  in  most  cases  the  corresponding  symptoms  disappear _ pro¬ 

vided  the  student  is  willing  to  work  at  himself  seriously. 

Section  B .  Some  difficulties  to  be  surmounted . 

1.  THE  ATTITUDES  OF  ' PHILOSOPHERS ,  ETC. 

‘Philosophers*,  ‘psychologists’,  ‘logicians’,  mathematicians,  etc.,  are 
somehow  unable  to  comprehend  that  their  work  is  the  product  of  the 

si  to  form  a  complex  unity;  a  whole  composed  of  parts  in  orderly  arrangement  accord¬ 
ing  to  some  scheme  or  plan.  ...  A  set  of  principles,  etc. ;  a  scheme,  method.  The 
let  of  corollated  principles  ...  or  statements  belonging  to  some  department  of 
knowledge  ...  a  department  of  knowledge  .  .  .  considered  as  an  organized  whole; 
a  comprehensive  body  of  doctrines,  conclusions  ...  An  organized  scheme  or  plan 
of  action ;  an  orderly  or  regular  method  of  procedure.  ...  A  formal,  definite  or 
established  scheme  or  method  .  .  .  systematic  form  or  order.’  Etc.  ( The  Shorter 
Oxford  Rtujlish  Dictionary  on  Historical  Principles .) 

xl 

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 

working  of  their  own  nervous  systems.  For  most  of  them  it  is  only  de¬ 
tached  verbalism  such  as  we  often  find  in  hospitals  for  ‘mentally'  ill.  For 
instance,  a  very  gifted,  well-minded  mathematician  and  professor  of  ‘phi¬ 
losophy*  wrote  to  me :  ‘I  do  not,  however,  think  that  neuro-psychology  is 
relevant  to  the  analysis  of  the  nature  of  meaning.  ...  I  do  not  believe 
in  confusing  logic  with  neuro-psychology*.  These  professionals  would  be 
shocked  if  they  would  study  the  many  volumes  of  verbal  rationalizations 
by  patients  in  hospitals.  They  would  find  very  quickly  that  the  words 
interplay  with  the  other  words  somehow,  but  they  have  very  little,  if  any, 
connection  with  the  facts,  and  that  is  one  reason  why  the  patients  are  con¬ 
fined.  Why  speculate  on  academic  verbal  definitions  instead  of  investi¬ 
gating  facts  in  such  hospitals,  where  patients  also  pay  no  attention  to  the 
functioning  of  their  own  nervous  systems  ?  Even  a  gramophone  record 
undergoes  some  physical  changes  before  words  or  noises  can  be  ‘stored' 
and/or  reproduced.  Is  it  so  very  difficult  to  understand  that  the  extremely 
sensitive  and  highly  complex  human  nervous  system  also  undergoes  some 
electro-colloidal  changes  before  words,  evaluations,  etc.,  are  stored,  pro¬ 
duced,  or  reproduced?  In  the  work  of  general  semantics  we  deal  with 
the  living  wewro-semantic  and  neuro-linguistic  reactions,  not  mere  de¬ 
tached  verbal  chatter  in  the  abstract.  In  our  experience  we  have  found 
that  even  seriously  maladjusted  persons  benefit  considerably  if  we  can 
succeed  in  making  them  ‘think*  about  themselves  in  neurological  electro- 
colloidal  terms  (see  chapter  IX). 

Most  ‘philosophers'  who  reviewed  this  book  made  particularly  shock¬ 
ing  performances.  Average  intelligent  readers  can  understand  this  book, 
as  they  usually  have  some  contact  with  life.  It  is  not  so  with  those  who 
indulge  in  mere  verbalism.  I  can  give  here  only  a  classical  example  of 
some  ‘philosophical*  performances.  A  reviewer  in  the  Journal  of  Philos¬ 
ophy,  February  1,  1934,  writes: 

‘Except  for  his  stimulating  discussion  of  the  mathematical  infinite 
(p.  206)  and  his  hints  on  the  nature  of  theory  (p.  253),  he  contributes 
nothing  to  the  clarification  of  meanings  by  definite  analyses  of  special 
problems.  Indeed,  he  only  adds  to  the  confusion  when  he  declares  that 
hypotheses  contrary  to  the  fact  are  meaningless  (e.g.,  p.  168)  ;  if  his  views 
were  correct,  science  would  come  to  an  end.  His  theory  of  meaning,  like 
his  theory  of  social  causation,  is  very  naive,  to  say  the  least.* 

I  suggest  that  the  reader  verify  whether  on  page  168  there  is  such  a 
statement,  or  even  a  hint  at  such  a  notion,  which  I  could  not  possibly  have. 
Besides,  I  do  not  give  any  theories  of  ‘meaning*  or  of  ‘social  causation* ! 

Most  ‘philosophers',  ‘logicians*,  and  even  mathematicians  look  at  this 
non-aristotelian  system  of  evaluation  as  some  system  of  formal  non-aris- 

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 

xli 

totelian  'logic',  which  is  not  the  case.  They  are  somehow  not  able  to  take 
the  natural  science  point  of  view  that  all  science,  mathematics,  ‘logic*, 
‘philosophy*,  etc.,  are  the  product  of  the  functioning  of  the  human  nervous 
system,  involving  some  sort  of  internal  orientations,  or  evaluations,  which 
are  not  necessarily  formalized.  The  analysis  of  such  living  reactions  is 
the  sole  object  of  general  semantics  as  a  natural  empirical  science. 

These  ‘philosophers*,  etc.,  seem  unaware,  to  give  a  single  example, 
that  by  teaching  and  preaching  ‘identity*,  which  is  empirically  non-existent 
in  this  actual  world,  they  are  neurologically  training  future  generations  in 
the  pathological  identifications  found  in  the  ‘mentally*  ill  or  maladjusted. 
As  explained  on  page  409,  and  also  Chapter  XXVI,  whatever  we  may 
say  an  object  (iss,  it  is  not ,  because  the  statement  is  verbal,  and  the  facts 
are  not. 

It  is  pathetic,  if  not  tragic,  that  society  should  invest  millions  of  dol¬ 
lars  to  support  such  specialists  who  train  future  generations  in  malad¬ 
justments  just  because  they  disregard  the  unavoidable  neuro-linguistic 
and  neuro-semantic  effects  of  their  teachings  on  the  lives  of  their  pupils. 

Most  scientists  and  educators  are  either  entirely  innocent  of  these 
problems,  or  indifferent  and  passive,  or  even  negativistic.  Like  some 
animals  that  can  outwit  humans  because  of  their  keen  observations,  the 
cunning,  often  pathological,  thoroughly  ignorant  present  day  totalitarian 
leaders  are  not  unaware  of  the  academic  shortcomings  based  on  inertia, 
verbalism,  etc.,  and  openly  proceed  to  utilize  these  human  nervous  weak¬ 
nesses  destructively,  with  very  telling  results.  Nazism,  wars  of  and  on 
nerves,  wars  of  verbal  distortion,  etc.,  with  their  following  disasters  are 
in  1941  only  too  obvious  examples.  I  will  return  to  this  subject  at  the 
end  of  this  introduction. 

The  terms  ‘philosophy*,  ‘system*,  etc.,  as  ordinarily  used,  stand  for 
too  broad  generalizations.  Different  ‘philosophies*  represent  nothing  but 

methods  of  evaluation,  which  may  lead  to 
empirical  mis-evaluation  if  science  and 
empirical  facts  are  disregarded.  Different 
systems  may  be  very  broad  and  general, 
such  as,  say,  the  aristotelian  system  (A) 
(see  Fig.  1),  within  which  is  a  more  lim¬ 
ited  and  less  general  system  such  as 
‘Christianity*  (C),  within  which  is,  for 
instance,  the  leibnitzian  system  (L),  and 
within  which  there  are  individual,  per¬ 
sonal  systems  (P).  Every  Smith*  has  an 
Individual  interpretation  of  broader  systems,  and  so  in  actuality  has  a 

Fio.  1 

xlii 

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 

system  of  his  own .  As  a  rule,  personal  systems  are  a  part  of,  and  in¬ 
fluenced  by,  larger  systems,  which  in  turn  are  influenced  by  still  more 
general  systems.  Such  problems  can  be  handled  at  present  only  by  the 
methods  of  general  semantics  and  by  topological  methods.* 

‘Mental’  illness  and  every  form  of  maladjustment  are  to  be  considered 
as  mis-evaiuations,  involving  some  ‘philosophies’,  public  or  individual, 
one  within  the  other,  as  usual.  ‘Philosophers’,  etc.,  who  wish  to  become 
aware  of  such  dangers,  would  do  well  to  study  the  verbalizations  and 
mis-evaluations  of  the  ‘mentally’  ill  in  hospitals. 

2.  PERPLEXITIES  IN  THEORIES  OF  ' MEANING ' 

There  is  a  fundamental  confusion  between  the  notion  of  the  older 
‘semantics’  as  connected  with  a  theory  of  verbal  ‘meaning*  and  words  de¬ 
fined  by  words,  and  the  present  theory  of  ‘general  semantics’  where  we 
deal  only  with  n^wro-semantic  and  neuro-linguistic  living  reactions  of 
Smithi,  Smiths,  etc.,  as  their  reactions  to  neuro-semantic  and  neuro-lin¬ 
guistic  environments  as  environment . 

The  present  day  theories  of  ‘meaning*  are  extremely  confused  and 
difficult,  ultimately  hopeless,  and  probably  harmful  to  the  sanity  of  the 
human  race.  Of  late  in  the  United  States  some  members  of  the  progres¬ 
sive  education  movement  have  written  much  on  ‘referents’  and  ‘opera¬ 
tional*  methods,  in  the  abstract,  based  on  verbalism.  Let  us  consider 
some  facts,  and  how  the  theories  of  referents  and  operational  methods  fit 
human  evaluations .  Here  is,  for  instance,  Smithi  who,  through  family, 
social,  economic,  political,  etc.,  conditions  has  become  ‘insane*.  Smithi 
finally,  in  ordinary  parlance,  kills  Smith2.  From  a  human  point  of  view 
it  is  a  very  complex  and  tragic  situation.  Let  us  account  for  it  in  terms  of 
referents  and  operations.  The  body  and  the  heart  of  Smith2,  the  hand  of 
Smithi,  the  knife,  etc.,  are  perfectly  good  referents.  The  grabbing  of  the 
knife  by  Smithi  and  plunging  it  in  the  heart  of  Smith2,  the  falling  down 
on  the  ground  by  Smith*  and  the  kicking  of  his  legs  are  perfectly  good 
operations.  However,  where  is  human  evaluation?  Where  is  concern 
with  ‘sanity*  and  ‘insanity*?  Here  we  deal  with  some  of  the  deepest 
human  and  social  tragedies  which,  in  this  case,  involve  not  only  the  killing 
of  Smith2  by  Smithi,  but  the  sick,  unhappy,  twisted  life  of  Smithi,  affect¬ 
ing  all  his  life  connections,  and  with  which  we  must  be  concerned  if  we 
are  to  be  human  beings  and  different  from  apes. 

*  Lewin,  Kurt.  Principles  of  Topological  Psychology.  McGraw-Hill,  New 
York,  1936. 

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION  xliii 

Such  an  example  is  of  course  extreme  and  over-simplified,  although 
it  illustrates  the  principles.  However,  officially  teaching  such  methods 
which  are  inadequate  to  handle  evaluation,  and  so  human  values,  has  a 
definite  sinister  effect,  among  others,  on  the  ‘sex’  life  of  the  students. 
Many  of  them  are  taught  to  orient  themselves  generally  by  referents  and 
operations  only ;  and  so  mere  physiological  performance  is  often  identified 
with  mature  love  life,  etc.,  and  is  a  causative  factor  in  the  wide-spread 
marital  unhappiness,  promiscuity  and  other  lowerings  of  human  cultural 
and  ethical  standards. 

Thus,  theories  of  'meaning*  or  still  worse,  ‘meaning  of  meaning*,  based 
on  ‘referents*  and  ‘operational*  methods  are  thoroughly  inadequate  to 
account  for  human  values,  yet  they  do  affect  the  nervous  systems  of 
humans.  We  must,  therefore,  work  out  a  theory  of  evaluation  which  is 
based  on  the  optimum  electro-colloidal  action  and  reaction  of  the  nervous 
system. 

There  is  no  doubt  that  a  civilized  society  needs  some  mature  ‘morals*, 
‘ethics*,  etc.  In  a  general  theory  of  evaluation  and  sanity  we  must  con¬ 
sider  seriously  such  problems,  if  we  are  to  be  sane  humans  at  all.  Theory 
and  practice  show  that  healthy,  well-balanced  people  are  naturally  ‘moral* 
and  ‘ethical*,  unless  their  educations  have  twisted  their  types  of  evalua¬ 
tions.  In  general  semantics  we  do  not  ‘preach*  ‘morality*  or  ‘ethics*  as 
such,  but  we  train  students  in  consciousness  of  abstracting,  consciousness 
of  the  multiordinal  mechanisms  of  evaluation,  relational  orientations,  etc., 
which  bring  about  cortico-thalamic  integration,  and  then  as  a  result  ‘mor¬ 
ality’,  ‘ethics*,  awareness  of  social  responsibilities,  etc.,  follow  automati¬ 
cally.  Unfortunately  our  educational  systems  are  unaware  of,  or  even 
negativistic  toward,  such  newro -semantic  and  neuro-linguistic  issues. 
These  are  sad  observations  to  be  made  about  our  present  educational 
systems. 

May  I  suggest  that  readers  consult  Apes,  Men  and  Morons  and  Why 
Men  Behave  Like  Apes  by  Earnest  A.  Hooton;  The  Mentality  of  Apes 
by  W.  Kohler,  The  Social  Life  of  Apes  and  Monkeys  by  S.  Zuckerman, 
and  many  other  studies  of  this  kind.  They  might  then  more  clearly  un¬ 
derstand  how  the  aristotelian  type  of  education  leads  to  the  humanly 
harmful,  gross,  macroscopic,  brutalizing,  biological,  animalistic  types  of 
orientations  which  are  shown  today  to  be  humanly  inadequate .  These 
breed  such  ‘ftihrers*  as  different  Hitlers,  Mussolinis,  Stalins,  etc.,  whether 
In  political,  financial,  industrial,  scientific,  medical,*  educational,  or  even 
publishing,  etc.,  fields,  fancying  that  they  represent  ‘all*  of  the  human 

*  See  Carrel's  Man  The  Unknown. 

xliv  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 

world!  Such  delusions  must  ultimately  be  destructive  to  human  culture, 
and  responsible  for  the  tragic  ‘cultural  lag’,  stressed  so  much  today  by 
social  anthropologists. 

Existing  theories  of  ‘meaning*  of  any  school  do  not  take  into  consider¬ 
ation  that  any  definition  of  words  by  words  must  be  based  ultimately  on 
undefined  terms.  To  the  best  of  my  knowledge  this  problem  is  not  con¬ 
sidered  at  all  in  present  day  educational  systems,  outside  of  some  sci¬ 
ences,  and  so  the  existing  theories  run  in  a  vicious  circle,  just  like  a  dog 
chasing  his  tail,  and  are  bound  to  be  ineffective,  if  not  harmful. 

As  Professor  Key ser  aptly  formulates  the  problem:  ‘If  he  contend,  as 
sometimes  he  will  Contend,  that  he  has  defined  all  his  terms  and  proved 
all  his  propositions,  then  either  he  is  a  performer  of  logical  miracles  or 
he  is  an  ass ;  and,  as  you  know,  logical  miracles  are  impossible/* 

Similarly  the  theorists  in  the  ‘theory  of  meaning*  as  described  above 
disregard  the  inadequacy  for  human  orientation  of  the  subject-predicate 
form  of  representation.  I  must  refer  the  reader  to  my  chapter  on  rela¬ 
tions,  page  188  ff.,  for  further  information. 

In  principle,  a  type  of  orientation  which  restricts  formally  everything 
to  subject-predicate  forms  of  representation  can  account  only  for  sym¬ 
metrical  relations,  and  we  may  beat  in  the  bush  about  ‘meaning’ ;  in  prin¬ 
ciple,  however,  a  theory  of  evaluation  is  then  impossible.  Evaluation 
must  be  based  on  asymmetrical  relations  such  as  ‘more’  or  ‘less’,  etc., 
which  cannot  be  dealt  with  at  all  adequately  if  restricted  formally  to  sub¬ 
ject-predicate  forms  of  representation,  that  harmfully  affect  our  orien¬ 
tations. 

What  I  have  said  here  is  correct  in  principle ;  however,  in  practice,  in 
the  neuro-semantic  and  neuro-linguistic  development  of  the  white  race  we 
had  to  invent,  by  living  necessity,  some  asymmetrical  relations  such  as 
‘more’  or  ‘less’,  etc.  The  difficulty  lies  in  the  fact  that  these  methods  of 
escape  from  a  subject-predicate  grammatical  structure  of  language  were 
used  only  haphazardly,  and  not  formulated  generally  into  a  workable 
system  based  on  asymmetrical  relations,  which  would  be  teachable . 

Similarly  with  the  problem  of  intensional  orientation  by  verbal  defi¬ 
nitions  and  extensional  orientation  by  facts  (see  p.  173)  ;  there  is  also 
confusion  about  it.  ‘Pure’  extension  is  humanly  impossible ;  ‘pure’  inten¬ 
sion  is  possible,  and  is  often  found  in  hospitals  for  ‘mentally*  ill,  and  in 
some  chairs  of  ‘philosophy*.  These  issues  and  problems  are  seriously 
confusing  to  the  average  person  because  they  have  not  been  formulated 
before  in  a  methodological  system. 

*  Keyser,  Cassius  J.  Mathematical  Philosophy.  E.  P.  Dutton,  New  York, 
1922,  p.  152. 

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 

xlv 

3.  INADEQUACY  OF  FORMS  OF  REPRESENTATION  AND  THEIR 
STRUCTURAL  REVISION 

It  is  not  generally  realized  what  serious  difficulties  an  inadequate, 
unduly  limited  form  of  representation  or  theory  brings  about  This  is 
well  known  in  science.  Thus,  for  instance,  the  euclidean  and  newtonian 
systems  cannot  deal  successfully  with  electricity  and  so  it  was  imperative 
to  produce  non-euclidean  and  non-newtonian  systems,  which  do  apply  to 
the  sub-microscopic  electrical  levels  and  also  to  the  macroscopic  gross 
levels.  Similarly  in  life,  the  two-valued  aristotelian  system  could  not 
deal  adequately  with  the  electro-colloidal  sub-microscopic  levels  of  the 
functioning  of  our  nervous  systems,  on  which  sanity  depends.  Thus  the 
formulation  of  the  present  infinite-valued  non-aristotelian  system  became 
also  an  imperative  necessity. 

I  must  stress  that  as  the  older  systems  are  only  special  limitations  of 
the  new  more  general  ‘non’  systems  (see  p.  97),  it  would  be  incorrect  to 
interpret  a  'non'  system  as  an  ‘anti*  system. 

Such  a  non-aristotelian  system  is  long  overdue.  It  was  retarded  be¬ 
cause  of  persecution  by  the  church  and  other  influential  bodies,  the  gen¬ 
eral  belief  that  ‘Aristotle  said  the  last  word*,  etc.,  and  particularly  because 
of  the  inherent  difficulties  of  such  a  revision. 

The  problem  of  inadequacy  in  the  forms  of  representation  has  handi¬ 
capped  science  and  life  a  great  deal  until  relatively  adequate  systems 
were  produced.  In  life  the  situation  is  much  more  aggravated,  for  if  our 
orientations  and  evaluations  are  inadequate,  our  predictability  is  impaired, 
and  we  feel  with  the  poet  Housman,  T,  a  stranger  and  afraid,  in  a  world 
I  never  made’.  If  we  have  a  more  adequate  or  proper  evaluation,  we 
would  have  more  correct  predictability,  etc.,  (see  p.  58  ff.  and  p.  750  ff.). 
We  would  then  feel,  ‘We  are  not  strangers,  and  not  afraid,  in  this  human 
mess  you  and  I  have  made'. 

Another  of  the  main  difficulties  is  that  a  language  or  a  system  of  a 
given  structure  can  be  somewhat  altered  from  within,  but  cannot  be 
revised  structurally  without  going  outside  the  former  system.  For  in¬ 
stance,  all  the  attempts  to  revise  the  structure  of  the  euclidean  and  new¬ 
tonian  systems  from  within  were  ineffective.  Those  who  revised  these 
systems  structurally  had  to  go  outside  the  systems  first,  after  which  they 
were  able  to  produce  different,  independent,  new  systems.  Only  then  did 
an  effective  evaluation  of  the  former  systems  become  possible. 

Similarly  the  aristotelian,  two-valued,  intensional  system  can  be  re¬ 
viled  structurally  and  evaluated  properly  only  by  building  independently 
a  non-aristotelian,  infinite-valued,  extensional  system.  This  verifies  the 
contention  of  Bertrand  Russell  made  in  1922  that  there  is  a  ‘possibility' 

xlvi  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 

that  ‘every  language  has  ...  a  structure  concerning  which,  in  the  lan¬ 
guage,  nothing  can  be  said,  but  that  there  may  be  another  language  deal¬ 
ing  with  the  structure  of  the  first  language,  and  having  itself  a  new  struc¬ 
ture’.*  What  Russell  calls  a  ‘possibility*  becomes  a  fact  once  a  system  of 
different  structure  is  built.  Then  the  issues  become  dear. 

Russell  limits  himsdf  to  the  structure  of  a  language,  and  disregards 
the  fact  that  this  limitation  is  artificial,  and  that  any  language  involves 
structural  assumptions  which  build  up  a  system  of  orientations  that  may 
be  racial,  national,  personal,  etc. 

4.  IDENTIFICATIONS  AND  MIS-E VALUATI ONS 

The  problem  of  general  identification  is  a  major  problem  which  does 
not  seem  to  be  understood  at  all  even  by  specialists.  Psychiatrists  know 
professionally  the  tragic  consequences  of  identifications  in  their  patients. 
But  what  even  psychiatrists  do  not  realize  is  that  identifications  in  daily 
life  are  extremely  frequent  and  bring  about  every  kind  of  difficulties. 

As  a  matter  of  fact  we  live  in  a  world  in  which  non-identity  is  as  en¬ 
tirely  general  as  gravitation,  and  so  every  identification  is  bound  to  be  in 
some  degree  a  mis-evaluation.  In  a  four-dimensional  world  where  every 
geometrical  point  has  a  date’,  even  an  ‘electron’  at  different  dates  is  not 
identical  with  itself,  because  the  sub-microscopic  processes  actually  going 
on  in  this  world  cannot  empirically  be  stopped  but  only  transformed. 
We  can,  however,  through  extensional  and  four-dimensional  methods 
translate  the  dynamic  into  the  static  and  the  static  into  the  dynamic,  and 
so  establish  a  similarity  of  structure  between  language  and  facts,  which 
was  impossible  by  aristotelian  methods.  Unfortunately  even  some  mod¬ 
ern  physicists  are  unable  to  understand  these  simple  facts. 

To  communicate  to  my  classes  what  I  want  to  convey  to  my  readers 
here,  the  following  procedure  has  been  useful.  In  my  seminars  I  pick  a 
young  woman  student  and  pre-arrange  with  her  a  demonstration  about 
which  the  class  knows  nothing.  During  the  lecture  she  is  called  to  the 
platform  and  I  hand  her  a  box  of  matches  which  she  takes  carelessly  and 
drops  on  the  desk.  That  is  the  only  ‘crime’  she  has  committed.  Then 
I  begin  to  call  her  names,  etc.,  with  a  display  of  anger,  waving  my  fists 
in  front  of  her  face,  and  finally  with  a  big  gesture,  I  slap  her  face  gently. 
Seeing  this  ‘slap’,  as  a  rule  ninety  per  cent  of  the  students  recoil  and 
shiver ;  ten  per  cent  show  no  overt  reactions.  The  latter  have  seen  what 
they  have  seen,  but  they  delayed  their  evaluations.  Then  I  explain  to  the 
students  that  their  recoil  and  shiver  was  an  organismal  evaluation  very 

*  Wittgenstein,  Ludwig.  Tractatus  Logic  o-Philosophicus,  with  an  introduction 
by  Bertrand  Russell.  Harcourt,  Brace,  New  York,  1022,  p.  23. 

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION  xlvii 

harmful  in  principle,  because  they  identified  the  seen  facts  with  their 
judgements,  creeds,  dogmas,  etc.  Thus  their  reactions  were  entirely 
unjustified,  as  what  they  have  seen  turned  out  to  be  merely  a  scientific 
demonstration  of  the  mechanism  of  identification,  which  identification  I 
expected. 

Such  identifications  are  very  common.  The  late  Dr.  Joshua  Rosett, 
formerly  Professor  of  Neurology  in  Columbia  University,  and  Scientific 
Director,  Brain  Research  Foundation,  New  York,  gives  an  example 
from  his  own  experience.  ‘A  vivid  picture  on  the  cinema  screen  repre¬ 
sented  a  boy  and  a  girl  pulling  down  hay  from  a  stack  for  bedding.  I 
sneezed — from  the  dust  of  the  hay  shown  on  the  screen/* 

The  problem  of  identification  in  values  is  neurologically  strictly  con¬ 
nected  with  the  pathological  reversal  of  the  natural  order  of  evaluation, 
which  is  found  in  different  degrees  in  the  maladjusted,  neurotics,  psy- 
chotics,  and  even  in  some  'normal'  persons.  Thus,  the  supposedly  inno¬ 
cent  'shiver'  and  the  sneezing  in  the  examples  above,  or  the  attack  of  hay 
fever  when  paper  roses  are  shown  (see  p.  128),  etc.,  may  as  well  in  other 
cases  end  in  a  sudden  death  or  in  a  neurosis  or  psychosis.  The  neuro¬ 
logical  mechanisms  are  similar,  involving  identifications  in  values  of 
different  orders  of  abstractions,  and  therefore  the  very  common  reversal 
of  the  natural  order  of  evaluation. 

In  the  evolution  of  the  human  race  and  language  there  was  a  natural 
order  of  evaluation  established ;  namely,  the  life  facts  came  first  and  labels 
(words)  next  in  importance.  Today,  from  childhood  up,  we  inculcate 
words  and  language  first,  and  the  facts  they  represent  come  next  in  value, 
another  pathologically  reversed  order,  by  which  we  are  unconsciously 
being  trained  to  identify  words  with  ‘facts'.  Even  in  medicine  we  much 
too  often  evaluate  by  the  definitions  of  'diseases'  instead  of  dealing  with 
an  individual  sick  patient,  whose  illness  seldom  fits  textbook  definitions. 

The  foregoing  considerations  deal  directly  with  aristotelian  orienta¬ 
tions  by  intension,  or  verbal  definitions,  where  verbiage  comes  first  in 
importance,  and  facts  next.  By  non-aristotelian  methods  we  train  in  the 
natural  order ;  namely,  that  first  order  empirical  facts  are  more  important 
than  definitions  or  verbiage.  It  should  be  noticed  that  the  average  child 
Is  born  extensional,  and  then  his  evaluations  are  distorted  as  the  result 
of  intensional  training  by  parents,  teachers,  etc.,  who  are  unaware  of  the 
heavy  neurological  consequences. 

These  are  key  problems  involved  in  the  passing  from  aristotelian  to 
non-aristotelian  orientations,  which  affect  our  future  personal,  national 

•  Rosett,  Joshua.  The  Mechanism  of  Thought,  Imagery,  and  Hallucination. 
Columbia  University  Press,  New  York,  1939,  p.  212. 

xlviii  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 

and  international  adjustments.  For  a  detailed  discussion  the  reader  is 
referred  to  this  text,  see  index  under  the  terms  ‘identification’,  ‘order*, 
‘natural  order*,  etc. 

5.  METHODS  OF  THE  MAGICIAN 

Another  very  serious  difficulty  arises  due  to  the  fact  that  our  knowl¬ 
edge  of  the  world  and  ourselves  involves  unavoidable  factors  of  decep¬ 
tion  and  self-deception.  A  scientific  study  of  magic  with  its  methods  of 
psycho-logical  deception  is  most  revealing,  as  it  shows  the  mechanisms 
by  which  we  are  continually  and  unknowingly  being  deceived  in  science 
and  daily  life.*  The  stock  in  trade  of  the  magician  to  fool  the  public  con¬ 
sists  of  methods  of  misdirection,  of  mis-evaluation,  half-truths,  etc,,  used 
to  play  on  the  ordinary  associations  and  implications,  habits  of  hasty 
generalizations,  etc.,  of  the  audience,  thus  leading  to  misinterpretations, 
identifications,  lack  of  predictability,  etc.  These  general,  and  so  common, 
psycho-logical  mechanisms  are  very  deep,  and  to  a  large  extent  are  con¬ 
nected  with  the  aristotelian  type  of  intensional,  subject-predicate  orien¬ 
tations,  which  ultimately  may  become  harmful. 

For  maximum  adjustment,  and  therefore  sanity,  we  need  neurological 
methods  to  prevent  and  counteract  these  heretofore  unavoidable  old  de¬ 
ceptions  and  self-deceptions.  In  a  non-aristotelian  system  these  difficul¬ 
ties  are  recognized  and  empirical  methods  are  discovered  to  eliminate 
them  step  by  step.  Such  methods  of  prevention  and  counteraction  cul¬ 
minate  in  training  in  consciousness  of  abstracting  (see  Chapters  XXVI 
XXVII,  XXIX  and  p.  499  ff .) . 

I  must  stress  that  as  far  as  we  humans  are  concerned,  we  cannot  pos¬ 
sibly  be  entirely  ignorant  about  ourselves ;  we  may  have  only  false  knowl¬ 
edge  or  half-truths .  It  is  psychiatricaliy  known  that  in  many  instances 
false  knowledge,  particularly  about  ourselves,  breeds  maladjustments, 
often  of  a  serious  character,  just  because  it  is  based  fundamentally  on 
self-deception.  In  the  meantime  we  react  and  act  ‘as  if  our  half-truths  or 
false  knowledge  were  ‘all  there  is  to  be  known'.  Thus  we  are  bound  to 
be  bewildered,  confused,  obsessed  with  fears,  etc.,  because  of  mistakes 
due  to  our  mis-evaluations,  when  we  orient  ourselves  by  verbal  structures 
which  do  not  fit  facts. 

Section  C.  Revolutions  and  evolutions . 

One  of  the  gravest  difficulties  facing  the  world  today  is  the  passing 
from  one  historical  era  to  another.  Such  passings,  as  history  shows,  have 

*  Kelley,  Douglas  M.  Conjuring  as  an  Asset  to  Occupational  Therapy.  Occu¬ 
pational  Therapy  and  Rehabilitation .  Vol.  19,  No.  2,  April,  1940. 

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION  xlix 

always  been  painful,  and  pregnant  with  consequences.  To  illustrate :  the 
transition  from  papal  control  to  non-papal  control,  passing  through  mur¬ 
derous  religious  persecutions  and  slaughters,  including  the  devastating 
Thirty  Years'  War,  etc. ;  from  French  royalism  to  republicanism,  passing 
through  the  ferocious  French  Revolution  and  Commune;  from  czarism 
to  state  capitalism,  passing  through  the  latest  bloody  Russian  Revolution 
and  a  period  of  so-called  'communism'.  Now  we  are  witnessing  the 
struggles  of  ‘democracies'  with  ‘totalitarian  states',  passing  as  yet  through 
the  recent  ruthless  Spanish  War,  second  World  War,  etc.,  etc. 

Similarly  we  can  give  illustrations  of  painful  transitions  from  one 
system  to  another  from  the  history  of  science,  which  were  also  accom¬ 
panied  by  bewilderment  and  labour:  for  instance,  the  passing  from  the 
ptolemaic  to  the  copernican,  from  euclidean  to  non-euclidean,  newtonian 
to  non-newtonian  (einsteinian),  etc.,  systems. 

In  all  these  transitions  it  took  one  or  more  generations  before  the 
upheaval  subsided  and  an  adjustment  was  made  to  the  new  conditions. 

No  matter  how  painful  and  disturbing  these  transitions  were,  they 
were  still  changes  and  revisions  within  the  then  most  general,  intensional 
aristotelian  system.  This  system  was  imposed  on  the  white  race  by  the 
‘church  fathers'.  Its  strength  and  influence  was  due  to  its  academically 
rationalized  general  verbal  formulations  which  were  set  forth  in  text¬ 
books,  and  thus  became  teachable.  From  the  beginning  the  aristotelian 
system  as  formulated  was  inadequate  and  many  attempts  at  corrections 
were  made.  The  white  race  was  impressed  by  the  church  that  ‘Aristotle 
spake’,  and  there  was  nothing  more  to  be  said.  In  fact,  attempts  to  revise 
this  system  were  prohibited  even  up  to  very  recent  times.  Just  the  same, 
new  facts  which  would  not  fit  the  aristotelian  and  church  patterns  were 
accumulating  and  so  new  methods,  languages  of  special  structure,  etc., 
were  required. 

Perhaps  an  illustration  from  the  history  of  mathematics  will  help. 
For  more  than  2,000  years  by  necessity  mathematicians  differentiated 
and  integrated  in  some  clumsy  fashion  in  order  to  solve  individual  prob¬ 
lems.  But  only  after  the  formulation  of  a  general  theory  by  Newton  and 
by  Leibnitz  did  the  general  method  become  teachable  and  communicable 
as  a  general  practical  discipline  (see  p.  574)  which  provided  the  founda¬ 
tions  for  future  developments  in  mathematics. 

The  aristotelian  system  had  been  formulated  in  a  very  rationalized 
way.  Non-aristotelian  attempts  have  been  and  are  being  made  con¬ 
tinually  in  limited  areas.  The  difficulty  was  that  no  methodological  gen¬ 
eral  theory  based  on  the  new  developments  of  life  and  science  had  been 
formulated  until  general  semantics  and  a  general,  extensional,  teachable 

1  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 

and  communicable,  non-aristotelian  system  was  produced.  The  mam 
difficulties  ahead  are  neuro-semantic  and  neuro-linguistic  because  for 
more  than  2,000  years  our  nervous  systems  have  been  canalized  in  the 
inadequate,  intensional,  often  delusional,  aristotelian  orientations,  which 
are  reflected  even  in  the  structure  of  the  language  we  habitually  use. 

It  may  be  helpful  to  indicate  some  historical  facts  of  the  development 
of  our  orientations  since  Socrates  (469-399  B.C.).  Socrates  was  the 
son  of  a  sculptor  and  himself  did  some  work  with  the  chisel  and  his  hands. 
He  became  an  important  founder  of  a  school  of  ‘philosophy .  In  brief, 
this  school  had  very  high  standards  for  science,  seeking  the  application  of 
the  science  of  the  time  to  life,  so  that  it  became  what  may  be  called  a 
‘school  of  wisdom’. 

One  of  his  students,  Plato  (427-347  B.C.),  who  came  from  an  aristo¬ 
cratic  family,  became  the  founder  of  a  different  school,  called  the  Acad¬ 
emy’,  and  the  ‘father’  of  what  may  be  called  ‘mathematical  philosophy’. 
Unlike  his  teacher,  he  began,  in  his  ‘Doctrine  of  Ideas’,  to  verbally  split 
humans  into  ‘ bod y*  and  ‘mind’,  as  if  they  could  be  so  split  in  living  beings. 
He  built  a  system  of  ‘ immaterialism ’  or  'idealism? , 

Aristotle  (384-322  B.C.),  the  son  of  a  physician,  was  the  student  of 
Plato,  and  particularly  interested  in  biology,  other  natural  sciences,  etc. 
He  founded  the  most  influential  of  the  three  schools,  which  is  called  by 
his  natn*  He  was  undoubtedly  one  of  the  most  gifted  men  mankind  has 
ever  known.  As  usual  in  such  cases,  the  study  of  one  branch  of  knowl¬ 
edge  leads  to  another,  so  Aristotle  was  led  to  the  study  of  ‘logic’,  lin¬ 
guistic  structure,  etc.,  about  which  he  produced  scholarly  treatises  or 
t»irtWiks,  ultimately  formulating  the  most  complete  system  of  his  time. 
Because  of  the  completeness  of  the  system,  backed  by  powerful  influences, 
it  has  moulded  our  orientations  and  evaluations  up  to  the  present.  The 
man  on  the  street,  our  education,  medicine  and  even  sciences,  are  still  m 
the  clutches  of  the  system  of  Aristotle,  a  system  inadequate  for  1941  yet 
perhaps  satisfactory  2,300  years  ago,  when  conditions  of  life  were  rela¬ 
tively  so  simple,  when  orientations  were  on  the  macroscopic  level  only, 
and  knowledge  of  scientific  facts  was  practically  nil  (see  p.  371  ff.). 

In  Aristotle’s  system  as  applied,  the  split  becomes  complete  and  insti¬ 
tutionalized,  with  jails  for  the  ‘animal’  and  churches  for  the  ‘soul’.  Now 
we  begin  to  realize  how  pernicious  and  retarding  for  civilization  that  split 
is  For  instance,  only  since  Einstein  and  Minkowski  do  we  begin  to 
understand  that  ‘space’  and  ‘time’  cannot  be  split  empirically,  otherwise 
we  create  for  ourselves  delusional  worlds.  Only  since  their  work  has 
modern  sub-microscopic  physics  with  all  its  accomplishments  become 
possible. 

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION  li 

Similarly,  and  tragically,  this  applies  to  medicine.  Until  recently  we 
have  had  a  split  medicine.  One  branch,  general  medicine,  was  interested 
in  the  body*  (soma)  ;  the  other  was  interested  in  the  ‘soul*  (‘psyche* ). 
The  net  result  was  that  general  medicine  was  a  glorified  form  of  veterin¬ 
ary  science,  while  psychiatry  remained  metaphysical.*  However,  it  has 
been  found  empirically  that  a  great  many  ‘physical*  ailments  are  of  a 
semantogenic  origin.  Only  a  few  years  ago  general  physicians  began  to 
understand  that  they  cannot  deal  with  humans  without  knowing  some- 
thing  about  psychiatry,  and  psychosomatic  medicine  began  to  be  formu¬ 
lated.  I  cannot  go  into  further  detail  here,  except  to  mention  that  this 
is  another  constructive  step  away  from  the  aristotelian  system,  which  as 
applied  trains  us  in  artificial,  verbal  splits. 

If  we  train  in  methods  which  in  principle  lead  to  splitting  the  person¬ 
ality,  we  obviously  train  or  prepare  the  ground  for  dementia  praecox  or 
schizophrenia,  which  very  often  involves  a  split  personality.  At  any 
rate,  it  does  not  seem  to  be  advisable  for  sanity,  and  so  proper  evaluation 
of  facts*  and  ‘reality*,  to  train  our  children  in  delusional  methods.  Per¬ 
sonally,  the  author  is  always  profoundly  shocked  that  parents,  who  after 
all  care  for  their  children,  can  tolerate  educators,  physicians,  scientists, 
etc.,  who  train  their  children  in  such  pernicious  and  hopelessly  antiquated 
methods.  I  also  always  wonder  whether  educators,  physicians,  scientists 
and  other  professionals  realize  what  harm  they  can  do  by  disregarding 
factors  of  sanity,  or  by  ignoring  them. 

It  is  pitiful  to  watch  how  even  some  of  the  most  outstanding  scientists 
in  the  world  are  unable  to  understand  what  a  passing  from  one  system  to 
another  means.  Thus,  for  example,  an  Encyclopedia  of  Unified  Science 
was  projected.  A  number  of  very  scholarly  treatises  were  published  in 
it,  and  yet  because  the  difficulties  were  not  faced  squarely  the  authors  are 
missing  the  point  that  neuro-semantic  and  neuro-linguistic  mechanisms 
are  involved  and  that  we  are  passing  from  one  system  to  another. 

One  of  the  tremendous  obstacles  in  the  revision  of  the  aristotelian 
system  is  exactly  the  excellence  of  the  work  of  Aristotle  based  on  the  very 
few  scientific  facts  known  2,300  years  ago.  The  aim  of  his  work  circa 
350  b.c.  was  to  formulate  the  essential  nature  of  science  (350  b.c.)  and 
the  forms  and  laws  of  science.  His  immediate  goal  was  entirely  methodo¬ 
logical  (350  B.c.),  and  he  aimed  to  formulate  a  general  method  for  ‘all* 
scientific  work.  He  was  even  expounding  the  theory  of  symmetrical 
relations,  the  relation  of  the  general  to  the  particular,  etc.  In  his  days 
these  orientations  were  by  necessity  two-valued  and  ‘objective*;  hence 

*  Korzybski,  Alfred.  Neuro-semantic  and  Neuro-linguistic  Mechanisms  of 
Extensionalixation.  Amtrican  Journal  of  Psychiatry ,  Vol.  93,  No.  1,  July,  1936. 

lii  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 

follows  his  whole  system,  then  more  or  less  satisfactory  on  macroscopic 
levels.  A  modem  revision  of  the  aristotelian  system  or  the  building  of  a 
non-aristotelian  system  involves,  or  is  based  on,  similar  aims,  namely, 
the  formulation  of  a  general  method  not  only  for  scientific  work,  but  also 

life,  as  we  know  it  today  (1941).  (  _ 

Modern  scientific  developments  show  that  what  we  label  ‘objects  or 
‘objective’  are  mere  nervous  constructs  inside  of  our  skulls  which  our 
nervous  systems  have  abstracted  electro-colloidally  from  the  actual  world 
of  electronic  processes  on  the  sub-microscopic  level.  And  so  we  have  to 
face  a  complete  methodological  departure  from  two-valued,  ‘objective’ 
orientations  to  general ,  infinite-valued,  process  orientations,  as  necessi¬ 
tated  by  scientific  discoveries  for  at  least  the  past  sixty  years. 

The  aim  of  the  work  of  Aristotle  and  the  work  of  the  non-aristotelians 
is  similar,  except  for  the  date  of  our  human  development  and  the  advance 
of  science.  The  problem  is  whether  we  shall  deal  with  science  and  scien¬ 
tific  methods  of  350  b.c.  or  of  1941  a.c.  In  general  semantics,  in  build¬ 
ing  up  a  non-aristotelian  system,  the  aims  of  Aristotle  are  preserved  yet 
scientific  methods  are  brought  up  to  date. 

Section  D.  A  non-aristotelian  revision . 

In  an  attempt  to  convey  the  magnitude  of  the  task  we  are  now  con¬ 
fronting,  I  can  do  no  better  than  to  summarize  roughly  in  the  following 
tabulation  some  of  the  more  outstanding  points  of  difference  between  the 
aristotelian  system  as  it  shapes  our  lives  today,  and  is  lived  by;  and  a 
scientific,  non-aristotelian  system,  as  it  will,  perhaps,  guide  our  lives 
sometime  in  the  future. 

Old  Aristotelian  Orientations 
(circa  350  b.c.) 

New  General  Semantic  Non- Aristo¬ 
telian  Orientations 
(1941  a.c.) 

1. 

Subject-predicate  methods 

Relational  methods 

2. 

Symmetrical  relations,  inadequate 
for  proper  evaluation 

Asymmetrical  relations,  indispensable 
for  proper  evaluation 

3. 

Static,  ‘ objective %  ‘permanent*,  ‘sub¬ 
stance*,  ‘solid  matter*,  etc.,  orien¬ 
tations 

Dynamic,  ever-changing,  etc.,  electronic 
process  orientations 

4. 

‘Properties*  of  ‘substance*,  ‘attri¬ 
butes*,  ‘qualities*  of  ‘matter,*  etc. 

Relative  invariance  of  function,  dynamic 
structure,  etc. 

5. 

Two-valued,  ‘either-or*,  inflexible, 
dogmatic  orientations 

Infinite-valued  flexibility,  degree  orien¬ 
tations 

T 

Static,  finalistic  *  alines/;  finite  num¬ 
ber  of  characteristics  attitudes 

Dynamic  non-allness;  infinite  number  of 
characteristics  attitudes 

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION  liii 

Aristotelian  Orientations 

Non-Aristotelian  Orientations 

7.  By  definition  ‘absolute  sameness  in 
“all”  respects*  (‘identity*) 

i  Empirical  non-identity,  a  natural  law  as 
universal  as  gravitation 

8.  Two-valued  ‘certainty*,  etc. 

Infinite-valued  maximum  probability 

9.  Static  absolutism 

Dynamic  relativism 

10.  By  definition  ‘absolute  emptiness*, 
absolute  space*,  etc. 

Empirical  fullness  of  electro-magnetic, 
gravitational,  etc.,  fields 

11.  By  definition  ‘absolute  time* 

Empirical  space-time 

12.  By  definition  ‘absolute  simultaneity* 

Empirical  relative  simultaneity 

13.  Additive  (‘and*),  linear 

Functional,  non-linear 

14.  (3  + 1) -dimensional  'space*  and 
‘time* 

4-dimensional  space-time 

15.  Euclidean  system 

Non-euclidean  systems 

16.  Newtonian  system 

Einsteinian  or  non-newtonian  systems 

17.  ‘Sense*  data  predominant 

Inferential  data  as  fundamental  new  fac¬ 
tors 

18.  Macroscopic  and  microscopic  levels 

Sw^-microscopic  levels 

19.  Methods  of  magic  (self-deception) 

Elimination  of  self-deception 

20.  Fibers,  neurons,  etc.,  ‘objective* 
orientations 

Electro-colloidal  process  orientations 

21.  Eventual  ‘organism-as-a-whole*,  dis¬ 
regarding  environmental  factors 

Orgamsm-as-a-who!e-tWm*V<wm*f»/,f, 
introducing  new  unavoidable  factors 

22.  Elementalistic  structure  of  language 
and  orientations 

Non-elementalistic  structure  of  language 
and  orientations 

23.  ‘Emotion*  and  ‘intellect*,  etc. 

Semantic  reactions 

24.  'Body*  and  ‘mind*,  etc. 

Psychosomatic  integration 

25.  Tendency  to  split  ‘personality* 

Integrating  ‘personality* 

26.  Handicapping  nervous  integration 

Producing  automatically  thalamo-corti- 
cal  integration 

27 .  Intensional  structure  of  language 
and  orientations,  perpetuating: 

Extensional  structure  of  language  and 
orientations,  producing : 

28.  Identifications  in  value : 

a)  of  electronic,  electro-colloidal,  ’ 

etc.,  stages  of  processes  with 
the  silent,  non-verbal,  ‘objec¬ 
tive’  levels 

b)  of  individuals,  situations,  etc. 

c)  of  orders  of  abstractions 

Consciousness  of  abstracting 

1  Extensional  devices 

29.  Pathologically  reversed  order  of 
evaluation 

Natural  order  of  evaluation 

30.  Conducive  to  neuro-semantic  tension 

Producing  neuro-semantic  relaxation 

liv 

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 

Aristotelian  Orientations 

N on- Aristotelian  Orientations 

31. 

Injurious  psychosomatic  effects 

Beneficial  psychosomatic  effects 

32. 

Influencing  toward  un-sanity 

Influencing  toward  sanity 

33. 

‘Action  at  a  distance',  metaphysical 
false-to-fact  orientations 

‘Action  by  contact*,  neuro-physiological 
scientific  orientations 

34. 

Two- valued  causality,  and  so  conse¬ 
quent  ‘final  causation' 

Infinite-valued  causality,  where  the  ‘final 
causation’  hypothesis  is  not  needed 

35. 

Mathematics  derived  from  ‘logic', 
with  resulting  verbal  paradoxes 

‘Logic’  derived  from  mathematics,  elimi¬ 
nating  verbal  paradoxes 

36. 

Avoiding  empirical  paradoxes 

Facing  empirical  paradoxes 

37. 

Adjusting  empirical  facts  to  verbal 
patterns 

Adjusting  verbal  patterns  to  empirical 
facts 

38. 

Primitive  static  ‘science'  (religions) 

Modern  dynamic  ‘religions’  (science) 

39. 

Anthropomorphic 

Non-anthropomorphic 

40. 

Non-similarity  of  structure  between 
language  and  facts 

Similarity  of  structure  between  language 
and  facts 

41. 

Improper  evaluations,  resulting  in: 

Proper  evaluations,  tested  by: 

42. 

Impaired  predictability 

Maximum  predictability 

43. 

Disregarded 

Undefined  terms 

44. 

Disregarded 

Self-reflexiveness  of  language 

45. 

Disregarded 

Multiordinal  mechanisms  and  terms 

46. 

Disregarded 

defined  character  of  terms 

47. 

Disregarded 

Inferential  terms  as  terms 

48. 

Disregarded 

Neuro-linguistic  environments  consid¬ 
ered  as  environment 

49. 

Disregarded 

Neuro-semantic  environments  considered 
as  environment 

50. 

Disregarded 

Decisive,  automatic  effect  of  the  struc¬ 
ture  of  language  on  types  of  evalua¬ 
tion,  and  so  neuro-semantic  reactions 

51. 

Elementalistic,  verbal,  intensional 
‘meaning*,  or  still  worse,  ‘meaning 
of  meaning* 

Non-elementalistic,  extensional,  by  fact 
evaluations 

52. 

Antiquated 

Modern,  1941 

The  new  non-aristotelian  orientations  differ  as 

MUCH  FROM  THE  ARISTOTELIAN  AS  THE  ARISTOTELIAN 

DIFFER  FROM  THE  PRIMITIVE  TYPES  OF  EVALUATION. 

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 

lv 

The  old  orientations  are  being  perpetuated,  as  a  rule  unknowingly, 
through  the  aristotelian  structure  of  our  language,  our  institutions,  etc. 
The  new  orientations  are  simpler  than  the  old  because  they  are  closer  to 
empirical  facts,  and  so  are  even  more  easily  absorbed  by  children — pro¬ 
vided  parents,  teachers,  etc.,  are  themselves  aware  of  the  new  methods 
and  so  can  give  the  children  guidance. 

The  difficulties  we  are  now  facing,  with  the  many  important  new  fac¬ 
tors  introduced  in  a  non-aristotelian  system,  listed  roughly  in  the  tabula¬ 
tion,  cannot  be  evaluated  effectively  unless  we  understand  the  role  that 
new  factors  play  in  our  generalizations. 

(5,12) 

Section  E.  New  factors :  the  havoc  they  play  with  our  generalizations . 

In  mathematics  and  science  we  use  extensively  the  method  of  inter¬ 
polation.  In  building  curves  we  do  not  have  all  the  points  or  data.  We 
have  a  number  of  them  and  then  connect  the  points  with  a  smooth  curve, 
y  The  equation  of  that  curve  is  given  on  the 

basis  of  the  actual  data  at  hand.  The  nervous 
processes  which  are  involved  in  interpolations 
and  building  up  equations  are  also  involved  in 
producing  ordinary  generalizations  in  daily 
life ;  that  is,  we  interpolate  from  the  data  we 
have  and  then  generalize  in  words  instead  of 
equations.  It  is  well  known  that  sometimes 
when  a  new  datum  is  discovered  it  transforms 
the  curve  entirely,  with  a  corresponding 
change  in  the  equation  (generalization) . 

Fig.  2  as  an  illustration  will  make  this 
clearer.  If  we  measure  the  experimental 
points  (1,0),  (3,6),  (5,12),  we  would  find 
them  to  lie  on  the  line  abc  with  the  equation 
y~3x  -3,  and  we  might  conclude  therefrom 
that  further  similar  experiments  would  con¬ 
firm  the  linearity  of  the  relationship  being 
studied.  But  if  a  further  analysis  yields  the 
point  (2,6),  the  simplest  curve  fitting  these  data  is  now  the  curve  adbec, 
expressed  by  the  equation  y  =  x3  - 9x2  +  26x -IS,  which  is  different  and 
much  more  complex  than  before,  because  it  is  a  cubic  equation  instead  of 
a  linear  equation.41 

Fig.  2 

*  I  am  indebted  for  this  example  to  Dr.  A.  S.  Householder,  University  of 
Chicago. 

lvi  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 

It  is  not  generally  recognized  what  havoc  the  discovery  of  a  single 
new,  important,  structural  factor  may  play  with  our  generalizations.  In 
science  and  ordinary  life  we  are  coming  across  such  new  factors  quite 
often,  and  we  have  to  change  our  equations  or  generalizations,  and  so 
our  standards  of  evaluation,  if  we  do  not  want  to  build  up  delusional 
situations  for  ourselves. 

As  an  example  I  can  suggest  here  the  work  of  Professor  W.  Bur- 
ridge,*  who  in  his  physiological  investigations  introduced  the  new 
unavoidable  factor  of  the  electro-colloidal  structure  of  life.  In  this  case 
it  does  not  matter  whether  the  particular  colloidal  theory  suggested  by 
Burridge  is  correct  or  not.  The  fact  that  he  introduced  an  important 
new  structural  factor  leads  to  entirely  different  interpretations,  general¬ 
izations,  etc.,  although  the  first  order  empirical  facts  remain.  Such  an 
introduction  requires  a  complete  revision  of  the  generalizations  of  biol- 
ogy,  physiology,  neurology,  etc.,  and  therefore  even  medicine  and 
psychiatry.  Incidentally,  psychosomatic  results  become  at  least  intel¬ 
ligible. 

Other  examples  may  be  given,  such  as  the  work  of  Professor  William 
F.  Petersen,**  who  introduced  the  new  factor  of  weather  into  medicine ; 
or  of  Freud,  who  introduced  the  ‘unconscious*,  etc. ;  or  of  Lorentz,  Ein¬ 
stein  and  others,  who  introduced  the  finite  velocity  of  light  into  the  new- 
tonian  system,  etc.,  etc.  As  is  well  known,  the  introduction  of  these  new 
factors  revolutionized  constructively  the  older  theories. 

The  scientific  requirements  of  a  new  theory  are  very  exacting.  A 
new  theory  must  account  for  the  known  facts  and  predict  new  facts  fol¬ 
lowing  the  new  generalizations,  which  in  turn  depend  upon  the  new  fac¬ 
tors  or  structural  assumptions  introduced.  The  predicted  new  facts 
must  then  be  verified  empirically. 

In  general  semantics  we  introduce  a  number  of  new  unavoidable  struc¬ 
tural  factors;  among  others,  our  neuro-semantic  (neuro-evaluational) 
and  neuro-linguistic  environments  as  environment .  Such  introductions 
also  require  a  radical  revision  of  what  we  know,  and  have  wide  applica¬ 
tions  in  daily  life,  as  well  as  in  sciences,  including  the  foundation  of 
mathematics  (see  chapters  XI V,  XV,  XVIII,  and  XIX)  and  physics 
(see  chapter  XVII).  These  new  factors  should  particularly  interest 
parents,  educators,  medical  men,  psychiatrists,  and  other  specialists. 

The  introduction  of  new  factors  may  at  first  produce  seeming  diffi- 

*  Dean  of  the  Medical  Faculty  and  Principal  of  King  George's  Medical  College, 
Lucknow,  India. 

**  Professor  of  Pathology,  University  of  Illinois,  College  of  Medicine. 

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION  lvii 

culties  because  of  the  unfamiliarity  of  a  new  terminology  which  embodies 
the  new  structural  assumptions,  and  because  of  the  necessity  of  a  re¬ 
canalization  of  our  neuro-linguistic  habits,  etc.  Yet  after  the  new  orien¬ 
tations  are  acquired,  the  new  issues  become  much  simpler  than  the  older, 
because  they  are  better  understood  (see  p.  97). 

In  at  least  one  historical  case,  it  was  the  omission  of  an  unnecessary 
artificial  assumption  that  brought  about  a  transformation  of  the  whole 
system.  I  speak  here  about  euclidean  geometry,  which  assumes  the 
equal  distance  of  parallels,  and  the  non-eucfidean  geometries,  which 
eliminated  this  equal  distance  postulate  as  unnecessary.  The  results  were 
very  striking.  Thus,  in  the  euclidean  system  we  build  curves  out  of  little 
bits  of  ‘straight  lines’.  We  do  the  opposite  in  the  newer  geometries — we 
start  with  curves,  shortest  distances,  etc.,  not  ‘straight  lines*  (as  no  one 
knows  what  that  means),  and  build  up  ‘straight  lines’  as  the  limit  of  an 
arc  of  a  circle  with  an  ‘infinite  radius’  (see  p.  590). 

Further  explanations  are  given  in  the  text,  but  I  hope  that  I  have  con¬ 
veyed  to  the  reader  the  fundamental  character  of  these  problems  and 
some  of  the  difficulties  encountered  at  first  when  new  structural  factors 
are  introduced.  Even  the  elimination  of  a  postulate  may  be  translated 
into  an  introduction  of  a  new  negative  factor.  This  translation  is  impor¬ 
tant  in  life,  although  it  may  be  unimportant  in  technical  mathematics. 
In  science  as  well  as  in  life  we  deal  all  the  time  with  this  kind  of  problems, 
and  when  they  are  not  understood  structurally,  we  are  only  plunged  into 
paradoxes  and  bewilderment,  and  potential  maladjustment. 

Section  F.  Non-aristotelian  methods, 

1.  NEUROLOGICAL  MECHANISMS  OF  EX  TENSION ALIZ  A  T1  ON 

There  is  an  especially  broad  generalization,  already  referred  to,  which 
empirically  indicates  a  fundamental  difference  between  the  traditional, 
aristotelian,  intensional  orientations,  and  the  new  non-aristotelian  exten- 
sional  orientations,  and  in  many  ways  summarizes  the  radical  differences 
between  the  two  systems.  This  is  the  problem  of  intension  (spelled  with 
an  s)  and  extension.  Aristotle,  and  his  followers  even  today,  recognized 
the  difference  between  intension  and  extension.  However,  they  con¬ 
sidered  the  problem  in  the  abstract ,  never  applying  it  to  human  living 
reactions  as  living  reactions,  which  can  be  predominantly  intensional  or 
predominantly  extensional.  The  interested  reader  is  advised  to  consult 
any  textbook  on  ‘logic’  concerning  ‘intension’  and  ‘extension*,  as  well  as 
the  material  given  in  this  text  (see  index). 

The  difference  can  be  illustrated  briefly  by  giving  examples  of  ‘defini- 

lviii  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 

tions\  Thus  a  ‘definition*  by  intension  is  given  in  terms  of  aristotelian 
‘properties*.  For  instance,  we  may  verbally  ‘define*  ‘man*  as  a  ‘feather¬ 
less  biped*,  ‘rational  animal*,  and  what  not,  which  really  makes  no  differ¬ 
ence,  because  no  listing  of  ‘properties*  could  possibly  cover  ‘all*  the  char¬ 
acteristics  of  Smithi,  Smith2,  etc.,  and  their  inter-relations. 

By  extension  ‘man*  is  ‘defined*  by  exhibiting  a  class  of  individuals 
made  up  of  Smithi,  Smith2,  etc. 

On  the  surface  this  difference  may  appear  unimportant ;  not  so  in  liv¬ 
ing  life  applications .  The  deeper  problems  of  neurological  mechanisms 
enter  here.  If  we  orient  ourselves  predominantly  by  intension  or  verbal 
definitions,  our  orientations  depend  mostly  on  the  cortical  region.  If  we 
orient  ourselves  by  extension  or  facts,  this  type  of  orientation  by  neces¬ 
sity  follows  the  natural  order  of  evaluation,  and  involves  thalamic  factors, 
introducing  automatically  cortically  delayed  reactions.  In  other  words, 
orientations  by  intension  tend  to  train  our  nervous  systems  in  a  split  be¬ 
tween  the  functions  of  the  cortical  and  thalamic  regions ;  orientations  by 
extension  involve  the  integration  of  cortico-thalamic  functions. 

Orientations  by  extension  induce  an  automatic  delay  of  reactions, 
which  automatically  stimulates  the  cortical  region  and  regulates  and  pro¬ 
tects  the  reactions  of  the  usually  over-stimulated  thalamic  region. 

What  was  said  here  is  elementary  from  the  point  of  view  of  neurology. 
The  difficulty  is  that  this  little  bit  of  neurological  knowledge  is  not  applied 
in  practice.  Neurologists,  psychiatrists,  etc.,  have  treated  these  prob¬ 
lems  in  an  ‘abstract*,  ‘academic*,  detached  way  only,  somehow,  entirely 
unaware  that  living  human  reactions  depend  on  the  working  of  the  human 
nervous  system,  from  which  dependence  there  is  no  escape.  No  wonder 
‘philosophers*,  ‘logicians*,  mathematicians,  etc.,  disregard  the  working  of 
their  nervous  systems  if  even  neurologists  and  psychiatrists  still  orient 
themselves  by  verbal  fictions  in  the  ‘ abstract *. 

If  we  investigate,  it  seems  appalling  how  little  of  the  vast  knowledge 
we  have  is  actually  applied.  Even  the  ancient  Persians  showed  their 
understanding  of  the  difference  between  learning  and  applying  in  their 
proverb :  ‘He  who  learns  and  learns  and  yet  does  not  what  he  knows,  is 
one  who  plows  and  plows  yet  never  sows*.  In  this  new  modem  non- 
aristotelian  system  we  have  not  only  to  ‘know*  elementary  facts  of  modem 
science,  including  neuro-linguistic  and  neuro-semantic  researches,  but 
also  to  apply  them.  In  fact,  the  whole  passage  from  the  aristotelian  to 
non-aristotelian  systems  depends  on  this  change  of  attitude  from  inten¬ 
sion  to  extension,  from  macroscopic  to  sub-microscopic  orientations, 
from  ‘objective*  to  process  orientations,  from  subject-predicate  to  rela¬ 
tional  evaluations,  etc.  This  is  a  laborious  process  and  months  of  self- 

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION  lix 

discipline  are  required  for  adults  before  these  new  methods  can  be  applied 
generally ;  children  as  a  rule  have  no  difficulties. 

If  we  stop  to  reflect,  however,  it  seems  obvious  that  those  who  are 
trained  in  two-valued,  macroscopic,  ‘objective’,  aristotelian  orientations 
only,  are  thoroughly  unable  to  have  modern,  electro-colloidal,  sub-micro¬ 
scopic,  infinite-valued,  process  orientations  in  life,  which  can  be  acquired 
only  by  training  in  non-aristotelian  methods. 

It  is  sad  indeed  to  deal  with  even  young  scientists  in  the  colloidal  and 
quantum  fields  who,  after  taking  off  their  aprons  in  the  laboratory,  re¬ 
lapse  immediately  into  the  two-valued,  prevalent  aristotelian  orientations, 
thus  ceasing  to  be  scientific  1941.  In  many  ways  these  scientists  are 
worse  off  than  the  ‘man  on  the  street’,  because  of  the  artificially  accen¬ 
tuated  split  between  their  scientific  and  their  life  orientations.  Although 
they  work  in  an  infinite-valued,  non-aristotelian  field,  even  they  need  spe¬ 
cial  training  to  become  conscious  of  how  to  apply  their  own  scientific  non- 
aristotelian  methods  to  life  problems. 

Empirically  the  consequences  of  training  in  the  new  methods  are 
astonishingly  far-reaching.  This  is  easily  understood  after  reflection, 
because  the  integrating  of  the  functions  of  the  cortical  and  thalamic  re¬ 
gions  brings  about  better  functioning  of  glands,  organs,  etc.  Although 
general  semantics  is  not  a  medical  science,  we  can  understand  why  the 
non-aristotelian  extensional  thalamo-cortical  methods  bring  about  a  great 
deal  of  stabilization  and  even  psychosomatic  consequences,  as  the  em¬ 
pirical  results  achieved  by  my  psychiatric  co-workers  and  myself  indicate. 

2.  NEURO-SEMANTIC  RELAXATION 

The  optimum  working  of  the  nervous  system  depends,  among  other 
things,  on  ‘normal’  blood  pressure,  which  is  predominantly  a  thalamic 
function,  supplying  the  nervous  system  with  necessary  blood  circulation. 
As  both  affective,  or  ‘emotional’,  responses  and  blood  pressure  are  neuro- 
logically  closely  connected,  it  is  fundamental  for  ‘emotional’  balance  to 
have  ‘normal’  blood  pressure,  and  vice  versa . 

In  general  semantics  we  utilize  what  I  call  ‘neuro-semantic  relaxa¬ 
tion',  which,  as  attested  by  physicians,  usually  brings  about  ‘normal’ 
blood  pressure;  that  is,  it  lowers  abnormally  high  pressure  and  raises 
abnormally  low  pressure,  thus  regulating  the  essential  blood  circulation, 
and  so  blood  supply.  The  standards  for  ‘normal’  are  given  in  statistical 
averages  and  are  not  accurate  for  the  given  individual,  and  at  different 
times.  These  conditions  and  beneficial  consequences  are  strictly  em¬ 
pirical,  and  must  be  taken  into  account,  regardless  of  the  fact  that  the 
present  scientific  theories  on  this  subject  are  not  yet  clear.  It  must  be 

lx 

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 

realized  that  for  the  'normal’  working  of  the  nervous  system  we  must 
have  a  proper  blood  circulation,  which  may  be  affected  by  the  tension  of 
blood  vessels,  and  is  also  connected  with  ‘emotional*  tension .  We  are 
never  aware  of  this  particular  steady  kind  of  ‘emotional*  tension,  which 
involves  hidden  fears,  anxieties,  uncertainties,  frustrations,  etc,,  and 
through  the  nervous  mechanisms  of  projection  colour  harmfully  our  atti¬ 
tudes  toward  the  world  and  life  in  general.  Such  conditions  result  in 
defensiveness,  which  is  no  defense,  but  a  wasteful,  useless  drain  on  the 
limited  nervous  capacities. 

Some  details  of  the  mechanisms  and  techniques  involved,  as  they 
affect,  among  others,  so-called  ‘speech  difficulties*,  (stuttering,  etc.)  are 
given  by  Professor  Wendell  Johnson,  University  of  Iowa,  in  his  Lan¬ 
guage  and  Speech  Hygiene:  An  Application  of  General  Semantics,  pub¬ 
lished  as  the  first  monograph  of  the  Institute  of  General  Semantics. 
More  details  concerning  neuro-semantic  relaxation  will  be  presented  in 
professional  papers. 

3.  EXTENSIONAL  DEVICES  AND  SOME  APPLICATIONS 

To  achieve  extensionalization  we  utilize  what  I  call  ‘extensional 
devices* : 

1)  Indexes 

2)  Dates 

3)  Etc.  ( et  cetera ) 

4)  Quotes 

5)  Hyphens 

Working  Devices 
Safety  Devices 

It  should  be  noticed  that  in  a  four-dimensional  world  dating  is  only  a 
particular  temporal  index  by  which  we  can  deal  effectively  with  space- 
time.  In  non-aristotelian  orientations  these  extensional  devices  should 
be  used  habitually  and  permanently,  with  a  slight  motion  of  the  hands 
to  indicate  absolute  individuals,  events,  situations,  etc.,  which  change  at 
different  dates,  also  different  orders  of  abstraction,  etc.  Thus  thalamic 
factors  become  involved,  without  which  the  coveted  thalamo-cortical  inte¬ 
gration  cannot  he  accomplished . 

I  may  add  that  all  existing  psychotherapy,  no  matter  of  what  school, 
is  based  on  the  partial  and  particular  extensionalization  of  a  given  patient, 
depending  on  the  good  luck  and  personal  skill  of  the  psychiatrist.  Un¬ 
fortunately  these  specialists  are  in  the  main  unaware  of  what  is  said  here, 
and  of  the  existence  of  a  theory  of  sanity  which  gives  general,  simple,  and 
workable  thalamo-cortical  methods  for  extensionalization,  and  so  thalamo¬ 
cortical  integration. 

A  few  illustrations  of  the  wide  practical  applications  of  some  of  the 
devices  may  be  given  here.  In  many  instances  serious  maladjustments 

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION  lxi 

follow  when  ‘hate*  absorbs  the  whole  of  the  affective  energy  of  the  given 
individual.  In  such  extreme  cases  ‘hate’  exhausts  the  limited  affective 
energy.  No  energy  is  left  for  positive  feelings  and  the  picture  is  often 
that  of  a  dementia  praecox,  etc.  Thus  an  individual  'hates*  a  generalisa¬ 
tion  ‘mother*,  ‘father*,  etc.,  and  so  by  identification  ‘hates*  ‘all  mothers’, 
‘all  fathers’,  etc.,  in  fact,  hates  the  whole  fabric  of  human  society,  and 
becomes  a  neurotic  or  even  a  psychotic.  Obviously,  it  is  useless  to  preach 
‘love*  for  those  who  have  hurt  and  have  done  the  harm.  Just  the  oppo¬ 
site  ;  as  a  preliminary  step,  by  indexing  we  allocate  or  limit  the  ‘hate*  to 
the  individual  Smithi,  instead  of  a  ‘hate’  for  a  generalization  which 
spreads  over  the  world.  In  actual  cases  we  can  watch  how  this  alloca¬ 
tion  or  limitation  of  ‘hate*  from  a  generalization  to  an  individual  helps 
the  given  person.  The  more  they  ‘hate*  the  individual  Smithi  instead  of 
a  generalization,  the  more  positive  affective  energy  is  liberated,  and  the 
more  ‘human*  and  ‘normal*  they  become.  It  is  a  long  struggle,  but  so  far 
empirically  invariably  successful,  provided  the  student  is  willing  to  work 
persistently  at  himself. 

But  even  this  indexed  individualised  ‘hate’  is  not  desirable,  and  we 
eliminate  it  rather  simply  by  dating.  Obviously  Smithi1920  is  not 
Smithi1940  and  most  of  the  time  hurti1920  would  not  be  a  ‘hurt*  in  1940. 
With  such  types  of  orientations  the  individual  becomes  adjusted,  and 
serious  improvements  in  family  and  social  relationships  follow,  because 
the  student  has  trained  himself  in  a  general  method  for  handling  his  own 
problems. 

Similar  mechanisms  of  generalization  through  identifications  are  in¬ 
volved  in  morbid  and  other  generalized  fears  which  are  so  disastrous  for 
daily  adjustment.  Because  thalamic  factors  are  involved,  these  difficul¬ 
ties  are  helped  greatly  or  eliminated  by  a  similar  use  of  the  extensional 
devices  to  individualize  and  then  date  the  allocated  fears. 

What  a  heavy  price  we  may  sometimes  pay  for  the  disregard  of  exten¬ 
sional  devices  in  connection  with  the  structure  of  language,  can  be  illus¬ 
trated  no  better  than  by  the  life  history  and  work  of  Dr.  Sigmund  Freud. 
In  his  writings  Freud  ascribed  one  intensional  undifferentiated  ‘sex*  even 
to  infants,  which  revolted  public  opinion.  If  Freud  would  have  used  the 
extensional  devices  he  would  not  have  gotten  into  such  detrimental  pro¬ 
fessional  and  other  difficulties.  He  would  not  have  used  the  fiction  ‘sex’ 
without  indexes,  dates  and  quotes,  and  he  would  have  explained  that  an 
infant  has  a  ticklish  organ  which  could  be  labelled  ‘sex0°*  at  birth,  ‘sexx1* 
at  the  age  of  one,  ‘sex22*  at  the  age  of  two,  etc.  These  are  obviously  dif¬ 
ferent  in  life,  but  the  differences  are  hidden  by  the  one  abstract  defini¬ 
tional  term  ‘sex*,  and  made  obvious  only  by  the  extensional  techniques. 

lxii  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 

Let  us  be  frank  about  it.  The  intensional  abstract  ‘sex’  labels  a  fiction. 

By  extension  or  facts,  ‘sex’  varies  with  every  individual  not  only  with 
age  (dates),  but  in  relation  to  endless  other  factors,  and  can  be  handled 
adequately  only  by  the  use  of  extensional  devices. 

4.  IMPLICATIONS  OF  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  LANGUAGE 
In  what  is  said  above  we  were  already  dealing  with  the  change  from 
an  intensional  to  an  extensional  structure  of  language,  and  so  orienta¬ 
tion.  We  can  investigate  a  step  further,  and  find  that  the  aristotelian 
structure  of  language  is  in  the  main  elementalistic,  implying,  through 
structure,  a  split  or  separation  of  what  in  actuality  cannot  be  separated. 
For  instance,  we  can  verbally  split  ‘body’  and  ‘mind’,  ‘emotion  and  intel¬ 
lect’,  ‘space’  and  ‘time’,  etc.,  which  as  a  matter  of  fact  cannot  be  separated 
empirically,  and  can  be  split  only  verbally.  These  elementalistic,  split¬ 
ting,  structural  characteristics  of  language  have  been  firmly  rooted  in  us 
through  the  aristotelian  training.  It  built  for  us  a  fictitious  animistic 
world  not  much  more  advanced  than  that  of  the  primitives,  a  world  in 
which  under  present  conditions  an  optimum  adjustment  is  in  principle 

impossible.  . 

In  a  non-aristotelian  system  we  do  not  use  elementalistic  terminology 

to  represent  facts  which  are  non-elementalistic.  We  use  terms  like 
‘semantic  reactions’,  ‘psychosomatic’,  ‘space-time’,  etc.,  which  eliminate 
the  verbally  implied  splits,  and  consequent  mis-evaluations.  In  the  be¬ 
ginning  of  my  seminars  when  I  am  explaining  space-time,  students  often 
react  by  saying,  ‘Oh,  you  mean  “space”  and  “time”  ’.  This  translation 
would  abolish  the  whole  modern  advances  of  physics,  because  of  the 
structural  implications  of  a  delusional  verbal  split.  .  Similarly  the 
habitual  use  of  the  non-elementalistic  term  ‘semantic  reactions’  eliminates 
metaphysical  and  verbal  speculations  on  such  elementalistic  fictions  as 
‘emotion’  and  ‘intellect’,  etc.,  considered  as  separate  entities. 

Unfortunately  these  considerations  of  structural  implications  have 
been  entirely  disregarded  in  daily  life  even  by  scientists,  often  befuddling 
issues  very  seriously.  Thus,  the  term  ‘concept’  is  widely  used,  and  the 
users  are  not  conscious  that  this  term  has  elementalistic  implications  of 
‘mind’  or  ‘intellect’  taken  separately,  which  then  become  verbal  fictions. 
The  actual  facts,  however,  can  be  simply  expressed  with  correct  struc¬ 
tural  implications.  What  is  called  ‘concept’  amounts  to  nothing  more 
or  less  than  a  verbal  formulation,  a  term  which  eliminates  the  false-to-fact 
implications.  Students  of  general  semantics  are  strongly  advised  never 
to  use  the  elementalistic  term  ‘concept’,  but  the  non-elementalistic  ‘formu¬ 
lation’  instead.  We  could  eventually  berate  and  ridicule  people  for  their 

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION  lxiii 

old  neuro-linguistic  habits,  but  in  our  work  we  take  the  neurological  atti¬ 
tude  and  realize  the  difficulties  of  linguistic  habits  and  neurological  re¬ 
canalization.  From  this  point  of  view  we  only  face  understanding^  the 
inherent  difficulties.  I  can  even  now  hear  the  reactions  of  some  of  my 
readers,  T  fully  agree  with  you,  and  I  believe  it  is  a  very  fine  concept’ t 
And  so  it  goes. 

From  the  above  it  becomes  obvious  that  without  changing  the  lan¬ 
guage  itself,  which  is  practically  impossible,  we  can  easily  change  the 
structure  of  language  to  one  free  from  false-to-fact  implications.  This 
change  is  feasible. 

Another  example  may  make  issues  clearer.  Thus  the  intensional 
verbal  definition  of  ‘man*  or  ‘chair*,  etc.,  brings  to  our  consciousness 
similarities,  and,  so  to  say,  drives  the  differences  into  the  ‘unconscious’. 
In  a  world  of  processes  and  non-identity  it  follows  that  no  individual, 
‘object',  event,  etc.,  can  be  the  ‘same'  from  one  moment  to  the  next.  And 
so  individualizing  (indexes)  and  temporal  devices  (dates),  etc.,  should 
be  used  conjointly .  Thus,  obviously  chair!1600  is  not  the  ‘same’  as 
chair!1940,  nor  is  SmithiMondiy  the  ‘same’  as  SmithiTueBd*y.  Orientations  in 
such  extensional  terms  bring  to  our  consciousness  not  only  similarities 
but  also  differences.  Through  training  in  the  consciousness  of  abstract¬ 
ing  we  become  aware  that  characteristics  are  left  out  in  the  process  of 
abstracting  by  our  nervous  systems,  and  so  we  become  conscious  of  the 
possibility  that  new  factors  may  arise  at  any  time  which  would  necessitate 
a  change  in  our  generalizations. 

Once  more  we  can  get  a  bit  of  wisdom  from  mathematical  method. 
I  believe  it  was  the  great  mathematician  Sylvester  who  said  that  ‘in 
mathematics  we  look  for  similarities  in  differences  and  differences  in 
similarities',  which  statement  should  apply  to  our  whole  life  orientation. 
This  is  made  uniquely  applicable  to  life  by  the  new  non-aristotelian  exten¬ 
sional  structure  of  language  and  so  orientations. 

The  reader  will  find  in  this  work  the  use  of  certain  terms  which, 
although  they  are  standard  English  words,  are  not  habitually  used.  The 
terms  used  here  have  been  carefully  selected  and  tested,  and  found  to  be 
more  similar  to  the  structure  of  the  actual  facts.  The  power  of  terminol¬ 
ogy,  because  of  its  structural  implications,  is  well  known  in  science,  but 
is  entirely  disregarded  in  our  daily  neuro-linguistic  habits. 

It  is  shocking  to  realize  that  even  such  scholarly  aristotelians  as  the 
Jesuits,  and  other  devotees,  are  unable  or  unwilling  to  comprehend  the 
obvious  structural  modern  neuro-semantic  and  neuro-linguistic  facts. 
When  confronted  with  them  they  hide  behind  a  verbal  smoke  screen  of 
medieval  terms  such  as  ‘nominalism',  ‘realism',  etc.,  which  in  modern  sci- 

lxiv  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 

ence  are  hopelessly  antiquated,  useless,  confusing,  and  so  eventually 
harmful.  Their  attitude  even  today  is  that  all  those  problems  were 
settled  and  disposed  of  by  different  monks  in  the  Middle  Ages.  Modern 
researches  reveal  that  nothing  of  the  sort  was  settled  or  disposed  of,  and 
that  a  new,  up-to-date  revision  is  necessary  to  eliminate  the  false  knowl¬ 
edge  from  which  present  day  tragedies  follow  automatically.  The  reader 
is  referred  to  the  Encyclopaedia  Britannica  under  such  terms  as  Nominal¬ 
ism’,  ‘realism’,  and  related  terms. 

Section  G.  -§^de fined  terms.* 

As  was  explained  before,  for  a  revision  of  a  system  we  must  first  get 
outside  of  the  system.  Only  after  producing  a  non-aristotelian  exten- 
sional  system  can  the  aristotelian  intensional  structure  of  our  traditional 
system  and  language  be  properly  evaluated. 

Here  we  introduce  a  most  important  technical  term  which  describes 
a  fundamental  characteristic  of  a  correct  attitude  toward  language; 
namely,  that  most  terms  are  ‘^^defined’.  They  are  over-defined  (over¬ 
limited)  by  intension,  or  verbal  definition,  because  of  our  belief  in  the 
definition;  and  are  hopelessly  under-defined  by  extension  or  facts, 
when  generalizations  become  merely  hypothetical.  For  instance,  the 
euclidean  parallels  with  their  equal  distance  are  over-defined  by  intension 
and  under-defined  by  extension,  as  ‘equal  distance’  is  unnecessary  and 
also  is  denied  by  facts.  Similarly  the  newtonian  equations  are  over¬ 
defined  (over-limited)  by  intension,  while  under-defined  by  extension, 
which  includes  the  necessary  finite  velocity  of  a  signal  (Lorentz- 
Einstein) . 

From  these  two  examples  alone  we  may  see  how  heavy  the  problem 
is,  as  the  discovery  of  a  new  important  factor  makes  it  obvious  that  most 
generalizations  must  be  ^defined,  depending  upon  whether  our  atti¬ 
tude  is  intensional  or  extensional.  Unfortunately  only  those  who  have 
studied  psychiatry  and/or  general  semantics  can  fully  comprehend  the 
difficulties  involved.  Different  maladjusted,  neurotics,  psychotics,  etc., 
orient  themselves  by  intension  most  of  the  time.  This  means  they  evalu¬ 
ate  by  over-definition,  just  because  they  believe  in  their  limited  verbal- 

*  The  term  ‘over-defined  class1  was  introduced  to  the  best  of  my  knowledge  by 
Dr.  A.  S.  Householder.  This  term  is  inadequate  for  our  purpose,  as  it  disregards 
the  problems  of  intension  and  extension,  which  represent  different  types  of  evaluation. 
Besides,  the  term  ‘class’  is  very  ambiguous.  In  science  and  life  we  deal  mostly 
with  ^^de fined  terms,  as  will  be  explained. 

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION  lxv 

isms,  and  not  by  extensional  facts,  which  make  us  conscious  of  under- 
definition. 

To  make  this  fundamental  difficulty  clearer  I  will  use  a  rather  trivial 
illustration.  The  dictionaries  define  ‘house*  as  a  'building  for  human 
habitation  or  occupation*,  etc.  Let  us  imagine  that  we  buy  a  house ;  this 
buying  is  an  extensional  activity,  usually  with  some  consequences.  If 
we  orient  ourselves  by  intension  we  are  really  buying  a  definition, 
although  we  may  even  inspect  the  house,  which  may  appear  desirable, 
etc.  Then  suppose  we  move  into  the  house  with  our  furniture  and  the 
whole  house  collapses  because  termites  have  destroyed  all  the  wood,  leav¬ 
ing  only  a  shell,  perhaps  satisfying  to  the  eye.  Does  the  verbal  defini¬ 
tion  of  the  house  correspond  to  the  extensional  facts?  Of  course  not. 
It  becomes  obvious  then  that  by  intension  the  term  'house*  was  over¬ 
defined,  or  over-limited,  while  by  extension,  or  actual  facts,  it  was  hope¬ 
lessly  under-defined,  as  many  important  characteristics  were  left  out. 
In  no  dictionary  definition  of  a  'house*  is  the  possibility  of  termites  men¬ 
tioned. 

‘Philosophers*,  etc.,  and  ‘philosophizing*  laymen,  if  they  ever  will  be 
able  to  face  facts  and  verbal  paradoxes,  will  have  a  merry  time  arguing 
back  and  forth  about  the  above  human  and  neuro-linguistic  situation 
because  they  know  nothing  about  psychiatry  and  empirical  data  of  gen¬ 
eral  semantics.  Without  serious  neuro-linguistic  study,  including  the 
'philosophical  treatises*  of  'mentally*  ill  in  hospitals,  they  will  not  be  able 
to  understand  why,  by  intension  or  belief  in  verbal  definitions,  most  terms 
are  hopelessly  over-defined,  while  by  extension  they  are  hopelessly  under- 
defined.  Their  analysis  of  intensional  'over-definitions*  will  be  exten¬ 
sional  by  necessity ,  and  they  will  have  great  difficulties  in  realizing  the 
very  important  fact  that  we  deal  for  the  most  part  only  with  -^defined 
terms. 

I  must  stress  again  that  this  difficulty  is  not  inherent  in  our  language 
as  such,  but  depends  exclusively  on  our  attitude  toward  the  use  of  lan¬ 
guage. 

The  ignorance  of  ‘philosophers*,  etc.,  about  neuro-semzntic  and  neuro- 
linguistic  issues  is  not  only  appalling,  but  positively  harmful  to  sanity, 
civilization  and  culture.  To  justify  their  own  existence  in  civilization 
they  should  have  investigated  such  problems  professionally  long  ago,  and 
incorporated  them  in  their  work.  Even  the  present  world  tragedies  are 
one  of  the  results  of  their  intensional  delusional  w^wro-semantic  and 
w#ttro-linguistic  detachment.  Present  day  totalitarianisms  were  built 
by  the  dumping  on  the  human  nervous  systems  of  such  terms  as  ‘com¬ 
munism,*  ‘bolshevism/  etc.,  which  induced  corresponding  fearful  signal 

lxvi  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 

reactions  (see  chapter  XXI)  of  the  ruling  classes,  resulting  in  their  im- 
becilic  and  suicidal  behaviour.  The  ruling  classes  welcomed  in  many 
ways  the  totalitarians  as  an  eventual  safe-guard  of  their  personal  selfish 
interests.  The  extensional  results  are  that  the  dreaded  ‘communists*  and 
‘bolshevists*  have  united  with  the  totalitarians,  and  today,  1940,  the  ‘com¬ 
munists*  are  as  ‘imperialistic*  as  any  czar  has  ever  been. 

To  give  another  example  of  ^^defined  terms,  it  may  be  helpful  to 
cite  a  paradox  formulated  by  the  mathematician  Frege  in  connection  with 
linguistic  difficulties  underlying  mathematical  foundations. 

In  a  village  there  was  only  one  barber,  who  shaved  only  those  who 
did  not  shave  themselves.  The  question  arises  whether  the  barber  shaves 
himself  or  not.  If  we  say  ‘yes,*  then  he  did  not  shave  himself;  if  we  say 
‘no/  then  he  shaved  himself.  In  daily  life  we  deal  all  the  time  with  such 
paradoxes,  which  if  not  clarified  result  only  in  bewilderment. 

The  term  ‘barber*  as  a  term ,  since  it  omits  the  living  human  being,  is 
a  label  for  a  fiction,  because  there  is  no  such  thing  as  a  ‘barber*  without 
a  living  human  being.  By  extension  the  given  specialist  in  shaving, 
Smithi,  is  not  so  simple.  He  is  peppered  with  complex  chain-indexes 
and  dates.  Thus,  Smith!!  may  be  by  profession  a  barber,  Smithy  may  be 
a  father,  Smithi8  may  be  a  member  of  the  village  council,  and  anyway 
Smithin  is  a  living  person  who  has  his  own  life  and  personality  outside  his 
profession,  and  ultimately  he  has  to  shave  himself  if  he  does  not  want  a 
beard,  verbalism  or  no  verbalism.  Obviously  the  term  ‘barber’  is  over¬ 
defined,  over-limited,  by  intension,  and  is  under-defined  by  extension. 

One  of  my  co-workers,  commenting  on  this  paradox,  suggested  that 
the  barber  may  be  a  woman  and  have  no  beard ;  or,  the  barber  may  be  a 
beardless  hermaphrodite  or  eunuch ;  or,  the  barber  may  have  a  full  beard. 
Thus,  we  have  only  traditionally  assumed,  in  analyzing  this  old  paradox, 
that  the  barber  was  a  man  with  a  beard  which  was  somehow  shaved. 

The  difficulties  of  this  ^^defined  terms  situation  affect  not  only 
our  daily  lives,  but  science  as  well.  For  example,  H20  is  by  intension  or 
definition  over-defined ;  by  extension  or  in  practice  we  do  not  deal  with 
‘pure*  H20,  which  is  only  a  symbol  on  paper,  because  actually  unavoid¬ 
able  impurities  are  always  present. 

Similarly  let  us  consider  ‘ blood  transfusion *.  In  the  beginning  we 
used  the  term  ‘blood  transfusion*  as  over-defined;  by  extension  it  turned 
out  to  be  under-defined,  because  different  bloods  have  different  charac¬ 
teristics,  and  often  blood  of  one  type  killed  the  patient  who  had  blood  of 
another  type. 

Here  I  will  list  a  few  of  the  many  heavy  terms  we  use  in  science  and 

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION  lxvii 

daily  life  which  are  the  cause  of  endless  verbal  bickering  and  confusion, 
because  of  our  lack  of  realization  of  their  “-^defined  character,  depend¬ 
ing  uniquely  on  our  attitudes.  Terms  such  as  variation  in  biology  and 
anthropology,  learning,  frustration,  education,  needs,  intelligence,  in¬ 
stincts,  genius,  teacher,  leadership,  love,  hate,  fear,  sex,  man,  woman, 
infantilism,  maladjustment,  dementia  praecox,  personality,  democracy, 
totalitarianism,  dollar,  god,  gold,  war,  peace,  aggression,  neutral,  jew, 
number,  velocity,  etc.,  etc.,  can  serve  as  illustrations. 

One  psychoanalyst  suggests  ego  and  super-ego;  another  writes:  T 
could  quote  you  a  considerable  part  of  psychoanalytic  terms*.  An  epis- 
tomologist  says,  ‘Meaning  is  a  forbidden  term  in  my  courses.  ...  In 
linguistics  the  terms  phoneme,  word,  sentence  are  mazes  of  confusion. 
.  .  .  Philosophy  is  in  as  bad  a  situation.  Metaphysics  is  even  worse.’ 
To  quote  a  prominent  anthropologist:  ‘^-definition  is  notably  com¬ 
mon  in  the  field  of  so-called  social  anthropology  in  which  students  at¬ 
tempt  to  disregard  the  human  organism  and  deal  with  human  affairs  as 
discrete  phenomena*.  For  example,  ‘ culture  may  be  technology,  morals, 
philosophy,  or  a  wooden  leg — all  most  vaguely  formulated.  .  .  .  When 
some  change  in  the  anatomy  and  physiology  of  the  organism  is  attributed 
to  environment,  the  latter  term  is  not  broken  down  into  climate,  rainfall, 
food  supply,  etc.  Social  environment  may  be  arts,  industries,  law, 
morals,  religion,  familial  institutions,  tradition,  etc.* 

The  following  comment  by  a  mathematician  shows  the  generality  of 
this  problem:  ‘A  term  would  seem  to  be  extensionally  under-defined  so 
long  as  we  cannot  in  practice  exhaust  its  instances  by  enumeration.  But 
this  much  is  true  of  just  about  every  term  of  the  kind  traditionally  known 
as  “general  concrete** ;  e.g.  house,  dime,  star,  neurone  * 

A  journalist  suggests :  ‘As  an  example  recently  come  to  our  attention 
I  would  mention  those  magic  words  Monroe  Doctrine .  Even  when  Mr. 
Hull  discusses  it,  as  he  does  as  nearly  correctly  as  anyone  “in  the  know**, 
he  omits  some  real  facts,  such  as  the  economic  implications  of  overturn¬ 
ing  the  international  status  quo  in  this  hemisphere.  But  when  Japan 
and/or  Germany  (high  order  abstractions  as  used  here)  refer  to  Asiatic 
and/or  European  Monroe  Doctrines,  the  meaning  of  the  original  words 
has  been  completely  metamorphosed  through  ^^definition.  The  Amer¬ 
ican  accepted  meaning  includes  no  actual  control  of  those  falling  within 
the  doctrine's  sphere,  whereas  Japan  and  Germany  mean  an  actual 
hegemony  in  their  respective  spheres.  The  relationship  between  ours 
and  theirs  is  therefore  a  vast  confusion  of  terms. 

‘Then  consider  the  incidents  growing  out  of  insults  in  the  interna- 

lxviii  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 

tional  fields.  What  is  an  insult  ?  It  is  usually  pure  verbalism  with  great 
affective  characteristics  manipulated  to  sway  others  as  the  swayer  directs. 
To  bring  it  into  the  domestic  field,  call  a  Republican  (what  is  that?) 
a  New  Dealer  (again,  what  is  that?)  and  the  fur  begins  to  fly/ 

A  leading  moving  picture  executive  says  that  actors  have  frequent 
verbal  arguments  about  what  is  funny.  The  only  thing  to  do  is  to  try 
it  before  an  audience.  ‘If  it  makes  them  .  .  .  laugh,  it  may  be  termed 
funny.  If  it  fails  to  make  them  laugh,  it  is  not  funny /  In  the  mean¬ 
time,  ‘your  audience  may  tell  you  that  the  subject  in  dispute  is  neither 
funny  nor  not-funny.  It  is  merely  boring/ 

There  is  no  need  to  give  further  examples  here,  as  practically  the 
whole  dictionary  could  be  quoted.  In  my  enquiry  concerning  —^defined 
terms  in  many  fields  I  got  a  number  of  answers  which  were  very  fun¬ 
damental,  which  I  gratefully  acknowledge.  Some  replies  were  to  the 
effect  that  T  would  gladly  give  you  examples  such  as  you  ask  for,  but  I 
do  not  think  I  have  any  that  would  be  new  to  you’,  which  shows  their 
understanding  of  the  problem.  Yet  the  most  extensional  answer  was 
given  by  that  brilliant  jurist,  Dr.  Robert  M.  Hutchins,  who  sent  to  me 
his  Convocation  Address  of  June,  1940  with  a  letter,  which  he  has  kindly 
given  me  permission  to  quote,  as  follows :  T  am  afraid  you  will  feel  that 
all  the  words  I  use  are  examples  of  the  errors  you  are  attacking.  Here 
is  my  last  Convocation  Address,  with  a  sample  in  every  line/  Such  a 
judgement  is  profoundly  justified  whenever  language  is  utilized.  This 
address  is  a  splendid  piece  of  work,  and  it  implies  the  intuitive  recogni¬ 
tion  of  the  fundamental  neuro-linguistic  difficulties  we  are  up  against. 

But  an  intuitive  grasp  by  exceptional  persons  does  not  make  that 
recognition  teachable  in  general  education.  We  need  crisp,  general 
methodological  formulations  which,  will  make  people  aware  of  the  role 
the  structure  of  language  plays  in  affecting  our  types  of  reactions.  For 
instance,  our  language  may  be  elementalistic  or  non-elementalistic,  inten- 
sional  or  extensional,  in  structure,  etc.  We  discover  also  the  fundamen¬ 
tal  multiordinal  character  of  the  most  important  terms  we  have,  the 
—^defined  character  of  most  of  our  terms,  etc. 

As  the  difficulties  mentioned  here  are  inherent  in  our  neuro-semantic 
and  neuro-linguistic  mechanisms,  which  control  our  reactions,  the  only 
possible  safe-guard  against  the  dangers  of  hopeless  bewilderment,  fears, 
anxieties,  etc.,  is  the  consciousness  of  the  mechanisms .  Certainly  ‘phi¬ 
losophers',  ‘logicians’,  psychiatrists,  educators,  etc.,  should  be  aware  of 
these  problems,  and  introduce  this  consciousness  even  in  elementary 
education  and  in  psychotherapy. 

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION  lxix 

The  problem  of  j^defined  terms  is  very  difficult  to  explain  briefly. 
It  is  discussed  more  fully  in  two  of  my  papers  presented  before  profes¬ 
sional  societies.* 

Section  H.  The  passing  of  the  old  aristotelian  epoch . 

1.  ‘MAGINOT  LINE  MENTALITIES’ 

Present  day  scientific  researches  and  historical  world  developments 
show  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  old  aristotelian  epoch  of  human  evolution 
is  dying.  The  terrors  and  horrors  we  are  witnessing  in  the  East  and 
the  West  are  the  deathbed  agonies  of  that  passing  epoch,  and  not  the 
beginning  of  a  new  system.  The  changes  of  historical  periods  in  human 
development  are  often  accompanied  by  the  disorganization,  and  some¬ 
times  acute  suffering,  of  mankind,  and  the  price  is  bound  to  be  paid  by 
one  or  more  generations. 

I  doubt  if  in  the  whole  of  human  history  there  is  a  more  accentuated 
illustration  than  the  tragic  and  sudden  collapse,  in  the  summer  of  1940, 
of  the  French  government  and  army,  and  eventually  of  French  culture 
and  ‘democracy'.  The  degree  of  stupidity,  treachery,  graft,  dishonesty, 
ignorance,  and  ultimately  decadence,  etc.,  the  French  plutocrats  and  poli¬ 
ticians,  and  so-called  ‘intelligentsia1  displayed  is  unprecedented,  particu¬ 
larly  because  of  the  fine  historical  record  the  French  have  had.  We  test 
the  freshness  or  deterioration  of  fishes  by  smelling  the  head  end,  and  as 
we  know  at  the  date  of  this  writing,  the  head  ends  of  the  French  ‘democ¬ 
racy'  have  a  putrid  odor.  This  deterioration  affected  the  French  military 
men,  who  once  were  the  finest  in  the  world,  and  so  the  collapse  was  com¬ 
plete.  I  can  give  no  better,  no  more  pitiful,  no  more  shocking  illustra¬ 
tion  of  the  collapse  of  the  old  system. 

The  ‘Maginot  line  mentality'  will  become  a  historical  classic,  and  will 
be  applied  quite  appropriately  to  other  than  military  fields.  It  means  a 
thoughtless,  self-deceptive,  etc.,  ‘security'  in  antiquated  systems  as 
matched  against  modern  methods  of  1940.  Well,  the  French  Marianna 
felt  secure  from  the  front  and  was  taken  from  behind  by  the  German  army 
men,  who  traditionally  pay  no  attention  to  such  ‘details'. 

*  (a)  <*e*’ne<*  Terms,  1939,  the  third  of  a  trilogy  of  papers  presented  be¬ 

fore  annual  meetings  of  the  American  Mathematical  Society  on  General  Semantics: 
1.  Kxtensionalization  in  Mathematics,  Mathematical  Physics  and  General  Education, 
1W5;  II.  Thalamic  Symbolism  and  Mathematics,  1938.  Institute  of  General 
Semantics,  Lakeville,  Connecticut. 

(b)  General  Semantics,  Psychiatry,  Psychotherapy  and  Prevention,  presented 
before  the  annual  meeting  of  the  American  Psychiatric  Association,  1940. 

Ixx  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 

Dealing  with  those  tragic  and  painful  collapses  in  civilizations,  and 
eventually  passing  to  another  spasm  of  civilization,  what  interests  us 
most  in  considering  the  problems  of  sanity,  is  the  newest,  psychopatho- 
logical  methods  of  destroying  sanity,  not  merely  the  organized  orgies  of 
murder,  rape,  arson,  looting,  drugging,  and  destruction  under  different 
dictators,  mikados,  etc. 

I  mention  the  ‘mikado’  especially  here  as  a  tragic  human  example  of 
the  effect  of  ^^defined  terms,  which  in  life  application  sway  the  his¬ 
tory  of  mankind.  By  definition  and/or  creed  the  mikado  is  supposed  to 
be  some  sort  of  a  ‘god’,  etc.  By  extension  or  facts,  the  best  we  know,  he 
is  probably  a  sort  of  a  nice,  supposedly  educated,  collegian.  He  has  a 
wife  and  makes  babies,  but  he  is  told  about  Japanese  people,  the  be¬ 
haviour  of  Japanese  troops  in  China,  etc.,  only  as  much  as  the  ruling 
clique  in  Japan  allows  him  to  know.  If  he  would  be  allowed  to  know 
what  ‘his’  soldiers,  and  so  his  representatives,  are  actually  doing  in  China 
with  their  governmentally  organised  murder,  rape,  looting,  drugging, 
etc.,  I  doubt  if  he,  as  a  ‘nice  collegian1,  would  approve  it.  However,  if 
he  would  try  to  do  something  about  it,  he  probably  would  be  ‘liquidated’ 
by  the  ruling  clique.  From  a  historical,  civilization,  human  point  of  view 
he  must  be  adjudged  responsible,  as  the  head  of  his  government,  for  what 
the  ruling  clique  and  the  Japanese  army  do  in  China  in  his  name. 

This  applies  to  many  other  ‘rulers’,  who  seldom  know  what  is  going 
on  extensionally  because  they  rely  on  the  use  of  —^defined  terms  in 
the  reports  of  those  who  are  in  actual  control.  Ignorance  in  high  places 
cannot  humanly  be  an  excuse. 

Imagine  a  British  empire  tolerating  so  long  a  Chamberlain  in  the 
government,  or  the  endless  petty,  befuddling,  deluding,  etc.,  bickerings  of 
political  partisanship,  which  are  good  enough  to  wreck  any  system  of 
‘democracy*  (in  practice  another  ^defined  term). 

It  seems,  however,  there  is  at  least  one  point  the  totalitarian  and 
‘democratic*  politicians  have  in  common,  best  expressed  by  Kipling : 

*  'Ow  the  loot! 

Bloomin’  loot! 

That's  the  thing  to  make  the  boys  git  up  an'  shoot ! 

It's  the  same  with  dogs  an'  men, 

If  you'd  make  'em  come  again 
Clap  'em  forward  with  a  Loo !  loo !  Lulu !  Loot  1 
Whoopee !  Tear  'im,  puppy !  Loo !  loo ! 

Lulu!  Loot!  loot!  loot!’ 

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION  lxxi 

2.  WARS  OF  AND  ON  NERVES 

It  was  explained  already  how  the  introduction  of  new  factors  is  bound 
to  change  our  generalizations  and  therefore  evaluations.  But  this  some¬ 
how  is  disregarded  by  most  rulers  and  politicians  who  are  on  the  defen¬ 
sive,  while  those  who  are  on  the  offensive  introduce  new  psycho-logical 
factors  to  confuse  the  old  generalizations,  as  a  rule  successfully.  Poli¬ 
ticians,  gangsters,  military  men,  etc.,  without  any  understanding  of  the 
depth  of  destructiveness  to  the  human  nervous  systems,  utilize  these 
methods  quite  successfully.  Magicians  have  studied  those  methods  pro¬ 
fessionally,  but  they  utilize  them  for  entertainment,  not  for  destruction. 

These  destructive  methods  are  the  bases  of  the  ‘war  oj  nerves',  and 
the  ‘war  on  nerves',  etc.,  to  the  point  of  using  ‘ screaming *  bombs,  verbal 
distortion,  the  ‘psychology'  of  deception,  etc.  These  methods  can  be 
counteracted  only  when  governments  who  feel  their  responsibility  not 
only  to  the  ruling  classes,  but  also  to  the  people  of  their  nations,  will 
employ  experts  in  neuro-psychiatry,  anthropology,  general  semantics,  etc., 
for  guidance,  if  the  present  world  neurosis  is  to  be  checked. 

There  are  persistent  reports  that  the  Nazi  government  is  utilizing  a 
staff  of  psycho-logical  experts  for  destructive  purposes.  Other  totali¬ 
tarian  governments  ape  their  successfully  worked  out  and  tested  methods. 
The  ‘democratic'  governments  in  this  present  fundamental  nerve  contest 
appear  a  tragic  joke  of  ignorance,  inefficiency,  etc.  In  practice  this 
amounts  to  betrayal,  because  they  fail  to  recognize  the  overwhelming  im¬ 
portance  and  vulnerability  of  the  human  nervous  system,  and  do  not  utilize 
such  experts  in  a  constructive  way.  The  ‘scream*  of  a  bomb,  for  instance, 
is  much  more  destructive  to  the  ‘enemy*  than  the  destruction  by  the  bomb 
itself,  which  may  kill  a  few  people  at  the  cost  of  at  least  $100,000  per 
corpse,  while  the  ‘scream*  alone  brings  demoralizing  terror  to  hundreds, 
if  not  thousands  of  people.  It  is  certainly  an  expertly  calculated  and 
efficient  ‘war  on  human  nerves*.  But  what  can  be  done  if  ignorant  ‘demo¬ 
cratic'  governments  refuse  to  live  up  to  their  duties  ? 

Humanity,  civilizations,  cultures,  etc.,  are  ultimately  based  on  the 
constructive  use  of  neuro-semantic  and  neuro-linguistic  mechanisms 
present  in  every  one  of  us.  Many  pathological  Nazi  leaders  utilize  these 
constructive  mechanisms  in  civilization  for  destructive  selfish  purposes. 
Under  experts  they  have  turned  against  mankind  the  essential  assets  of 
mankind.  The  beginning  was  ‘mental*  illness  of  a  few  leaders,  based  on 
hates,  fears,  revenges,  etc.  Later  this  destructive  task  was  passed  on  to 
governmental  psycho-logical  experts,  to  build  up  methods  to  tear  down 
human  neuro- semantic  and  neuro-linguistic  mechanisms,  quite  success- 

lxxii  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 

fully  because  of  the  abysmal  ignorance  of  modern  scientific  issues  exhib¬ 
ited  by  the  political  verbalists  and  enchanters  of  other  nations. 

One  of  the  most  effective  of  these  methods  is  the  use  of  pathological 
verbal  distortion  such  as  is  found  among  the  ‘mentally*  ill.  For  instance, 
a  paranoiac  may  believe  ‘honestly*  that  he  is  persecuted,  become  domi¬ 
nated  by  ‘hate*,  etc.,  and  ultimately  may  kill  to  ‘defend*  himself.  Unfor¬ 
tunately  at  present  only  psychiatrists,  familiar  with  verbal  distortions  and 
‘rationalizations*  of  patients  in  hospitals,  can  fully  understand  these 
problems. 

A  ‘mentally*  ill  person  is  not  necessarily  a  ‘genius,*  but  it  is  well 
known  to  psychiatrists  that  some  ‘mentally*  ill  are  often  very  cunning  and 
will  outwit  any  doctor  or  nurse.  At  present  the  people  of  the  world  do 
not  realize  that  they  are  being  trained  in  psychopathological  uses  of  their 
nervous  systems,  and  a  future  generation  or  two  will  become  semantically 
crippled  because  trained  in  such  distortions. 

The  violation,  through  ignorance  and/or  ww-sanity,  of  the  similarity 
of  structure  in  the  map-territory  relationship  (see  p.  58  ff.  and  p.  750 
ff.),  and/or  deliberate,  professionally  planned  distortion  of  it,  abolishes 
predictability,  proper  evaluation,  trust,  etc.  This  results  only  in  breeding 
fears,  anxieties,  hates,  etc.,  which  disorganize  individuals  and  even 
nations.  There  must  be  a  correspondence  and  similarity  of  structure 
between  language  and  facts,  and  so  consequent  thalamo-cortical  integra¬ 
tion,  if  we  are  to  survive  as  a  sane  ‘civilized*  race. 

In  a  few  years  history  will  judge  these  dying  spasms  of  the  aristotelian 
system,  a  system  which  was  the  best  of  its  kind  2,300  years  ago,  as  for¬ 
mulated  by  a  great  man  under  the  conditions  of  the  very  few  scientific 
facts  known  at  that  date.  It  is  not  so  today,  1941.  Most  of  the  knowl¬ 
edge  of  scientific  facts  and  methods  of  Aristotle  are  obsolete  today,  and  in 
the  main  harmful,  like  the  ‘Maginot  line*  orientation. 

By  necessity  the  aristotelian  system  was  based  on  macroscopic  or 
animal,  ‘sense*,  levels,  which  even  now  predominantly  guide  the  masses. 
It  could  take  into  consideration  ‘sense*  data,  etc.,  but  cannot  deal  ade¬ 
quately  with  1941  cultural  as  well  as  sanity  conditions  which,  as  we  know 
today,  are  resultants  of  sub-microscopic,  electro-colloidal  processes. 

In  a  non-aristotelian  system  we  are  stressing  the  differences  between 
the  animal  reflex,  automatic  signal  reactions,  which  do  not  involve  ‘think¬ 
ing’,  human  ‘intelligence*,  etc.,  and  human  symbol  reactions,  with  their 
flexibility,  based  on  conscious  evaluations,  etc.  These  differences  could 
hardly  be  conveyed  better  than  by  studying  The  Rape  of  the  Masses; 
The  Psychology  of  Totalitarian  Propaganda ,  by  Dr.  Serge  Chakotin, 
(Alliance  Book  Corporation,  New  York,  1940).  A  former  student  of 

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION  lxxiii 

Professor  Pavlov,  Dr.  Chakotin  bases  his  analysis  of  totalitarian  methods 
on  Pavlov’s  fundamental  researches  of  conditional  reactions  in  dogs. 

3.  HITLER  AND  PSYCHO-LOGICAL  FACTORS  IN  HIS  LIFE 

The  groping  dissatisfaction  with  the  old  system  was  so  general  that 
only  a  catalyst  was  needed  to  precipitate  the  crisis.  This  catalyst  was 
found  in  the  son  of  Alois  Schicklgruber  (also  spelled  Schiicklgruber) 
who  later  changed  his  name  to  ‘Hitler’.  There  was  a  history  of  illegiti¬ 
macy  in  the  family.  Rudolf  Olden  in  his  biography  of  Hitler  says,  ‘Hitler 
has  given  the  simplest  and  clearest  picture  possible  of  conditions  in  his 
father’s  home.  But  we  have  only  to  look  at  the  facts  to  see  that,  far  from 
being  simple,  the  married  life  of  his  father  was  unusual  and  tempestuous. 
Three  wives,  seven  children,  one  divorce,  one  birth  before  marriage,  two 
shortly  after  the  wedding,  one  wife  fourteen  years  older  than  himself  and 
another  twenty-three  years  younger — that  is  saying  a  good  deal  for  a 
Customs  officer/ 

There  were  other  important  circumstances  in  Adolf  Hitler’s  life 
which  were  influential  and  found  their  fulfillment  in  totalitarian  systems, 
(a)  He  was  born  from  a  peasant  stock,  by  tradition  prepared  to  carry  a 
heavy  load  of  work  with  persistency,  (b)  He  was  baptized  in  the  Cath¬ 
olic  Church,  an  institution  well  known  to  have  totalitarian  orientations, 
and  which  up  to  this  day  in  principle  proclaims  authority  over  ‘all’  the 
Catholics  in  the  world.  Having  absorbed  that  totalitarian  orientation 
from  childhood  up,  which  applies  also  to  Mussolini,  Stalin,  etc.,  it  was 
simple  for  those  so  trained  to  switch  to  state  totalitarianism ,  where  such 
leaders  could  find  a  ‘lebensraum’  for  themselves  as  individuals,  thus  en¬ 
hancing  their  own  ‘egos’,  and  incidentally  filling  their  pockets.  No  one 
who  has  actually  studied  the  public  appearances  of  various  totalitarian 
‘fuhrers’  can  miss  the  utter  similarity  between  their  reactions  and  the 
reactions  of  the  mobs  to  them.  They  act  like  little  ‘gods  on  wheels',  and 
the  mobs  react  with  unreasoned,  blind,  fanatical  subjection,  which  the 
fuhrers  and  their  aides  know  how  to  manufacture. 

(c)  Hitler  was  born  into  Austrian  bureaucracy,  one  of  the  most  in¬ 
efficient,  dishonest,  hypocritical,  etc.,  bureaucracies  in  the  world,  perme¬ 
ated  with  the  Hapsburg  motto,  ‘Divide  et  impera’.  The  older  Schickl¬ 
gruber  wanted  his  son  also  to  become  a  Hapsburg  bureaucrat.  Schickl¬ 
gruber,  Jr.  had  a  natural  repulsion  for  them,  and  so  deliberately  boy¬ 
cotted  any  education,  to  disqualify  himself  for  such  a  fate.  This  lack 
of  education  ostracized  him  from  the  class  of  so-called  ‘intelligentsia’, 
lo  which  a  Hapsburg  bureaucrat  eventually  belonged.  Through  living 
necessities  he  had  to  become  a  plain  labour  hand,  yet  because  of  his  para- 

lxxiv  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 

noia  tendencies,  delusions  of  grandeur  based  on  unhealthy  worship  of 
historical  ‘heroes’,  etc.,  he  was  also  not  acceptable  to  the  plain  workers, 
who  are  generally  sane  and  do  not  look  at  life  as  a  Wagnerian  opera.  So 
in  reality  he  found  that  he  was  not  acceptable  anywhere,  belonged 
nowhere,  a  misfit  everywhere,  until  he  adhered  to  totalitarianism  as  a 
‘religion’  which  he  and  his  closest  associates  modified  to  suit  the  Prussian 
character,  selected  by  them  as  a  standard  of  German  perfection,  to  be 
imposed  on  the  rest  of  the  world. 

(d)  When  he  joined  the  German  army  with  its  orderly  efficiency, 
etc  he  found  an  ideal  for  himself  as  an  escape  from  Hapsburg  decadence. 
No 'matter  how  he  hated  the  Hapsburg  polite  perfidy,  he  was  too  much 
of  an  Austrian  not  to  utilize  to  the  limit  the  Hapsburg  methods.  Ulti¬ 
mately  through  this  combination  of  methods  he  ‘out-Prussianed’  the 
Prussians,  whose  particular  arrogant,  brutal  methods  were  never  ap¬ 
proved  and  often  disliked  throughout  the  world  and  even  in  Germany. 

I  give  these  data  as  partial  explanations  of  how  through  life  and  other 
circumstances  the  whole  life  of  Hitler,  as  well  as  his  political  program 
was  based  on  hate,  revenge  and  destruction  of  what  he  feared  and  hated 
as  a  person,  driven  by  his  delusions  of  persecution  and  grandeur.  It  was 
only  natural  in  his  ‘chosen  people’  delusion  that  he  should  hate  and  try 
to  destroy  other  ‘chosen  people’ ;  obviously  there  is  no  place  m  this  world 
for  two  or  more  ‘chosen  people*.  The  absurdity  of  Hitler’s  ignorant 
anthropological  theories  has  been  definitely  established  by  science  and 
history,  and  in  fact  are  not  taken  seriously  by  many  of  the  informed  Nazi 

leaders  themselves.  . 

Some  such  analysis  of  a  few  of  the  more  important  factors  in  Hitler  s 
life  indicates  how  his  ‘mental’  illness  developed,  involving  ‘inferiority 
and  ‘persecution’  complexes,  etc.,  and  explains  why  for  his  own  comfort 
he  surrounded  himself  personally  with  mostly  psychopathological  people, 
although  their  psychiatric  classifications  may  be  different. 

Very  soon  psychiatric  treatises  will  be  written  on  the  ‘Jehovah  com¬ 
plex’  of  Schicklgruber,  Jr.,  etc.  Perhaps  the  following  quotations  will 
illustrate  how  the  ‘Jehovah’,  as  recorded  in  Exodus  19  and  20,  is  being 

copied  today :  .  ,  ,  «  , 

‘Now  therefore,  if  ye  will  obey  my  voice  indeed,  and  keep  my  cove¬ 
nant,  then  ye  shall  be  mine  own  possession  from  among  all  peoples:  for 
all  the  earth  is  mine :  and  ye  shall  be  unto  me  a  kingdom  of  priests,  and  a 
holy  nation.  These  are  the  words  which  thou  shalt  speak  unto  the 
children  of  Israel  [Nazis].’ 

Or,  ‘I  am  Jehovah  thy  God,  who  brought  thee  ...  out  of  the  house 
of  bondage  [England].’ 

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION  lxxv 

Or,  ‘for  I  Jehovah  thy  God  am  a  jealous  God,  visiting  the  iniquity 
of  the  fathers  upon  the  children,  upon  the  third  and  upon  the  fourth 
generation  of  them  that  hate  me,  and  showing  mercy  unto  thousands  of 
them  that  love  me  and  keep  my  commandments/ 

Or,  ‘An  altar  of  earth  thou  shalt  make  unto  me,  and  shalt  sacrifice 
thereon  thy  burnt-offerings,  and  thy  peace-offerings,  thy  sheep,  and  thine 
oxen :  in  every  place  where  I  record  my  name  I  will  come  unto  thee  and 
I  will  bless  thee/  Etc.,  etc. 

These  suggestions  are  given  only  to  indicate  how  psychiatrists  can 
help  future  historians. 

4.  EDUCATION  FOR  INTELLIGENCE  AND  DEMOCRACY 
It  may  become  clearer  why  I  speak  of  a  dying,  aristotelian,  two-valued 
system  by  giving  examples  of  how  this  type  of  evaluation  is  at  the  founda¬ 
tion  of  present  day  confusions  and  terrors.  Thus,  for  instance,  the  Nazi 
militant  delusion  of  ‘chosen  people*  gives  us  an  excellent  illustration  of 
a  two-valued,  ‘either-or*  orientation.  The  two- valued  semantic  twisting 
of  ‘real  neutrality*  is  another  significant  example.  This  distortion  has 
kept  the  ‘neutrals*  in  terrors,  disorganizing  their  national  and  political 
life  to  the  point  of  complete  collapse,  which  today  is  a  historical  fact. 
The  Nazi  two-valued  evaluation  of  ‘neutrality*  was:  either  be  ‘really 
neutral*  and  endorse  and  fight  for  the  Nazis,  or  be  ‘not  really  neutral*  and 
not  help  them.  According  to  this  orientation  a  ‘really  neutral*  Belgium, 
Holland,  Denmark,  Norway,  etc.,  should  fight  against  England,  France, 
etc.,  to  prove  that  they  are  ‘really  neutral* ! 

A  similar  analysis  applies  to  the  ‘aggression*  of  China  against  Japan, 
Czechoslovakia  against  Germany,  Poland  against  Germany,  Poland 
against  Russia,  Finland  against  Russia,  Greece  against  Italy,  etc.,  and  so 
on  endlessly,  which  shows  only  the  pathological  application  of  the  two¬ 
valued,  ‘either-or*  patterns  in  action .  This  analysis  applies  also  to  the 
first  World  War  and  the  ‘war  guilt*.  In  a  non-aristotelian  orientation  we 
ask  for  actual  facts,  and  do  not  accept  mere  verbalism.  Who  invaded 
whom?  The  historical  facts  are  simple.  We  know  by  now  who  invaded 
whom ,  and  never  mind  verbal  definitions. 

When  analysed  from  a  non-aristotelian  point  of  view,  such  orienta¬ 
tions  appear  pathologically  twisted.  Yet  they  produced  results,  as  history 
shows.  It  is  not  accidental  that  some  years  ago  Hitler  in  one  of  his 
speeches  took  a  definite  stand  for  the  prevailing  aristotelianism,  two¬ 
valued  orientations,  etc.,  and  against  modern  science,  which  naturally 
develops  in  a  non-aristotelian  direction.  Quite  soon  whole  volumes  will 

lxxvi  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 

be  written  on  this  subject;  here  it  is  possible  only  to  indicate  the  main 

methodological  issues  involved. 

Dr.  Irving  J.  Lee  in  his  article,  ‘General  Semantics  and  Public  Speak- 
ing’.  Quarterly  Journal  of  Speech,  December,  1940,  formulates  a  fun¬ 
damental  contrast  between  the  types  of  ‘rhetorics’  of  Aristotle  and  Hitler, 
and  the  non-aristotelian  type  of  communication  found  in  general  seman¬ 
tics  which  is  based  on  proper  evaluation,  made  possible  by  thalamo¬ 
cortical  integration.  .  .  ., 

We  should  not  make  the  mistake  of  fancying  that  Hitler,  etc.,  or  the 
tpiiraHn  are  building  a  new  non-aristotelian  system,  and  a  future  new  saner 
civilization.  It  is  only  a  rebellion  within  the  old  ‘either-or’  system,  a  chang¬ 
ing  from  one  scheme  of  selfishness,  greed  and  force  to  another  cabal  of  sd- 
fishness,  greed,  and  brute  force,  this  time  unavoidably  lowering  human  cul¬ 
tural  standards  by  training  future  generations  m  pathological  abuses  of 
neuro-semantic  and  neuro-linguistic  mechanisms,  emasculating  and 

misusing  science,  etc.  ...  r 

A  non-aristotelian  system  must  include  considerations  of  neuro- 
semantic  and  neuro-linguistic  environments  as  environment.  Introduc¬ 
tions  of  such  new  factors  necessitate  a  complete  revision  of  all  known 
doctrines,  pet  creeds,  etc.,  and  make  possible  the  building  of  asctenceof 
man  which  under  the  old  aristotelian  conditions  was  impossible,  lhe 
tabulation  given  here  indicates  some  of  the  many  older  fictitious  factors 
which  have  been  eliminated  as  false  to  facts  and  destructive,  whde  new, 
constructive  factors  have  been  introduced.  This  by  necessity  requires 
the  utilization  of  more  adequate  methods  and  techniques  by  which  we  can 

cope  with  a  new  world.  t  .  . 

The  new,  non-aristotelian  types  of  evaluations  are  forthcoming  in 
every  field  of  human  endeavour,  in  science  and/or  life,  necessitated  by 
the  urgencies  of  modern  conditions.  The  main  problem  today  is  to  formu¬ 
late  general  methods  by  which  these  many  separate  attempts  can  be  uni¬ 
fied  into  a  general  system  of  evaluation,  which  can  become  commumcab  e 
to  children  and,  with  more  difficulty,  even  to  adults.  History  shows  that 
whenever  older  methods  prove  their  inefficiency  new  methods  are  pro¬ 
duced  which  meet  the  new  conditions  more  effectively.  But  the  difficul¬ 
ties  involved  must  first  be  clearly  formulated  before  methods  and  tech¬ 
niques  can  be  devised  with  which  we  can  deal  with  them  more  success- 

Ml‘t  seems  unnecessary  to  enlarge  on  the  present  day  world  tragedies 
because  many  excellent  volumes  have  already  been  written  and  are  con¬ 
tinuing  to  accumulate,  psychiatric  evaluations  included.  I  must  stress, 
however,  that  no  writer  I  know  of  has  ever  understood  the  depth  of  the 

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION  lxxvii 

pending  transition  from  the  aristotelian  system  to  an  already  formulated 
non-aristotelian  system.  This  transition  is  much  deeper  than  the  change 
from  merely  one  aristotelian  ‘ism’  to  another. 

We  argue  so  much  today  about  ‘democracy’  versus  'totalitarianism’. 
Democracy  presupposes  intelligence  of  the  masses  ;*  totalitarianism  does 
not  to  the  same  degree.  But  a  'democracy*  without  intelligence  of  the 
masses  under  modern  conditions  can  be  a  worse  human  mess  than  any 
dictatorship  could  be.**  Certainly  present  day  education,  while  it  may 
cram  students*  heads  with  some  data,  without  giving  them  any  adequate 
methodological  synthesis  and  extensional  working  methods,  does  not 
train  in  ‘intelligence*  and  how  to  become  adjusted  to  life,  and  so  does  not 
work  toward  ‘democracy*.  Experiments  show  that  even  a  root  can  learn 
a  lesson  (see  p.  120),  and  animals  can  learn  by  trial  and  error.  But  we 
humans  after  these  millions  of  years  should  have  learned  how  to  utilize 
the  ‘intelligence’  which  we  supposedly  have,  with  some  predictability,  etc., 
and  use  it  constructively,  not  destructively,  as,  for  example,  the  Nazis  are 
doing  under  the  guidance  of  specialists. 

In  general  semantics  we  believe  that  some  such  thing  as  healthy 
human  intelligence  is  possible,  and  so  somehow  we  believe  in  the  eventual 
possibility  of  ‘democracy*.  We  work,  therefore,  at  methods  which  could 
be  embodied  even  in  elementary  education  to  develop  the  coveted  thala- 
mo-cortical  integration,  and  so  sane  intelligence.  Naturally  in  our  work 
prevention  is  the  main  aim,  and  this  can  be  accomplished  only  through 
education,  and  as  far  as  the  present  is  concerned,  through  re-education, 
and  re~ training  of  the  human  nervous  system. 

Section  L  Constructive  suggestions . 

As  far  back  as  1933,  on  page  485  ff .  of  the  present  book,  I  drew  atten¬ 
tion  to  the  human  dangers  of  the  abuse  of  neuro-semantic  and  neuro-lin¬ 
guistic  mechanisms,  with  suggestions  for  preventive  measures.  In  Sep¬ 
tember,  1939,  I  advanced  further  constructive  suggestions  to  some  lead¬ 
ing  governments,  urging  the  employment  of  permanent  boards  of  neuro¬ 
psychiatrists,  psycho-logicians,  and  other  specialists,  to  counteract  similar 
dangers  in  connection  with  the  present  world  crises.  I  received  only  two 
polite  acknowledgements  of  my  letters.  But  both  forewarnings  of  1933 
and  1939  have  been  disregarded  in  practice,  even  by  specialists,  with 
known  disastrous  results. 

*  Mumford,  Lewis.  Men  Must  Act.  Harcourt,  Brace,  New  York,  1939. 

**  Consult,  for  example,  comments  of  Supreme  Court  justices  about  the  impos¬ 
sibility  of  ‘justice’  when  juries  are  made  up  of  individuals  of  low  grade  ‘mentality*, 

etc. 

lxxviii  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 

In  the  meantime  the  more  far-sighted  Nazi  government  employed  a 
staff  of  specialists  working  at  methods  to  disorganize  the  nervous  func¬ 
tioning  of  their  adversaries  which,  as  facts  show,  have  worked  very  suc¬ 
cessfully  and  devastatingly  upon  the  unlucky  citizens  whom  the  short¬ 
sighted,  unscientific,  etc.,  governments  never  guided  toward  the  proper 
use  of  their  nervous  systems,  or  safe-guarded  from  the  abuses.* 

Perhaps  at  present,  1941,  after  some  irreparable  harm  has  been  done, 
the  governments  of  the  world  will  awaken  and  realize  that  the  proper 
functioning  of  the  nervous  systems  of  their  citizens  is  in  many  ways  more 
important  than  any  gun,  battleship  or  aeroplane,  etc.,  could  possibly  be, 
as  there  must  be  a  Smithi  behind  the  gun ! 

No  matter  who  is  finally  ‘victorious*  in  the  present  world  struggle,  no 
matter  which  way  we  look  at  it,  the  return  to  the  old  conditions  is  impos¬ 
sible.  A  complete  neuro-semantic  and  neuro-linguistic  revision  is  inevi¬ 
table,  and  this  revision  is  bound  to  lead  away  from  aristotelianism.  For 
this  revision  we  are  preparing  the  foundations  in  the  formulations  of  gen¬ 
eral  semantics.  Before  any  lasting  adjustments  in  the  future  social, 
economic,  political,  ethical,  etc.,  fields  are  accomplished  we  have  to  be 
able  to  evaluate  properly  and  talk  sense .  Otherwise  the  situation  is 
hopeless. 

Obviously,  regardless  of  what  the  ‘politicians*  may  say,  in  every  coun¬ 
try  we  necessarily  have  some  kind  of  guidance  by  the  government  and 
executive  power,  no  matter  in  what  direction.  Even  ‘complete  lack  of 
guidance*  must  be  considered  guidance  of  some  sort,  in  the  direction,  say, 
of  ‘rugged  individualism*,  etc.,  which,  if  carried  to  the  limit,  becomes  the 
unworkable  ideal  of  anarchy.  In  practical  life  such  attitudes  ultimately 
engender  animal  competition  instead  of  human  co-operation,  and  the  very 
opposite  of  what  we  consider  as  the  social  feeling  imperative  for  ‘democ¬ 
racy*. 

The  real  question  is  whether  the  existing  governments  are  informed 
enough  about  human  neurological  problems,  sanity,  etc.,  and  are  intelli¬ 
gent  enough,  honest  enough,  etc.,  to  guide  and  advise  their  people  con¬ 
structively  and  efficiently  in  constantly  emerging  neurological  situations 
such  as  occur  in  home  and  school  lives,  in  national  and  international 
affairs,  etc.  Unfortunately  the  answer  is  in  the  negative.  At  present 
there  is  no  such  government  I  know  of.  The  Nazi  government,  on  the 
other  hand,  has  mobilized  the  psycho-logical  knowledge  available  to  them 
for  destructive  purposes,  which  must  be  professionally  counteracted  by 
the  rest  of  the  governments  of  the  civilized  world,  if  sanity  is  to  prevail 

♦Taylor,  Edmond.  The  Strategy  of  Terror .  Houghton-Mifflin,  Boston,  1940. 

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION  lxxix 

Depending  on  science  for  more  and  better  killing  machines  is  certainly 
not  the  solution  for  human  problems,  culture  and  civilization.  Without 
being  sentimental,  in  a  human  civilization  humans  matter  more  than 
machines,  or  symbols  such  as  a  ‘dollar’,  a  ‘pound  sterling’,  a  ‘pound  of 
flesh’,  a  ‘scalp’,  etc.,  or  such  verbal  generalizations  as  ‘liberty’,  ‘equality’, 
etc.  The  living  reactions  of  Smithi  are  more  important  than  the  verbal¬ 
isms  of  Smitht,  who  nevertheless  can  shake  the  air  with  his  verbal  tricks, 
as  many  of  us  too  often  do,  affecting  the  nervous  systems  of  others. 

At  present  the  totalitarians  have  exploited  neuro-semantic  and  neuro¬ 
linguistic  mechanisms  to  their  destructive  limit,  the  best  they  knew  how, 
to  date.  Counteraction,  reconstruction,  and/or  prevention  are  impossible 
unless  such  mechanisms  are  utilized  constructively  under  the  guidance  of 
governmental  specialists  in  the  fields  of  anthropology,  neuro-psychiatry, 
general  semantics,  etc.,  who  would  understand  the  language  of  their 
fellow  workers  in  related  scientific  fields,  and  would  be  free  to  devote 

THEIR  ENTIRE  TIME  AND  EFFORTS  TO  THIS  TASK ,  AND  TO  FURTHER  INVES¬ 
TIGATIONS. 

Although  practically  all  civilized  states  employ  psychiatrists  in  their 
governmental  hospitals  for  ‘mentally*  ill,  these  physicians  are  necessarily 
preoccupied  with  their  patients  and  cannot  undertake  the  special  duties 
of  the  board  I  suggest.  Such  a  board  would  require  the  full  time  and 
attention  of  its  members,  as  they  would  be  called  upon  for  consultation 
by  various  other  governmental  departments  such  as  interior,  state,  labour, 
commerce,  health,  army,  navy,  etc.,  and  so  special  studies  and  co-ordi¬ 
nating  knowledge  in  related  branches  of  science  would  be  essential. 

It  seems  extremely  short-sighted  in  1941  that  governments  should 
employ  permanently  specialists  in  chemistry,  physics,  engineering,  etc.  ; 
other  specialists  who  advise  how  to  eliminate  lice  from  poultry,  raise  pigs* 
conserve  wild  life,  etc. — and  yet  have  no  permanent  consulting  board  of 
specialists  who  would  advise  how  to  conserve  and  prevent  the  abuse  of 
human  nervous  systems.  Even  a  Chamberlain  would  have  intelligence 
and/or  honesty  enough  to  pass  a  problem  of  a  ‘magnetic  mine*  to  physi¬ 
cists  and  engineers,  and  not  to  party  politicians,  who  know  nothing  about 
such  mechanisms,  but  would  nevertheless  be  ready  to  debate  ‘politically* 
on  the  subject. 

For  example,  if  consulted,  such  a  suggested  body  of  governmental 
specialists  would  have  studied  Mein  Kampf  and  various  speeches  of 
Hitler,  Goebbels,  etc.,  as  a  part  of  their  duties,  long  ago,  and  would  have 
advised  their  governments  that  psychopathological  people  are  getting  in 
control  of  world  affairs  and  that  their  words  cannot  be  trusted  at  all 

lxxx  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 

There  would  have  been  no  ‘appeasements’,  etc.,  and  other  measures  would 
have  been  taken  to  cope  with  the  depth  of  the  problems  involved. 

It  seems  that  the  suggestions  made  on  page  485  ff.,  although  neces¬ 
sary,  are  not  sufficient  at  the  date  of  this  writing,  and  the  latest  sugges¬ 
tions  become  imperative  to  safe-guard  our  future. 

CONCLUSION 

To  summarize,  under  present  world  conditions  the  role  of  govern¬ 
ments  is  becoming  more  and  more  difficult  and  important.  With  all  mod¬ 
em  complexities  it  is  impossible  for  governmental  men  to  be  specialists 
in  every  field  of  science,  and  therefore  they  must  depend  on  professional 
experts  attached  to  the  government,  not  only  in  the  fields  of  chemistry, 
engineering,  physics,  agriculture,  etc.,  which  they  already  utilize ;  but  also 
in  anthropology,  neuro-psychiatry,  general  semantics,  and  related^  pro¬ 
fessions.  Otherwise  the  governments  will  indefinitely  play  the  role  of 
the  blind  leading  the  blind.  It  is  unreasonable  to  wait  ten  or  twenty 
years  to  learn  by  bitter  experience  how  short-sighted  and  incompetent 
our  governments  have  been.  Why  not  utilize  some  human  intelligence, 
proper  evaluation,  etc.,  toward  which  extensional  methods  lead,  and 
thereby  have  some  predictability .  This  is  definitely  an  imperative, 
immediate  need. 

We  should  not  delude  ourselves.  Once  the  psychopathological  mis¬ 
uses  of  neuro-semantic  and  neuro-linguistic  mechanisms  have  been  so 
successfully  introduced,  they  will  remain  with  us  unless  reconstructive 
and  preventive  governmental  measures  are  undertaken  by  experts,  at 
once. 

The  conditions  of  the  world  are  such  today  that  private  scientific 
undertakings  and  even  professional  opinions  of  scientific  societies,  or  in¬ 
ternational  congresses,  etc.,  are  bound  to  be  ineffective.  Only  govern¬ 
mental  interest,  backing,  financing,  etc.,  can  organize  and  enforce  a  seri¬ 
ous  movement  for  sanity,  the  more  so  since  scientists,  physicians,  edu¬ 
cators,  and  other  professionals  do  not  have  the  necessary  time,  money, 
authority,  or  even  initiative  to  carry  forward  concerted  plans.  We  have 
learned  this  group  wisdom  by  now  in  the  case  of  smallpox  vaccination, 
control  of  epidemics,  etc.,  and  I  venture  to  suggest  that  only  such  group 
wisdom  will  be  effective  as  far  as  the  health  of  our  nervous  systems  is 
concerned.  In  terms  of  money  certainly  it  would  be  economical  to  spend 
for  preventive  and  permanent  measures  an  amount  even  less  than  the  cost 
of  a  single  aeroplane  which  is  made  today  and  shot  down  tomorrow. 

It  must  be  sadly  admitted  that  even  professionals,  no  matter  how 
prominent  they  may  be  in  their  narrow  specialties,  as  individuals  or  spe- 

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION  lxxxi 

cialized  groups  are  at  present  scientifically  unequipped  to  deal  with  such 
large  and  complex  problems  as  the  passing  from  one  system  of  orienta¬ 
tion  to  another,  because  those  whose  duty  it  was  to  integrate  methodolog¬ 
ically  the  vast  knowledge  at  hand,  have  failed.  Such  conditions  can  be 
remedied  only  by  diversified  methodological  investigations,  co-operation, 
and  concerted  action  of  specialists  in  different  fields,  which  no  private 
undertaking  can  organize  effectively.  The  reader  is  referred  to  page 
558  ff.  and  also  to  my  ‘Science  of  Man*.* 

There  can  be  little  doubt  that  self-seeking  politicians,  to  cover  up  their 
own  tracks,  will  be  against  such  scientific  sanity  guidance,  but  enlightened 
public  opinion  will  sooner  or  later  force  the  issues  to  the  only  possible 
intelligent  solution. 

The  prevalent  and  constantly  increasing  general  deterioration  of 
human  values  is  an  unavoidable  consequence  of  the  crippling  misuse  of 
ft -linguistic  and  w^wro-semantic  mechanisms.  In  general  semantics 
we  are  concerned  with  the  sanity  of  the  race,  including  particularly  meth¬ 
ods  of  prevention ;  eliminating  from  home,  elementary,  and  higher  educa¬ 
tion  inadequate  aristotelian  types  of  evaluation,  which  too  often  lead  to 
the  un-sanity  of  the  race,  and  building  up  for  the  first  time  a  positive 
theory  of  sanity,  as  a  workable  non-aristotelian  system. 

The  task  ahead  is  gigantic  if  we  are  to  avoid  more  personal,  national, 
and  even  international  tragedies  based  on  unpredictability,  insecurity, 
fears,  anxieties,  etc.,  which  are  steadily  disorganizing  the  functioning  of 
the  human  nervous  system.  Only  when  we  face  these  facts  fearlessly 
and  intelligently  may  we  save  for  future  civilizations  whatever  there  is 
left  to  save,  and  build  from  the  ruins  of  a  dying  epoch  a  new  and  saner 
society. 

I  seriously  appeal  to  scientists,  educators,  medical  men,  especially 
psychopathologists,  parents,  and  other  forward-looking  citizens  to  inves¬ 
tigate  and  co-operate  in  urging  the  governments  to  carry  out  their  duty 
to  guide  the  people  scientifically,  as  suggested  here. 

A  non-aristotelian  re-orientation  is  inevitable ;  the  only  problem  today 
is  when,  and  at  what  cost. 

A.  K. 

Chicago,  March,  1941. 

*  Korzybski,  A.  The  Science  of  Man.  Amer.  Jour,  of  Psychiatry .  May,  1937 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

I  gratefully  acknowledge  the  valuable  comments  of  the  following  in 
connection  with  defined  terms  :  Franz  Alexander,  M.D.,  Professor 
Leonard  Bloomfield,  Douglas  Gordon  Campbell,  M.D.,  Professor  Mor¬ 
ris  R.  Cohen,  C  B.  Congdon,  M.D.,  Professor  S.  I.  Hayakawa,  Pro¬ 
fessor  Earnest  A.  Hooton,  Doctor  Robert  M.  Hutchins,  N.  E.  Ischlond- 
sky,  M.D.,  Professor  Wendell  Johnson,  Professor  Kurt  Lewin, 
Professors  H.  G.  and  L.  R.  Lieber,  Mr.  Robert  Lord,  Jules  H.  Masser- 
man,  M.D.,  Mr.  H.  L,  Mencken,  Professor  Charles  W.  Morris,  the  late 
Professor  Raymond  Pearl,  Professor  W.  V.  Quine,  Professor  Oliver 
Reiser,  Professor  Bertrand  Russell,  Doctor  Eugene  Randolph  Smith, 
Mr.  A.  Ranger  Tyler,  and  many  students  and  friends  too  numerous  to 
list  here. 

I  wish  to  express  my  warm  appreciation  to  my  students  and  secre¬ 
taries,  Miss  Charlotte  Schuchardt  and  Miss  Pearl  Johnecheck,  for  the 
constructive  help  they  have  given  me  in  the  preparation  of  this  introduc¬ 
tion.  The  drawings  on  pages  xiv  and  xxviii  were  made  by  Miss  Johne¬ 
check.  I  am  also  genuinely  indebted  to  Miss  M.  Kendig,  Educational 
Director  of  the  Institute,  and  to  Doctor  Irving  J.  Lee  of  Northwestern 
University,  for  their  important  criticism  and  co-operation. 

Special  Acknowledgement 

On  behalf  of  students  of  general  semantics  who  have  attended  semi¬ 
nars  at  the  Institute,  and  on  my  own  behalf,  I  want  to  express  my  deep 
gratitude  to  Cornelius  Crane,  whose  vision,  interest,  and  financing  made 
possible  the  founding  of  the  Institute  in  1938.  The  widespread  influence 
and  rapid  development  of  the  work  of  the  Institute  in  this  world  turmoil 
became  a  living  reality  because  of  Mr.  Crane's  generous  contributions 
during  the  first  two  and  a  half  years  of  our  pioneer  effort.  Forces  of 
destruction  are  working  steadily,  and  Mr.  Crane  should  be  credited  with 
helping  to  organize  constructive  efforts. 

I  also  gratefully  acknowledge  the  contributions  of  the  other  students 
who  are  now  helping  to  support  the  work  of  the  Institute. 

Alfred  Korzybski 

lxxxii 

SUPPLEMENTARY  BIBLIOGRAPHY 

TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 

The  following  bibliography  is  only  illustrative  of  points  made  in  the  introduction 
to  the  second  edition.  A  number  of  volumes  listed  here  give  extensive  bibliographies 
in  their  fields.  For  instance,  the  book  of  Dr.  Dunbar  has  130  pages  of  bibliography 
which  cover  2,358  items.  Some  of  the  most  important  and  latest  empirical  data  on 
electrical  brain-waves,  electro-physiology,  conditional  reactions  in  humans,  electro- 
colloidal  processes  of  the  nervous  system,  experimental  neuroses  and  psychoses  in 
animals,  the  reactions  of  apes,  data  on  human  psychotherapy,  the  methods  of  decep¬ 
tion  and  sensory  misdirection  as  utilized  by  magicians,  etc.,  are  given  mostly  in  tech¬ 
nical  journals  and  monographs,  and  the  interested  reader  may  find  them  in  libraries. 

This  applies  also  to  the  many  applications  of  the  methods  of  general  semantics 
in  education,  mental  hygiene,  speech  difficulties,  etc.,  carried  on  in  universities  and 
colleges,  as  well  as  applications  in  the  practice  of  physicians,  including  psychiatrists ; 
these  are  in  preparation,  or  printed  at  present  only  by  professional  journals  or  by 
the  Institute  of  General  Semantics  (see  special  list). 

I  list  also  some  new  pertinent,  professional  publications  such  as  Psychosomatic 
Medicine ,  Journal  of  Symbolic  Logic ,  Encyclopedia  of  Unified  Science ,  etc.,  without 
listing  the  titles  of  the  individual  contributions.  It  is  suggested  that  the  interested 
reader,  and  particularly  educators,  medical  men,  etc.,  become  acquainted  with  such 
material,  or  at  least  know  that  it  does  exist.  The  reader  is  also  referred  to  the  fore¬ 
word  to  the  bibliography  given  on  page  767,  and  the  titles  which  follow. 

In  science  and  life  a  great  deal  depends  on  proper  evaluation,  tested  by  predict¬ 
ability,  which  depends  in  turn  on  the  similarity  of  structure  between  territory-map 
or  fact-language.  Thus,  we  have  to  know  scientific  facts,  as  well  as  the  intricacies 
and  difficulties  of  language  and  its  structure.  Fortunately  there  is  a  weekly  Science 
News  Letter ,  published  by  Science  Service,  Washington,  D.  C,  giving  brief,  authori¬ 
tative,  non-technical  factual  summaries  of  progress  in  science,  mathematics,  medicine, 
etc.,  including  sources,  which  every  specialist  as  well  as  intelligent  layman  should 
know. 

1.  Adler,  Mortimer.  How  to  Read  a  Book,  Simon  &  Schuster,  New  York,  1940. 

2.  Arensberg,  Conrad  M.  See  Chappie. 

3.  Arnold,  Thurman.  The  Symbols  of  Government.  Yale  Univ.  Press,  New 

Haven,  1935. 

4.  The  Folklore  of  Capitalism.  Yale  Univ.  Press,  New  Haven,  1937. 

5.  The  Bottlenecks  of  Business.  Reynal,  Hitchcock,  New  York,  1940. 

6.  Born,  Max.  The  Restless  Universe.  Harper  &  Bros.,  New  York,  London, 

1936. 

7.  Burridge,  W.  Excitability ,  A  Cardiac  Study.  Oxford  Univ.  Press,  London, 

New  York,  1932. 

8.  A  New  Physiology  of  Sensation.  Oxford  Univ.  Press,  London,  New  York, 

1932. 

9.  A  New  Physiological  Psychology.  Arnold  &  Co.,  London,  Baltimore,  1933. 

10.  Alcohol  and  Anaesthesia.  Williams  &  Norgate,  London,  1934. 

11.  Carnap,  R.  The  Unity  of  Science.  K.  Paul,  Trench,  Trubner  &  Co.,  London, 

1934. 

12.  Philosophy  and  Logical  Syntax.  K.  Paul,  Trench,  Trubner  &  Co.,  London, 

1935. 

13.  The  Logical  Syntax  of  Language.  Harcourt,  Brace,  New  York,  1937. 

14.  Foundations  of  Logic  and  Mathematics.  Univ.  of  Chicago  Press,  1939. 

15.  Carrel,  Alexis.  Man  the  Unknown .  Harper  &  Bros.,  New  York,  1935. 

16.  Chapple,  Eliot  D.  Measuring  Human  Relations;  An  Introduction  to  the 

Study  of  the  Interaction  of  Individuals.  With  the  collaboration  of  Conrad 
M.  Arensberg.  Genetic  Psychology  Monographs.  Feb.,  1940. 

17.  Chase,  Stuart.  The  Tyranny  of  Words.  Harcourt,  Brace,  New  York,  1938. 

18.  Dunbar,  H.  F.  Emotions  and  Bodily  Changes .  Columbia  Univ.  Press,  New 

York,  1938,  2nd  ed.  Extensive  bibliography  of  2,358  titles. 

Ixxxiii 

lxxxiv  INTRODUCTION  TO  TIIK  SECOND  EDITION 

19.  Einstein,  A.,  and  Infeld,  L.  The  Evolution  of  Physics;  the  Growth  of  Ideas 

from  Early  Concepts  to  Relativity  and  Quanta.  Simon  &  Schuster,  New 
York,  1938. 

20.  Esser,  P.  H.  Waan  als  Meerwaardige  Term.  Psychiatrische  en  Neuro- 

logische  Bladen ,  1939,  No.  4,  Bennebroek,  Holland. 

21.  Psycho-logie  en  Semantiek.  Nederl .  T ijdschrift  voor  Psychologic.  Vol.  8, 

1940.  Zutphen,  Holland. 

22.  Esser,  P.  H.,  and  Krans,  R.  L.  Korzybski’s  Wetenschap  van  ‘Den  Mensch’. 

Mensch  en  Maatschappij,  1940,  No.  2.  Amsterdam,  Holland. 

23.  Frank,  Jerome.  Law  and  the  Modem  Mind .  Tudor  Publ.  Co.,  New  York, 

1935. 

24.  Goldberg,  Isaac.  The  Wonder  of  Worlds;  An  Introduction  to  Language  for 

Everyman.  Appleton-Century,  New  York,  1938. 

25.  Gray,  Louis  H.  Foundations  of  Language.  Macmillan,  New  York,  1939. 

26.  Heiden,  K.  Hitler;  A  Biography.  Knopf,  New  York,  1936. 

27.  Hogben,  L.  Genetic  Principles  in  Medicine  and  Social  Science .  Knopf,  New 

York,  1932. 

28.  Mathematics  for  the  Million .  Norton,  New  York,  1937. 

29.  The  Retreat  from  Reason.  Random  House,  New  York,  1937. 

30.  Science  for  the  Citizen.  Knopf,  New  York,  1938. 

31.  Dangerous  Thoughts.  Norton,  New  York,  1940. 

32.  Principles  of  Animal  Biology.  Norton,  New  York,  1940. 

33.  Hooton,  E.  A.  Up  From  the  Ape.  Macmillan,  New  York,  1931. 

34.  Apes,  Men  and  Morons.  Putnam's,  New  York,  1937. 

35.  An  Anthropologist  Looks  at  Medicine.  Science.  March  20,  1936. 

36.  Twilight  of  Man.  Putnam’s,  New  York,  1939. 

37.  Why  Men  Behave  Like  Apes  and  Vice  Versa .  Princeton  Univ.  Press,  1940. 

38.  Horney,  K.  The  Neurotic  Personality  of  Our  Time.  Norton,  New  York, 

1937. 

39.  Infeld,  L.  See  Einstein. 

40.  International  Encyclopedia  of  Unified  Science.  Otto  Neurath,  Editor-in-chief. 

Vols.  I  and  II.  Foundations  of  the  Unity  of  Science.  Univ.  of  Chicago 
Press,  1939. 

41.  Ischlondsky,  N.  E.  Neuropsyche  und  Himrinde,  2  vol.  German.  Under  the 

titles:  I.  The  Conditional  Reflex  and  Its  Importance  in  Biology ,  Medicine , 
Psychology '  and  Pedagogics;  II.  Physiological  Foundations  of  Deep  Psy¬ 
chology,  with  Special  Application  to  Psychoanalysis.  Urban  &  Schwarzen- 
berg,  Berlin  and  Vienna,  1930. 

42.  Kasner,  Edward,  and  Newman,  James.  Mathematics  and  the  Imaginatidn. 

Simon  &  Schuster,  New  York,  1940. 

43.  Kelley,  Douglas  M.  Conjuring  as  an  Asset  to  Occupational  Therapy.  Occu¬ 

pational  Therapy  and  Rehabilitation.  Vol.  19,  No.  2,  April,  1940. 

44.  Kopel,  D.  See  Witty. 

45.  Krans,  R.  L.  See  Esser. 

46.  Language  in  General  Education.  A  Report  of  the  Committee  on  the  Func¬ 

tion  of  English  in  General  Education  for  the  Commission  on  Secondary 
School  Curriculum  of  the  Prog.  Educ.  Asso.  Appleton-Century,  New 
York,  1940. 

47.  Lewin,  K.  Principles  of  Topological  Psychology .  McGraw-Hill,  New  York, 

1936. 

48.  Lewis,  Nolan  D.  C.  Research  in  Dementia  Praecox.  Natl.  Comm,  for  Mental 

Hygiene,  New  York,  1936. 

49.  Ludecke,  Kurt  G.  W.  I  Knew  Hitler.  Scribners,  New  York,  1938. 

50.  Lundberg,  G.  A.  Foundations  of  Sociology.  Macmillan,  New  York,  1939. 

51.  Mackaye,  J.  The  Logic  of  Language.  Dartmouth  Coll.  Pubis.,  Hanover, 

N.  H.,  1939. 

52.  Malinowski,  B.  Coral  Gardens  and  Their  Magic;  A  Study  of  the  Methods  of 

Tilling  the  Soil  and  of  Agricultural  Rites  in  the  Trobriand  Islands,  2  vol. 
I.  Introduction;  II.  An  Ethnographic  Theory  of  Language  and  some  Prac¬ 
tical  Corollaries.  Allen  &  Unwin,  London,  1935. 

53.  The  Foundations  of  Faith  and  Morals;  An  Anthropological  Analysis  of 

INTRODUCTION  TO  TUli  SliCOND  EDITION  Ixxxv 

Primitive  Beliefs  and  Conduct  with  Special  Reference  to  the  Fundamental 
Problems  of  Religion  and  Ethics.  Univ.  of  Oxford  Press,  London,  New 
York,  1936. 

54.  Meyer,  Adolf.  Mental  Health.  Science.  Sept.  27,  1940. 

55.  Mumford,  L.  The  Culture  of  Cities.  Harcourt,  Brace,  New  York,  1938. 

56.  Men  Must  Act.  Harcourt,  Brace,  New  York,  1939. 

57.  Faith  for  Living.  Harcourt,  Brace,  New  York,  1940. 

58.  Muncie,  W.  Psychobiology  and  Psychiatry.  With  a  Foreword  by  Adolf 

Meyer.  Mosby,  St.  Louis,  1939. 

59.  Newman,  James.  See  Kasner. 

60.  Nissen,  H.  W.  See  Yerkes. 

61.  Olden,  R.  Hitler.  Covici,  Friede,  New  York,  1936. 

62.  Perkins,  F.  Theodore.  See  Wheeler. 

63.  Petersen,  William  F.  The  Patient  and  the  Weather,  4  vol.  Edwards  Bros., 

Ann  Arbor,  Mich.,  1938. 

64.  Pitkin,  W.  B.  Escape  From  Fear.  Doubleday,  Doran,  New  York,  1940. 

65.  Prescott,  Daniel  A.  Emotion  and  the  Educative  Process.  Amer.  Council  on 

Educ.,  Washington,  D.  C.,  1938. 

66.  Psychosomatic  Medicine.  Published  quarterly  by  Comm,  on  Problems  of  Neu¬ 

rotic  Behavior,  Natl.  Research  Council,  Washington,  D.  C. 

67.  Quine,  W.  V.  Mathematical  Logic.  Norton,  New  York,  1940. 

68.  Rauschning,  H.  The  Revolution  of  Nihilism.  Alliance  Book  Corp.,  1939. 

69.  The  Voice  of  Destruction  ( Hitler  Speaks ).  Putnam's,  New  York,  1940. 

70.  Richards,  I.  A.  Interpretation  in  Teaching.  Harcourt,  Brace,  New  York, 

1938. 

71.  Rosett,  J.  The  Mechanism  of  Thought,  Imagery,  and  Hallucination.  Colum¬ 

bia  Univ.  Press,  New  York,  1939. 

72.  Ryan,  Carson  W.  Mental  Health  Through  Education.  Commonwealth  Fund, 

New  York,  1938. 

73.  Sapir,  E.  Totality .  Language  Monograph  of  Linguistic  Soc.  of  Amer. 

Waverly  Press,  Baltimore,  1930. 

74.  The  Expression  of  the  Ending  Point  Relation.  Language  Monograph  of  Lin¬ 

guistic  Soc.  of  Amer.,  1932. 

75.  Sargent,  Porter.  Human  Affairs.  Porter  Sargent,  Boston,  1938. 

76.  Education;  A  Realistic  Appraisal.  Porter  Sargent,  Boston,  1939. 

77.  What  Makes  Lives.  Porter  Sargent,  Boston,  1940. 

78.  Schiferl,  Max.  An  Introduction  to  Interpretation.  Stanford  Language  Arts 

Investigation,  Interpretation  Series  I.  Stanford  Univ.  Press,  1939. 

79.  Smith,  Geddes.  See  Stevenson. 

80.  Stevenson,  George  S.,  and  Smith,  Geddes.  Child  Guidance  Clinics;  One 

Quarter  Century  of  Development.  Commonwealth  Fund,  New  York,  1934. 

81.  Sullivan,  Lawrence.  The  Dead  Hand  of  Bureaucracy.  Bobbs-Merrill,  New 

York,  1940. 

82.  Taylor,  Edmond.  The  Strategy  of  Terror.  Houghton-Mifflin,  Boston,  1940. 

83.  Urban,  Wilbur  M.  Language  and  Reality;  The  Philosophy  of  Language  and 

the  Principles  of  Symbolism.  Macmillan,  New  York,  1939. 

84.  Wheeler,  Raymond  H„  and  Perkins,  F.  Theodore.  Principles  of  Mental 

Development.  Crowell  Co.,  New  York,  1932. 

85.  Williams,  Jesse  F.  A  Textbook  of  Anatomy  and  Physiology.  Saunders, 

Philadelphia,  1939,  6th  ed. 

86.  Witty,  Paul,  and  Kofel,  David.  Reading  and  the  Educative  Process.  Ginn  & 

Co.,  Boston,  1939. 

87.  Woodger,  J.  H.  The  Axiomatic  Method  in  Biology .  Cambridge  Univ.  Press, 

London,  1937. 

88.  Yerkes,  Robert  M.,  and  Nissen,  Henry  W.  Pre-linguistic  Sign  Behavior  in 

Chimpanzee.  Science .  June  23,  1939. 

89.  Zuckerman,  S.  The  Social  Life  of  Monkeys  and  Apes.  Harcourt,  Brace, 

New  York,  1932. 

Ixxxvi  IN  TRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDI  TION 

The  following  items  in  the  bibliography  have  either  been  omitted  by  inadvertence, 
or  they  appeared  after  the  numbering  of  the  bibliography  was  completed. 

90.  Barnard,  R.  H.  General  Semantics  and  the  Controversial  Phases  of  Speech. 

Quar.  Jour,  of  Speech.  Dec.,  1940. 

91.  Chakotin,  S.  The  Rape  of  the  Masses;  The  Psychology  of  Totalitarian 

Political  Propaganda.  Alliance  Book  Corporation,  New  York,  1940. 

92.  Hitler,  Adolf.  Mein  Kampf.  Stackpole  Sons,  New  York,  1939. 

93.  Lee,  Irving.  General  Semantics  and  Public  Speaking.  Quar.  Jour,  of  Speech. 

Dec.,  1940. 

94.  The  Adult  in  Courses  in  Speech.  Accepted  for  publication.  College  English 

1941. 

95.  Lieber,  H.  G.  and  L.  R.  Non~Euclidean  Geometry  or  Three  Moons  t» 

Mat  he  sis.  Galois  Institute  of  Mathematics,  Long  Island  Univ.,  Brooklyn, 
New  York,  1931. 

96.  Galois  and  the  Theory  of  Groups ;  A  Bright  Star  in  Mathesis .  Galois  Insti¬ 

tute  of  Mathematics,  1932. 

97.  The  Einstein  Theory  of  Relativity ,  Part  I.  Galois  Inst,  of  Mathematics,  1936. 

98.  Psychiatry;  Jour,  of  the  Biology  and  the  Pathology  of  Interpersonal  Relations. 

Wm.  A.  White  Psychiatric  Foundation,  Washington,  D.  C. 

99.  Reiser,  O.  L.  The  Promise  of  Scientific  Humanism.  Oskar  Piest,  New  York, 

1940. 

100.  Robinson,  Edward  S.  Law  and  the  Lawyers.  Macmillan,  New  York,  1935. 

LIST  OF  REPRINTS  AND  MONOGRAPHS 

INSTITUTE  OF  GENERAL  SEMANTICS— 1941 

1.  Barrett,  L.  G.  General  Semantics  and  Dentistry.  Harvard  Dental  Record , 

June,  1938. 

2.  Evaluational  Disorders  and  Caries ;  Semantogenic  Symptoms.  Jour,  of  Amer. 

Dental  Asso.  Nov.,  1939. 

3.  Brewer,  Joseph.  Education  and  the  Modem  World.  Convocation  Address, 

Olivet  College,  Sept.,  1937.  Reproduced  from  No.  21. 

4.  Burridge,  W.  A  New  Colloido-Physiological  Psycho-Logics.  Reproduced 

from  No.  21. 

5.  Campbell,  D.  G.  General  Semantics;  Implications  of  Linguistic  Revision  for 

Theoretical  and  Clinical  Neuro-Psychiatry.  Amer.  Jour,  of  Psychiatry. 
Jan.,  1937. 

6.  Neuro-Linguistic  and  Neuro- Semantic  Factors  of  Child  Development. 

Address,  Chicago  Pediatric  Soc.  Jan.,  1938.  Reproduced  from  No.  21. 

7.  General  Semantics  in  Education,  Counseling,  and  Therapy.  Natl.  Educ.  Asso. 

Proc.  1939. 

8.  General  Semantics  and  Schizophrenic  Reactions ;  Neuro-Linguistic  and 

Neuro- Semantic  Mechanisms  of  Pathogenesis  and  Their  Implications  for 
Prevention  and  Therapy.  Presented  before  Amer.  Psychiatric  Asso.,  Chi¬ 
cago.  May,  1939.  To  be  published. 

9.  See  Congdon. 

10.  Congdon,  C.  B.,  and  Campbell,  D.  G.  A  Preliminary  Report  on  the  Psycho¬ 

therapeutic  Application  of  General  Semantics.  March,  1937.  Reproduced 
from  No.  21. 

11.  Devereux,  G.  A  Sociological  Theory  of  Schizophrenia.  Psychoanalytic  Rev. 

July,  1939. 

12.  Hayakawa,  S.  I.  General  Semantics  and  Propaganda.  Presented  before  the 

Natl.  Council  of  Teachers  of  English,  St.  Louis,  Mo.  Nov.,  1938.  Pub. 
Opinion  Quar.  April,  1939. 

13.  Language  in  Action.  Experimental  second  edition  of  a  text  for  Freshman 

English  Courses.  An  application  of  the  principles  of  General  Semantics 
which  provides  an  orientation  towards  language  based  upon  modem  lin¬ 
guistic,  scientific,  and  literary  theory.  Institute  of  General  Semantics. 
Chicago,  1940.  Final  text  published  by  Harcourt,  Brace,  New  York,  1941. 

INTRODUCTION  TO  Till:  SIX'OND  KDITION  Ixxxvii 

14.  Hrkrick,  C.  Judson.  A  Neurologist  Makes  Up  His  Mind.  The  Mellon  Lec¬ 

ture,  Univ.  ol  Pittsburgh,  School  of  Medicine,  May,  1939.  Scientific 
Monthly.  Aug.,  1939. 

15.  Johnson,  Wendell.  Language  and  Speech  Hygiene;  An  Application  of  Gen~ 

eral  Semantics.  Outline  of  a  Course,  Iowa  Univ.  General  Semantics 
Monographs,  No.  I.  Institute  of  General  Semantics,  Chicago,  1939. 

16.  Ken  dig,  M.  Language  Re-Orientation  of  High  School  Curriculum  and  Scien¬ 

tific  Control  of  Neuro-Linguistic  Mechanisms  for  Better  Mental  Health 
and  Scholastic  Achievement.  Presented  before  Educ.  Section,  A.A.A.S., 
St.  Louis,  Dec.,  1935.  Reproduced  from  No,  21. 

17.  Book  Reviews  for  Students  of  General  Semantics;  First  Series.  The  Psy¬ 

chiatric  Exchange  of  the  III.  State  Institutions.  March,  1939. 

18.  Comments  on  the  Controversy  over  the  ‘Nature  and  Constancy  of  the  I.Q.  as 

a  Measure  of  Potential  Growth’.  Educational  Method.  Jan.,  1940. 

19.  Keyser,  Cassius  J.  Mathematics  and  the  Science  of  Semantics.  Scripta 

Mathematica.  May,  1934. 

20.  Korzybski,  A.  Preface  to  First  Edition,  Science  and  Sanity ,  1933.  Separately 

published.  Institute  of  General  Semantics,  Chicago. 

21.  General  Semantics:  Papers  from  the  First  American  Congress  for  General 

Semantics ,  1935.  With  an  introductory  ‘Outline  of  General  Semantics’  by 
Alfred  Korzybski  and  other  related  contributions.  Bibliography.  Collected 
and  arranged  by  Hansell  Baugh.  (Author  index  Korzybski)  Arrow  Edi¬ 
tions,  New  York,  1938.  Distributed  also  by  the  Institute  of  General 
Semantics,  Chicago. 

22.  Outline  of  General  Semantics;  The  Application  of  Some  Methods  of  Exact 

Sciences  to  the  Solution  of  Human  Problems  and  Educational  Training  for 
General  Sanity.  Presented  before  First  American  Congress  for  General 
Semantics,  Ellensburg,  Wash.,  1935.  Reproduced  from  No.  21. 

23.  Neuro- Semantic  and  Neuro-Linguistic  Mechanisms  of  Extensionalization ; 

General  Semantics  as  a  Natural  Experimental  Science.  Presented  before 
the  Psychology  Section,  A.A.A.S.,  St.  Louis,  Dec.,  1935.  Amer.  Jour .  of 
Psychiatry.  July,  1936. 

24.  The  Science  of  Man.  Amer.  Jour .  of  Psychiatry .  May,  1937. 

25.  General  Semantics;  Extensionalization  in  Mathematics,  Mathematical  Physics 

and  General  Education.  Three  papers  presented  before  annual  meetings  of 
the  Amer.  Math.  Soc.,  1935,  1938,  1939.  With  an  introductory  Outline  of 
General  Semantics.  General  Semantics  Monographs  No.  II.  Institute  of 
General  Semantics,  Chicago,  1941. 

26.  A  Memorandum  on  the  Institute  of  General  Semantics.  A  preliminary  report, 

194°. 

27.  General  Semantics,  Psychiatry,  Psychotherapy  and  Prevention.  Paper  pre¬ 

sented  before  the  Amer.  Psychiatric  Asso.,  May,  1940.  Amer.  Jour,  of 
Psychiatry.  Sept.,  1941. 

28.  Introduction  to  Second  Edition,  Science  and  Sanity,  1941.  Separately  pub¬ 

lished.  Institute  of  General  Semantics,  Chicago. 

29.  Michie,  S.  A  New  General  Language  Curriculum  for  the  Eighth  Grade. 

Modem  Language  Jour.  Feb.,  1938. 

30.  Semmelmeyer,  M.  The  Application  of  General  Semantics  to  a  Program  for 

Reading  Readiness.  Paper  presented  before  the  Third  Annual  Conference 
on  Reading,  University  of  Chicago,  June,  1940.  Institute  of  General  Seman¬ 
tics,  Chicago.  An  abridgement  of  this  paper  is  published  in  the  proceedings 
of  the  conference,  Readtng  and  Pupil  Development,  under  the  title,  ‘Pro¬ 
moting  Readiness  for  Reading  and  for  Growth  in  the  Interpretation  of 
Meaning1.  Suppl.  Educ.  Monographs,  No.  51,  October,  1940.  Univ.  of 
Chicago  Press. 

31.  Weinberg,  A.  M.  General  Semantics  and  the  Teaching  of  Physics.  Amer 

Physics  Teacher.  April,  1939. 

32.  Weyl,  Hermann.  The  Mathematical  Way  of  Thinking.  Studies  in  the  His¬ 

tory  of  Science.  Univ.  of  Pa.  Press,  1941. 

Latest  list  of  publications  available  from  Institute  of  General  Semantics,  Lake¬ 
ville,  Connecticut. 

PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION  1933 

It  is  difficult  for  a  philosopher  to  realise  that  anyone  really  is  confining 
his  discussion  within  the  limits  that  I  have  set  before  you.  The  boundary 
is  set  up  just  where  he  is  beginning  to  get  excited.  (573)  A.  n.  whitehead 

That  all  debunkers  must  add  new  boshes  of  their  own  to  supply  the  vacua 
created  by  the  annihilation  of  the  old,  is  probably  a  law  of  nature.  (22) 

E.  T.  BELL 

Teaching  without  a  system  makes  learning  difficult.  The  Talmud 

The  layman,  the  'practical'  man,  the  man  in  the  street,  says,  What  is 
that  to  me?  The  answer  is  positive  and  weighty.  Our  life  is  entirely  de¬ 
pendent  on  the  established  doctrines  of  ethics,  sociology,  political  economy, 
government,  law,  medical  science,  etc.  This  affects  everyone  consciously  or 
unconsciously,  the  man  in  the  street  in  the  first  place,  because  he  is  the 
most  defenseless.  (280>  A.  K. 

When  new  turns  in  behaviour  cease  to  appear  in  the  life  of  the  individ¬ 
ual  its  behaviour  ceases  to  be  intelligent.  (106)  c.  E.  coghill 

'Tis  a  lesson  you  should  heed. 

Try  again; 

If  at  first  you  don't  succeed , 

Try  again; 

Then  your  courage  should  appear » 
For  if  you  will  persevere 
You  will  conquer ,  never  fear , 

Try  again, 

William  Edward  Hickson. 

The  main  portions  of  the  present  work  have  already  been  presented 
in  the  form  of  lectures  before  different  universities,  technological  in¬ 
stitutes,  teachers'  and  physicians'  associations,  and  other  scientific 
bodies.  The  general  outline  was  presented  for  the  first  time  before  the 
International  Mathematical  Congress  in  Toronto  in  1924,  and  pub¬ 
lished  in  the  form  of  a  booklet.  A  further  elaboration  of  the  system 
was  read  before  the  Washington  (D.  C.)  Society  for  Nervous  and 
Mental  Diseases  in  1925,  and  the  Washington  (D.  C.)  Psychopatho- 
logical  Society  in  1926,  and  later  published.  A  fuller  draft  was  pre¬ 
sented  before  the  Congres  des  mathematiciens  des  pays  Slaves,  in  War¬ 
saw,  Poland,  in  1929.  A  special  and  novel  aspect  of  the  subject,  in 
connection  with  the  conditional  reflexes  of  Pavlov,  was  outlined  before 
the  First  Internationa!  Congress  of  Mental  Hygiene,  Washington,  D. 

lxxxix 

see  page  xii 

xc 

PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION 

C.,  in  1930.  Other  aspects  were  discussed  before  the  American  Mathe¬ 
matical  Society,  October  25,  1930,  and  the  Mathematical  Section  of 
The  American  Association  for  the  Advancement  of  Science,  December 
28,  1931.  The  latter  paper  is  printed  as  Supplement  III  in  this 
volume. 

The  general  character  of  the  present  work  is  perhaps  best  indicated 
by  the  two  following  analogies.  It  is  well  known  that  for  the  working 
of  any  machine  some  lubricant  is  needed.  Without  expressing  any 
judgement  about  the  present  ‘machine  age*,  we  have  to  admit  that  tech¬ 
nically  it  is  very  advanced,  and  that  without  this  advancement  many 
scientific  investigations  necessitating  very  refined  instruments  would  be 
impossible.  Let  us  assume  that  mankind  never  had  at  its  disposal  a 
clean  lubricant,  but  that  existing  lubricants  always  contained  emery 
sand,  the  presence  of  which  escaped  our  notice.  Under  such  condi¬ 
tions,  existing  technical  developments,  with  all  their  consequences, 
would  be  impossible.  Any  machine  would  last  only  a  few  weeks  or 
months  instead  of  many  years,  making  the  prices  of  machines  and  the 
cost  of  their  utilization  entirely  prohibitive.  Technical  development 
would  thus  be  retarded  for  many  centuries.  Let  us  now  assume  that 
somebody  were  to  discover  a  simple  means  for  the  elimination  of  emery 
from  the  lubricants ;  at  once  the  present  technical  developments  would 
become  possible,  and  be  gradually  accomplished. 

Something  similar  has  occurred  in  our  human  affairs.  Technically 
we  are  very  advanced,  but  the  elementalistic  premises  underlying  our 
human  relations,  practically  since  Aristotle,  have  not  changed  at  all. 
The  present  investigation  reveals  that  in  the  functioning  of  our  nervous 
systems  a  special  harmful  factor  is  involved,  a  ‘lubricant  with  emery’ 
so  to  speak,  which  retards  the  development  of  sane  human  relations 
and  prevents  general  sanity.  It  turns  out  that  in  the  structure  of  our 
languages,  methods,  ‘habits  of  thought’,  orientations,  etc.,  we  preserve 
delusional,  psychopathological  factors.  These  are  in  no  way  inevitable, 
as  will  be  shown,  but  can  be  easily  eliminated  by  special  training, 
therapeutic  in  effect,  and  consequently  of  educational  preventive  value. 
This  ‘emery*  in  the  nervous  system  I  call  identification.  It  involves 
deeply  rooted  ‘principles*  which  are  invariably  false  to  facts  and  so  our 
orientations  based  on  them  cannot  lead  to  adjustment  and  sanity. 

A  medical  analogy  here  suggests  itself.  We  find  a  peculiar  parallel 
between  identification  and  infectious  diseases.  History  proves  that 
under  primitive  conditions  infectious  diseases  cannot  be  controlled. 
They  spread  rapidly,  sometimes  killing  off  more  than  half  of  the  af¬ 
fected  population.  The  infectious  agent  may  be  transmitted  either 

PREFACE  TO  Tlili  FIRST  HDITION  xci 

directly,  or  through  rats,  insects,  etc.  With  the  advance  of  science, 
we  are  able  to  control  the  disease,  and  various  important  preventive 
methods,  such  as  sanitation,  vaccination,  etc.,  are  at  our  disposal. 

Identification  appears  also  as  something  infectious’,  for  it  is  trans¬ 
mitted  directly  or  indirectly  from  parents  and  teachers  to  the  child 
by  the  mechanism  and  structure  of  language,  by  established  and  in¬ 
herited  ‘habits  of  thought’,  by  rules  for  life-orientation,  etc.  There 
are  also  large  numbers  of  men  and  women  who  make  a  profession 
of  spreading  the  disease.  Identification  makes  general  sanity  and  com¬ 
plete  adjustment  impossible.  Training  in  non-identity  plays  a  thera¬ 
peutic  role  with  adults.  The  degree  of  recovery  depends  on  many  fac¬ 
tors,  such  as  the  age  of  the  individual,  the  severity  of  the  ‘infection’, 
the  diligence  in  training  in  non-identity,  etc.  With  children  the  train¬ 
ing  in  non-identity  is  extremely  simple.  It  plays  the  role  both  of 
sanitation  and  of  the  equally  simple  and  effective  preventive  vaccina¬ 
tion. 

As  in  infectious  diseases,  certain  individuals,  although  living  in 
infected  territory,  are  somehow  immune  to  this  disease.  Others  are 
hopelessly  susceptible. 

The  present  work  is  written  on  the  level  of  the  average  intelligent 
layman,  because  before  we  can  train  -children  in  non-identity  by  pre¬ 
ventive  education,  parents  and  teachers  must  have  a  handbook  for  their 
own  guidance.  It  is  not  claimed  that  a  millenium  is  at  hand,  far  from 
it ;  yet  it  seems  imperative  that  the  w^wro-psycho-logical  factors  which 
make  general  sanity  impossible  should  be  eliminated. 

I  have  prefaced  the  parts  of  the  work  and  the  chapters  with  a 
large  number  of  important  quotations.  I  have  done  so  to  make  the 
reader  aware  that,  on  the  one  hand,  there  is  already  afloat  in  the  ‘uni¬ 
verse  of  discourse’  a  great  deal  of  genuine  knowledge  and  wisdom,  and 
that,  on  the  other  hand,  this  wisdom  is  not  generally  applied  and,  to  a 
large  extent,  cannot  be  applied  as  long  as  we  fail  to  build  a  simple  sys¬ 
tem  based  on  the  complete  elimination  of  the  pathological  factors. 

A  system,  in  the  present  sense,  represents  a  complex  whole  of  co¬ 
ordinated  doctrines  resulting  in  methodological  rules  and  principles 
of  procedure  which  affect  the  orientation  by  which  we  act  and  live. 
Any  system  involves  an  enormous  number  of  assumptions,  presup¬ 
positions,  etc.,  which,  in  the  main,  are  not  obvious  but  operate  un¬ 
consciously.  As  such,  they  are  extremely  dangerous,  because  should 
it  happen  that  some  of  these  unconscious  presuppositions  are  false  to 
facts,  our  whole  life  orientation  would  be  vitiated  by  these  unconscious 
delusional  factors,  with  the  necessary  result  of  harmful  behaviour  and 

XC11 

PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION 

maladjustment.  No  system  has  ever  been  fully  investigated  as  to  its 
underlying  unconscious  presuppositions.  Every  system  is  expressed 
in  some  language  of  some  structure,  which  is  based  in  turn  on  silent 
presuppositions,  and  ultimately  reflects  and  reinforces  those  presup¬ 
positions  on  and  in  the  system.  This  connection  is  very  close  and  allows 
us  to  investigate  a  system  to  a  large  extent  by  a  linguistic  structural 
analysis. 

The  system  by  which  the  white  race  lives,  suffers,  'prospers*, 
starves,  and  dies  today  is  not  in  a  strict  sense  an  aristotelian  system. 
Aristotle  had  far  too  much  of  the  sense  of  actualities  for  that.  It 
represents,  however,  a  system  formulated  by  those  who,  for  nearly  two 
thousand  years  since  Aristotle,  have  controlled  our  knowledge  and 
methods  of  orientations,  and  who,  for  purposes  of  their  own,  selected 
what  today  appears  as  the  worst  from  Aristotle  and  the  worst  from 
Plato  and,  with  their  own  additions,  imposed  this  composite  system 
upon  us.  In  this  they  were  greatly  aided  by  the  structure  of  language 
and  psycho-logical  habits,  which  from  the  primitive  down  to  this  very 
day  have  affected  all  of  us  consciously  or  unconsciously,  and  have 
introduced  serious  difficulties  even  in  science  and  in  mathematics. 

Our  rulers:  politicians,  ‘diplomats*,  bankers,  priests  of  every  de¬ 
scription,  economists,  lawyers,  etc.,  and  the  majority  of  teachers  re¬ 
main  at  present  largely  or  entirely  ignorant  of  modern  science,  scientific 
methods,  structural  linguistic  and  semantic  issues  of  1933,  and  they  also 
lack  an  essential  historical  and  anthropological  background,  without 
which  a  sane  orientation  is  impossible.*  This  ignorance  is  often  wilful 
as  they  mostly  refuse,  with  various  excuses,  to  read  modem  works 
dealing  with  such  problems.  As  a  result  a  conflict  is  created  and  main¬ 
tained  between  the  advance  of  science  affecting  conditions  of  actual 
life  and  the  orientations  of  our  rulers,  which  often  remain  antiquated 
by  centuries,  or  one  or  two  thousand  years.  The  present  world  condi¬ 
tions  are  in  chaos ;  psycho-logically  there  exists  a  state  of  helplessness — 
hopelessness,  often  resulting  in  the  feelings  of  insecurity,  bitterness,  etc., 
and  we  have  lately  witnessed  psychopathological  mass  outbursts,  sim¬ 
ilar  to  those  of  the  dark  ages.  Few  of  us  at  present  realize  that,  as  long 
as  such  ignorance  of  our  rulers  prevails,  no  solution  of  our  human 
problems  is  possible . 

*  The  literature  of  these  subjects  is  very  large  and  impossible  to  give 
here  or  in  my  bibliography;  but  as  primers  I  may  as  well  suggest  numbers 
299,  334,  492,  558,  589  in  my  bibliography.  These  books  in  turn  give  further 
references. 

PRLiFACli  TO  THK  FIRST  HDITION  xciii 

The  distinctly  novel  issue  in  a  non-aristotelian  system  seems  to  be 
that  in  a  human  class  of  life  elementary  methodological  and  structural 
ignorance  about  the  world  and  ourselves,  as  revealed  by  science,  is 
bound  to  introduce  delusional  factors,  for  no  one  can  be  free  from 
some  conscious  or  unconscious  structural  assumptions.  The  real  and 
only  problem  therefore  seems  to  be  whether  our  structural  assump¬ 
tions  in  1933  are  primitive  or  of  the  1933  issue.  The  older  populariza¬ 
tion  of  science'  is  not  the  solution,  it  often  does  harm.  The  progress 
of  science  is  due  in  the  main  to  scientific  methods  and  linguistic  revis¬ 
ions,  and  so  the  new  facts  discovered  by  such  methods  cannot  be 
properly  utilized  by  antiquated  psycho-logical  orientations  and  lan¬ 
guages.  Such  utilization  often  results  only  in  bewilderment  and  lack 
of  balance.  Before  we  can  adjust  ourselves  to  the  new  conditions  of 
life,  created  in  the  main  by  science,  we  must  first  of  all  revise  our 
grossly  antiquated  methods  of  orientation.  Then  only  shall  we  be  able 
to  adjust  ourselves  properly  to  the  new  facts. 

Investigations  show  that  the  essential  scientific  structural  data  of 
1933  about  the  world  and  ourselves  are  extremely  simple,  simpler  even 
than  any  of  the  structural  fancies  of  the  primitives.  We  usually  have 
sense  enough  to  fit  our  shoes  to  our  feet,  but  not  sense  enough  to  revise 
our  older  methods  of  orientation  to  fit  the  facts.  The  elimination  of 
primitive  identifications,  which  is  easily  accomplished  once  we  take  it 
seriously,  produces  the  necessary  psycho-logical  change  toward  sanity. 

‘Human  nature'  is  not  an  elementalistic  product  of  heredity  alone, 
or  of  environment  alone,  but  represents  a  very  complex  organism-as-a- 
whole  end-result  of  the  enviro-genetic  manifold.  It  seems  obvious, 
once  stated,  that  in  a  human  class  of  life,  the  linguistic,  structural,  and 
semantic  issues  represent  powerful  and  ever  present  environmental 
factors,  which  constitute  most  important  components  of  all  our  prob¬ 
lems.  ‘Human  nature’  can  be  changed ,  once  we  know  how.  Experi¬ 
ence  and  experiments  show  that  this  ‘change  of  human  nature’,  which 
under  verbal  elementalism  was  supposed  to  be  impossible,  can  be  ac¬ 
complished  in  most  cases  in  a  few  months,  if  we  attack  this  problem  by 
the  non- elementalistic,  newro-psycho-logical,  special  non-identity  tech¬ 
nique. 

If  the  ignorance  and  identifications  of  our  rulers  could  be  eliminated 
a  variety  of  delusional  factors  through  home  and  school  educational 
and  other  powerful  agencies  would  cease  to  be  imposed  and  enforced 
upon  us,  and  the  revision  of  our  systems  would  be  encouraged,  rather 
than  hampered.  Effective  solutions  of  our  problems  would  then  appear 
spontaneously  and  in  simple  forms;  our  ‘shoes’  would  fit  our  ‘feet*  and 

XCIV 

PRFFACH  TO  T \Ui  FIRST  KDITION 

we  could  ‘walk  through  life’  in  comfort,  instead  of  enduring  the  pres¬ 
ent  sufferings. 

Since  our  existing  systems  appear  to  be  in  many  respects  unwork¬ 
able  and  involve  psychopathological  factors  owing  in  the  main  to  cer¬ 
tain  presuppositions  of  the  aristotelian  system,  and  also  for  brevity’s 
sake,  I  call  the  whole  operating  systemic  complex  ‘aristotelian’.  The 
outline  of  a  new  and  modern  system  built  after  the  rejection  of  the 
delusional  factors  I  call  ‘non-aristotelian’.  To  avoid  misunderstand¬ 
ings  I  wish  to  acknowledge  explicitly  my  profound  admiration  for 
the  extraordinary  genius  of  Aristotle,  particularly  in  consideration  of 
the  period  in  which  he  lived.  Nevertheless,  the  twisting  of  his  system 
and  the  imposed  immobility  of  this  twisted  system,  as  enforced  for 
nearly  two  thousand  years  by  the  controlling  groups,  often  under 
threats  of  torture  and  death,  have  led  and  can  only  lead  to  more  dis¬ 
asters.  From  what  we  know  about  Aristotle,  there  is  little  doubt  that, 
if  alive,  he  would  not  tolerate  such  twistings  and  artificial  immobility 
of  the  system  usually  ascribed  to  him. 

The  connection  between  the  study  of  psychiatry  and  the  study  of 
mathematics  and  the  foundations  of  mathematics  is  very  instructive. 
In  the  development  of  civilization  and  science  we  find  that  some 
disciplines,  for  instance,  the  very  young  science  of  psychiatry,  have 
progressed  rapidly.  Other  disciplines  such  as  mathematics,  physics, 
etc.,  until  recently  progressed  slowly,  mainly  on  account  of  certain 
dogmas  and  prejudices.  Of  late  some  of  these  prejudices  have  been 
eliminated,  and  since  then  the  progress  of  these  sciences  has  become 
extremely  rapid.  Still  other  disciplines  such  as  'psychology’,  the 
traditional  ‘philosophy’,  sociology,  political  economy,  ethics,  etc.,  have 
developed  their  principles  very  little  in  nearly  two  thousand  years 
notwithstanding  a  wealth  of  accumulated  new  data. 

Many  reasons  are  responsible  for  this  curious  state  of  affairs,  but 
I  will  suggest  only  three,  in  the  order  of  their  importance.  (1)  First 
of  all,  the  last  mentioned  slowly  developing  disciplines  are  the  closest 
to  us  humans,  and  a  primitive  man,  or  an  entirely  ignorant  person 
‘knows  all  about’  these  most  complex  problems  in  existence.  This 
‘know  it  all’  general  tendency  produces  an  environmental,  psycho¬ 
logical,  linguistic,  etc.,  manifold,  filled  with  identifications  which  pro¬ 
duce  dogmas,  prejudices,  misunderstandings,  fears,  and  what  not,  mak¬ 
ing  an  impersonal,  impartial  scientific  approach  next  to  impossible. 
(2)  Few  of  us  realize  the  unbelievable  traps,  some  of  them  of  a  psy¬ 
chopathological  character,  which  the  structure  of  our  ordinary  lan¬ 
guage  sets  before  us.  These  also  make  any  scientific  approach  or 

PRLiFACF  TO  1  Hi:  FIRST  liDITION 

xcv 

agreement  on  vital  points  impossible.  We  grope  by  animalistic  trial 
and  error,  and  by  equally  animalistic  strife,  wars,  revolutions,  etc. 
'These  first  two  points  apply  practically  to  all  of  us,  and  introduce 
great  difficulties  even  into  mathematics.  (3)  One  of  the  main  reasons 
why  psychiatry  has  advanced  so  rapidly  in  such  a  short  period  in  con¬ 
tradistinction  to  ‘psychology",  is  that  it  studies  relatively  simple  and 
relatively  singled-out  symptoms.  But  as  these  symptoms  are  not  iso¬ 
lated,  and  represent  the  reactions  of  the  organism-as-a-whole,  their 
partial  study  yields  glimpses  of  the  general  and  fundamental  mecha¬ 
nisms.  If  we  study  mathematics  and  mathematical  sciences  as  forms 
of  human  behaviour,  we  study  also  simplified  and  singled-out  human 
reactions  of  the  type:  ‘one  and  one  make  two',  ‘two  and  one  make 
three",  etc.,  and  we  also  get  glimpses  of  general  mechanisms.  In  psy¬ 
chiatry  we  study  simplified  psycho-logical  reactions  at  their  worst;  in 
mathematics  and  mathematical  sciences  we  study  simplified  psycho¬ 
logical  reactions  at  their  best.  When  both  types  of  reactions  are 
studied  conjointly,  most  unexpected  and  very  far-reaching  results 
follow  which  deeply  affect  every  known  phase  of  human  life  and 
activity,  science  included.  The  results  of  such  widely  separated  studies 
do  not  conflict,  but  supplement  each  other,  elucidating  very  clearly  a 
general  mechanism  which  operates  in  all  of  us.  Psychiatrical  studies 
help  us  most  unexpectedly  in  the  solution  of  mathematical  paradoxes; 
and  mathematical  studies  help  us  to  solve  very  important  problems  in 
psychotherapy  and  in  prevention  of  psycho-logical  disorders. 

History  shows  that  the  advancement  of  science  and  civilization 
involves,  first,  an  accumulation  of  observations;  second,  a  preliminary 
formulation  of  some  kind  of  ‘principles"  (which  always  involve  some 
unconscious  assumptions)  ;  and,  finally,  as  the  numbers  of  observations 
increase,  it  leads  to  the  revision  and  usually  the  rejection  of  unjusti¬ 
fied,  or  false  to  facts  ‘principles",  which  ultimately  are  found  to  repre¬ 
sent  only  postulates.  Because  of  the  cumulative  and  non-elementalistic 
character  of  human  knowledge,  a  mere  challenge  to  a  ‘principle'  does 
not  carry  us  far.  For  expediency,  assumptions  underlying  a  system 
have  (1)  to  be  discovered,  (2)  tested,  (3)  eventually  challenged, 
(4)  eventually  rejected,  and  (5)  a  system ,  free  from  the  eventually 
objectionable  postulates,  has  to  be  built. 

Examples  of  this  abound  in  every  field,  but  the  histories  of  the 
non~euclidean  and  non-newtonian  systems  supply  the  simplest  and 
most  obvious  illustrations.  For  instance,  the  fifth  postulate  of  Euclid 
did  not  satisfy  even  his  contemporaries,  but  these  challenges  were 
ineffective  for  more  than  two  thousand  years.  Only  in  the  nineteenth 

xcvi  PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION 

century  was  the  fifth  postulate  eliminated  and  non-euclidean  systems 
built  without  it.  The  appearance  of  such  systems  marked  a  profound 
revolution  in  human  orientations.  In  the  twentieth  century  the  much 
more  important  ‘principles*  underlying  our  notions  about  the  physical 
world,  such  as  ‘absolute  simultaneity*,  ‘continuity*  of  atomic  processes, 
‘certainty*  of  our  experiments  and  conclusions,  etc.,  were  challenged, 
and  systems  were  then  built  without  them.  As  a  result,  we  now  have 
the  magnificent  non-newtonian  physics  and  world  outlooks,  based  on 
the  work  of  Einstein  and  the  quantum  pioneers. 

Finally,  for  the  first  time  in  our  history,  some  of  the  most  important 
principles  of  all  principles,  this  time  in  the  ‘mental  world*,  were 
challenged  by  mathematicians.  For  instance  the  universal  validity  of 
the  so-called  ‘logical  law  of  the  excluded  third*  was  questioned.  Un¬ 
fortunately,  as  yet,  no  full-fledged  systems  based  on  this  challenge 
have  been  formulated,  and  so  it  remains  largely  inoperative,  although 
the  possibilities  of  some  non-aristotelian,  though  elementalistic  and 
unsatisfactory  ‘logics*,  are  made  obvious. 

Further  researches  revealed  that  the  generality  of  the  ‘law  of  the 
excluded  third*  is  not  an  independent  postulate,  but  that  it  is  only  an 
elementalistic  consequence  of  a  deeper,  invariably  false  to  facts  prin¬ 
ciple  of  ‘identity’,  often  unconscious  and  consequently  particularly  per¬ 
nicious.  Identity  is  defined  as  ‘absolute  sameness  in  all  respects*,  and  it 
is  this  ‘all*  which  makes  identity  impossible.  If  we  eliminate  this  ‘all* 
from  the  definition,  then  the  word  ‘absolute*  loses  its  meaning,  we  have 
‘sameness  in  some  respects*,  but  we  have  no  ‘identity’,  and  only  ‘simi¬ 
larity*,  ‘equivalence*,  ‘equality*,  etc.  If  we  consider  that  all  we  deal  with 
represents  constantly  changing  sub-microscopic,  interrelated  processes 
which  are  nor,  and  cannot  be  ‘identical  with  themselves*,  the  old  dictum 
that  ‘everything  is  identical  with  itself*  becomes  in  1933  a  principle  in¬ 
variably  false  to  facts. 

Someone  may  say,  ‘Granted,  but  why  fuss  so  much  about  it?*  My 
answer  would  be,  ‘Identification  is  found  in  all  known  primitive  peoples ; 
in  all  known  forms  of  “mental**  ills;  and  in  the  great  majority  of 
personal,  national,  and  international  maladjustments.  It  is  important, 
therefore,  to  eliminate  such  a  harmful  factor  from  our  prevailing  sys¬ 
tems.  Certainly  no  one  would  care  to  contaminate  his  child  with  a 
dangerous  germ,  once  it  is  known  that  the  given  factor  is  dangerous. 
Furthermore,  the  results  of  a  complete  elimination  of  identity  are  so  far- 
reaching  and  beneficial  for  the  daily  life  of  everyone,  and  for  science,* 

*  While  correcting  the  proofs  of  this  Preface,  I  read  a  telegraphic  press  re¬ 
port  from  London  by  Science  Service,  that  Professor  Max  Born,  by  the  applica- 

PRITACI*  TO  THli  FIRST  1*1)1  HON  xcvn 

l hat  such  'fussing’  is  not  only  justified,  but  becomes  one  of  the  primary 
l asks  before  us.  Anyone  who  will  study  the  present  work  will  be 
easily  convinced  by  observations  of  human  difficulties  in  life,  and 
science,  that  the  majority  of  these  difficulties  arise  from  necessary 
false  evaluations,  in  consequence  of  the  unconscious  false  to  facts 
identifications. 

The  present  work  therefore  formulates  a  system,  called  non- 
aristotelian,  which  is  based  on  the  complete  rejection  of  identity  and 
its  derivatives,  and  shows  what  very  simple  yet  powerful  structural 
factors  of  sanity  can  be  found  in  science.  The  experimental  develop¬ 
ment  of  science  and  civilization  invariably  involves  more  and  more 
refined  discriminations.  Each  refinement  means  the  elimination  of 
some  identifications  somewhere,  but  many  still  remain  in  a  partial  and 
mostly  unconscious  form.  The  non-aristotelian  system  formulates  the 
general  problem  of  non-identity,  and  gives  childishly  simple  non- 
el  ementalistic  means  for  a  complete  and  conscious  elimination  of 
identification,  and  other  delusional  or  psychopathological  factors  in 
all  known  fields  of  human  endeavours,  in  science,  education,  and  all 
known  phases  of  private,  national,  and  international  life.  This  work, 
in  its  application  to  education  and  psychotherapy,  has  been  experi¬ 
mental  for  more  than  six  years. 

The  volume  is  divided  into  three  main  divisions.  Book  I  gives  a 
general  survey  of  non-aristotelian  structural  factors  discovered  by 
science,  which  are  essential  in  a  textbook.  Only  such  data  are 
selected,  interpreted  and  evaluated  as  are  necessary  for  a  full  mastery 
of  the  system.  Book  II  presents  a  general  introduction  to  non-aristote¬ 
lian  systems  and  general  semantics  free  from  identity,  and  gives  a 
technique  for  the  elimination  of  delusional  factors  from  our  psycho¬ 
logical  reactions.  Book  III  gives  additional  structural  data  about  lan¬ 
guages,  and  also  an  outline  of  the  essential  structural  characteristics 
of  the  empirical  world,  but  only  such  as  are  pertinent  for  training  in 
the  non-aristotelian  discipline. 

Following  each  quotation  prefacing  each  part  and  chapter,  the 
number  in  parenthesis  indicates  the  number  of  the  book  in  the  bibli¬ 
ography  from  which  the  quotation  is  taken. 

tion  of  the  non~elementalistic  methods  of  Einstein,  has  succeeded  in  making  & 
major  contribution  to  the  formulation  of  a  unified  field  theory  which  now  in* 
eludes  the  quantum  mechanics.  Should  this  announcement  be  verified  in  its  scien¬ 
tific  aspects,  our  understanding  of  the  structure  of  'matter*,  'electron*,  etc.,  would 
be  greatly  advanced,  and  would  involve  of  course  most  important  practical  appli¬ 
cations.  For  the  semantic  aspects  of  these  problems,  see  pp.  378,  386  f.,  541,  667, 
698-701,  and  Chapter  XXXIX. 

xcviii  PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION 

I  have  tried  to  avoid  footnotes  as  much  as  possible.  The  small 
numbers  after  some  words  in  the  text  refer  to  the  Notes  on  p.  763  if., 
where  the  references  to  the  bibliography  are  given. 

Book  II  is  largely  self-contained  and  therefore  can  be  read  inde¬ 
pendently  of  the  others,  after  the  reader  has  become  acquainted  with 
the  short  tables  of  abbreviations  given  on  pp.  15  and  16,  and  with 
Chapters  II  and  IV.  I  believe,  however,  that  for  the  best  results  the 
book  should  be  read  consecutively  without  stopping  at  passages  which  at 
first  are  not  entirely  clear,  and  read  at  least  twice.  On  the  second  read¬ 
ing,  passages  which  at  first  were  not  clear  will  become  obvious  because, 
in  such  a  wide  system,  the  beginning  presupposes  the  end,  and  vice 
versa. 

The  discovery  of  such  important  and  entirely  general  delusional 
factors  in  the  older  systems  leads  to  a  far-reaching  revision  of  all 
existing  disciplines.  Because  of  modern  complexities  of  knowledge 
this  revision  can  only  be  accomplished  by  the  activities  of  specialists 
working  together  as  a  group,  and  unified  by  one  principle  of  non¬ 
identity,  which  necessitates  a  structural  treatment. 

To  facilitate  this  most  urgent  need,  and  to  present  the  results  of 
this  work  to  the  public  at  reasonable  prices,  an  International  Non- 
aristotelian  Library  has  been  organized,  to  be  printed  and  distributed 
by  The  Science  Press  Printing  Company,  Lancaster,  Pennsylvania, 
U.  S.  A.,  and  Grand  Central  Terminal,  New  York  City. 

It  is  also  intended  to  organize  an  International  Non-aristotelian 
Society  with  branches  in  connection  with  all  institutions  of  learning 
throughout  the  world,  where  co-operative  scientific  work  for  the  elimi¬ 
nation  of  identity  can  be  carried  out,  as  this  work  is  beyond  the  capaci¬ 
ties  of  any  one  man. 

Since  the  scope  of  the  Library  and  Societies  is  international,  I 
have  accepted,  in  the  main,  the  Oxford  spelling  and  rules,  which  are 
a  happy  medium  between  the  English  used  in  the  United  States  of 
America  and  that  of  the  rest  of  the  world.  In  certain  instances  I  had 
to  utilize  some  forms  of  expressions  which  are  not  entirely  customary, 
but  these  slight  deviations  were  forced  upon  me  by  the  character  of  the 
subject,  the  need  for  clarity,  and  the  necessity  for  cautiousness  in 
generalizations.  The  revision  of  the  manuscript  and  reading  of  the 
proofs  in  connection  with  other  editorial  and  publishing  duties  has  been 
a  very  laborious  task  for  one  man,  and  I  only  hope  that  not  too  many 
mistakes  have  been  overlooked.  Corrections  and  suggestions  from  the 
readers  are  invited. 

The  International  Non-aristotelian  Library  is  a  non-commercial, 

PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION 

XCIX 

scientific  venture,  and  the  interest  and  help  of  scientists,  teachers,  and 
those  who  are  not  indifferent  to  the  advancement  of  science,  civilization, 
sanity,  peace,  and  to  the  improvement  of  social,  economic,  international, 
etc.,  conditions,  will  be  greatly  appreciated. 

From  one  point  of  view,  this  enquiry  has  been  independent;  from 
another,  much  material  has  been  adapted.  In  some  instances  it  is  im¬ 
possible  to  give  specific  credit  to  an  author,  particularly  in  a  text¬ 
book,  and  it  is  simpler  and  fairer  to  state  that  the  works  of  Professors 
H.  F.  Biggs,  G.  Birtwistle,  E.  Bleuler,  R.  Bonola,  M.  Bom,  P.  W. 
Bridgman,  E.  Cassirer,  C.  M.  Child,  A.  S.  Eddington,  A.  Einstein, 
A.  Haas,  H.  Head,  L.  V.  Heilbrunn,  C.  J.  Herrick,  S.  E.  Jelliffe, 
C.  J.  Keyser,  C.  I.  Lewis,  J.  Loeb,  H.  Minkowski,  W.  F.  Osgood,  H. 
Pieron,  G.  Y.  Rainich,  B.  Russell,  C.  S.  Sherrington,  L.  Silberstein, 
A.  Sommerfeld,  E.  H.  Starling,  A.  V.  Vasiliev,  H.  Weyl,  W.  A. 
White,  A.  N.  Whitehead,  E.  B.  Wilson,  L.  Wittgenstein  and  J.  W. 
Young  have  been  constantly  consulted. 

Although  I  have  had  no  opportunity  to  use  directly  the  funda¬ 
mental  researches  of  Doctor  Henry  Head  on  aphasia,  and  particularly 
on  semantic  aphasia,  my  whole  work  has  been  seriously  influenced  by 
his  great  contributions.  Doctor  Head's  work,  in  connection  with  a 
non-elementalistic  analysis,  makes  obvious  the  close  connection  be¬ 
tween:  (1)  identifications;  (2)  structural  ignorance;  (3)  lack  of 
proper  evaluations  in  general,  and  of  the  full  significance  of  words  and 
phrases  in  particular;  and  (4)  the  corresponding  necessary,  at  least 
colloidal  lesions  of  the  nervous  system. 

I  am  under  heavy  obligations  to  Professors:  E.  T.  Bell,  P.  W. 
Bridgman,  C.  M.  Child,  B.  F.  Dostal,  M.  H.  Fischer,  R.  R.  Gates 
(London),  C.  Judson  Herrick,  H.  S.  Jennings,  R.  J.  Kennedy,  R.  S. 
Lillie,  B.  Malinowski  (London),  R.  Pearl,  G.  Y.  Rainich,  Bertrand 
Russell  (London),  M.  Trainer  (Bern),  W.  M.  Wheeler,  H.  B.  Wil¬ 
liams,  W.  H.  Wilmer;  and  Doctors:  C.  B.  Bridges,  D.  G.  Fairchild,  W. 
H.  Gantt,  P.  S.  Graven,  E.  L.  Hardy,  J.  A.  P.  Millet,  P.  Weiss,  W.  A. 
White,  Mr.  C.  K.  Ogden  (London),  and  Miss  C.  L.  Williams,  for  read¬ 
ing  the  manuscript  and/or  the  proofs  as  a  whole,  or  in  part,  and  for 
their  invaluable  criticism,  and  suggestions. 

I  also  owe  much  to  Doctor  C.  B.  Bridges  and  Professor  W.  M. 
Wheeler,  not  only  for  their  important  criticisms  and  constructive  sug¬ 
gestions,  but  also  for  their  painstaking  editorial  corrections  and  in¬ 
terest. 

Needless  to  say,  I  assume  full  responsibility  for  the  following 
pages,  the  more,  that  I  did  not  always  follow  the  suggestions  made. 

c 

PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION 

I  wish  to  express  my  deep  appreciation  to  Doctor  W.  A.  White 
and  the  staff  of  St.  Elizabeth's  Hospital,  Washington,  D.  C.,  who,  during 
my  two  years  of  study  in  the  hospital,  gave  me  every  assistance  to 
facilitate  my  research  work  there.  I  am  indebted  to  Doctor  P.  S. 
Graven  for  supplying  me  with  his  as  yet  unpublished  experimental 
clinical  material,  which  was  very  useful  to  me. 

Three  important  terms  have  been  suggested  to  me ;  namely,  ‘enviro- 
genetic’  by  Doctor  C.  B.  Bridges,  'actional*  by  Professor  P.  W.  Bridg¬ 
man,  and  ‘un-sane’  by  Doctor  P.  S.  Graven,  which  debt  I  gladly 
acknowledge. 

I  am  also  deeply  grateful  to  Professor  R.  D.  Carmichael  for  writ¬ 
ing  Supplement  I  for  this  book  on  the  Theory  of  Einstein,  and  to 
Doctor  P.  Weiss  for  his  kind  permission  to  reprint  as  Supplement  II 
his  article  on  the  Theory  of  Types. 

I  warmly  appreciate  the  kindness  of  those  authors  who  gave  me 
their  permission  to  utilize  their  works. 

During  my  twelve  years  of  research  work  in  the  present  subject 
and  preparation  of  this  volume  I  have  been  assisted  by  a  number  of 
persons,  to  whom  I  wish  to  express  my  appreciation.  My  particular 
appreciation  is  extended  to  my  secretary,  Miss  Lily  E.  MaDan  who, 
besides  her  regular  work,  made  the  drawings  for  the  book;  to  Miss 
Eunice  E.  Winters  for  her  genuine  assistance  in  reading  the  proofs 
and  compiling  the  bibliography;  and  to  Mr.  Harvey  W.  Culp  for  the 
difficult  reading  of  the  physico-mathematical  proofs  and  the  equally 
difficult  preparation  of  the  index. 

The  technical  efficiency  in  all  departments  of  the  Science  Press 
Printing  Company,  and  the  zealous  and  courteous  co-operation  of  its 
compositors  and  officials,  have  considerably  facilitated  the  publication 
of  this  book,  and  it  is  my  pleasant  duty  to  extend  my  thanks  to  them. 

My  heaviest  obligations  are  to  my  wife,  formerly  Mira  Edgerly. 
This  work  was  difficult,  very  laborious,  and  often  ungrateful,  which 
involved  the  renouncing  of  the  life  of  ‘normal’  human  beings,  and  we 
abandoned  much  which  is  supposed  to  make  ‘life  worth  living’.  With¬ 
out  her  whole-hearted  and  steady  support,  and  her  relentless  encourage¬ 
ment,  I  neither  would  have  formulated  the  present  system  nor  written 
the  book  which  embodies  it.  If  this  book  proves  of  any  value,  Mira 
Edgerly  is  in  fact  more  to  be  thanked  than  the  author.  Without  her 
interest,  no  non-aristotelian  system,  nor  theory  of  sanity  would  have 
been  produced  in  1933. 

New  York,  August,  1933. 

A.  K. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 

The  author  and  the  publishers  gratefully  acknowledge  the  following 
permissions  to  make  use  of  copyright  material  in  this  work : 

Messrs.  G.  Allen  and  Unwin,  London,  for  permission  to  quote  from 
the  works  of  Bertrand  Russell. 

The  publishers  of  the  Archives  of  Neurology  and  Psychiatry,  for 
permission  to  quote  from  a  paper  by  W.  A.  White. 

Messrs.  Blackie  and  Son,  London  and  Glasgow,  for  permission  to 
quote  from  the  works  of  E.  Schrodinger. 

Messrs.  Gebriider  Borntraeger,  Berlin,  for  permission  to  utilize 
material  from  the  work  of  L.  V.  Heilbrunn. 

The  Cambridge  University  Press,  Cambridge,  England,  for  per¬ 
mission  to  quote  from  the  works  of  G.  Birtwistle,  A.  S.  Eddington, 
A.  N.  Whitehead,  A.  N.  Whitehead  and  Bertrand  Russell. 

The  Chemical  Catalog  Company,  New  York,  for  permission  to 
quote  from  Colloid  Chemistry >  edited  by  J.  Alexander. 

Messrs.  J.  and  A.  Churchill,  London,  for  permission  to  quote  from 
the  work  of  E.  H.  Starling. 

Messrs.  Constable  and  Company,  London,  for  permission  to  utilize 
material  from  the  works  of  A.  Haas. 

Messrs.  Doubleday,  Doran  and  Company,  Garden  City  and  New 
York,  for  permission  to  quote  from  the  work  of  J.  Collins. 

Messrs.  E.  P.  Dutton  and  Company,  New  York,  for  permission  to 
quote  from  the  works  of  C.  J.  Keyser. 

The  Franklin  Institute,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  for  permission  to  quote 
from  the  paper  of  G.  Y.  Rainich  printed  in  the  Journal  of  the  Franklin 
Institute. 

Messrs.  Harcourt,  Brace  and  Company,  New  York,  for  permission 
to  quote  from  the  work  of  W.  M.  Wheeler. 

Messrs.  Henry  Holt  and  Company,  New  York,  for  permission  to 
quote  from  the  works  of  C.  M.  Child,  A.  Einstein,  and  C.  J.  Herrick. 

Messrs.  Kegan  Paul,  Trench,  Trubner  and  Company,  London,  and 
Messrs.  Harcourt,  Brace  and  Company,  New  York,  for  permission  to 
quote  from  the  works  of  C.  K.  Ogden  and  I.  A.  Richards,  H.  Pieron, 
and  Bertrand  Russell. 

Messrs.  Macmillan  and  Company,  London  and  New  York,  for 
permission  to  quote  from  the  works  of  L.  Couturat,  W.  S,  Jevons,  J. 
Royce,  and  S.  P.  Thompson. 

The  Macmillan  Company,  New  York  and  London,  for  permission 
to  quote  from  the  works  of  E.  Bleuler,  M.  Bocher,  P.  W.  Bridgman, 
A.  S.  Eddington,  E.  V.  McCollum,  W.  F.  Osgood,  and  A.  N.  White- 
head. 

Messrs.  Methuen  and  Company,  London,  and  Messrs.  Dodd,  Mead 
and  Company,  New  York,  for  permission  to  quote  from  the  works  of 
A.  Einstein,  H.  Minkowski,  and  H,  Weyl. 

ci 

cii  PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION 

Messrs.  Methuen  and  Company,  London,  and  Messrs.  E.  P.  Dutton 
and  Company,  New  York,  for  permission  to  quote  from  the  works  of 
M.  Born,  A.  Haas,  A.  Sommerfeld,  and  H.  Weyl. 

The  publishers  of  ‘Mind’,  Cambridge,  England,  for  permission  to 
reprint  the  article  of  P.  Weiss. 

Sir  John  Murray,  London,  and  Messrs.  P.  Blakiston’s  Son  and 
Company,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  for  permission  to  quote  from  the  work  of 
W.  D.  Halliburton. 

The  Nervous  and  Mental  Disease  Publishing  Company,  Washing¬ 
ton,  D.  C.,  for  permission  to  quote  from  the  works  of  S.  E.  Jelliffe  and 
W.  A.  White. 

Messrs.  W.  W.  Norton  and  Company,  New  York,  for  permission 
to  quote  from  the  works  of  H.  S.  Jennings. 

The  Open  Court  Publishing  Company,  Chicago,  Ill.,  for  permission 
to  quote  from  the  works  of  R.  Bonola,  R.  D.  Carmichael,  Bertrand 
Russell  and  J.  B.  Shaw. 

The  Oxford  University  Press,  London  and  New  York,  for  a  ten 
dollar  permission  to  quote  from  the  works  of  I.  P.  Pavlov  and  H.  F. 
Biggs. 

The  publishers  of  Physical  Review,  New  York,  for  permission  to 
quote  from  the  paper  of  C.  Eckart. 

The  Princeton  University  Press,  Princeton,  New  Jersey,  for  per¬ 
mission  to  quote  from  the  work  of  A.  Einstein. 

Messrs.  G.  P.  Putnam's  Sons,  New  York  and  London,  for  permis¬ 
sion  to  utilize  the  works  of  J.  Loeb. 

The  W.  B.  Saunders  Company,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  for  permission 
to  quote  from  the  works  of  W.  T.  Bovie,  A.  Church  and  F.  Peterson, 
and  C.  J.  Herrick. 

The  Science  Press,  New  York  and  Lancaster,  Pa.,  for  permission 
to  quote  from  the  work  of  H.  Poincare. 

Messrs.  Charles  Scribner's  Sons,  New  York,  for  permission  to 
quote  from  the  works  of  G.  Santayana. 

The  University  of  California  Press,  Berkeley,  Calif.,  for  permission 
to  quote  from  the  work  of  C.  I.  Lewis. 

The  University  of  Chicago  Press,  Chicago,  Ill.,  for  permission  to 
quote  from  the  works  of  W.  Heisenberg,  C.  J.  Herrick,  R.  S.  Lillie, 
and  J.  Loeb. 

The  publishers  of  the  University  of  Washington  Chapbooks,  Seat¬ 
tle,  Wash.,  for  permission  to  quote  from  the  work  of  E.  T.  Bell. 

The  Williams  and  Wilkins  Company,  Baltimore,  Md.,  for  permis¬ 
sion  to  quote  from  the  work  of  E.  T.  Bell. 

In  several  instances  I  have  quoted  a  few  lines  from  other  publi¬ 
cations,  without  asking  special  permission.  I  now  wish  to  express  my 
gratitude  to  these  respective  publishers. 

In  all  instances  the  sources,  from  which  the  quotations  and  the 
material  used  were  taken,  are  explicitly  indicated  in  the  text  of  the 
book. 

BOOK  I 

A  General  Survey  of 
Non-Aristotelian  Factors 

Allow  me  to  express  now,  once  and  for  all,  my  deep  respect  for  the  work 
of  the  experimenter  and  for  his  fight  to  wring  significant  facts  from  an  in¬ 
flexible  Nature,  who  says  so  distinctly  "No”  and  so  indistinctly  "Yes”  to 
our  theories.  (5  so  Hermann  weyl 

The  firm  determination  to  submit  to  experiment  is  not  enough;  there  are 
still  dangerous  hypotheses;  first,  and  above  all,  those  which  are  tacit  and 
unconscious.  Since  we  make  them  without  knowing  it,  we  are  powerless  to 
abandon  them.  <4i7>  H*  poincare 

The  empiricist .  .  .  thinks  he  believes  only  what  he  sees,  but  he  is  much 
better  at  believing  than  at  seeing.  (46D  g.  santayana 

For  a  Latin,  truth  can  be  expressed  only  by  equations;  it  must  obey  laws 
simple,  logical,  symmetric  and  fitted  to  satisfy  minds  in  love  with  mathe¬ 
matical  elegance.  ,  , 

The  Anglo-Saxon  to  depict  a  phenomenon  will  first  be  engrossed  in  mak¬ 
ing  a  model ,  and  he  will  make  it  with  common  materials,  such  as  our  crude, 
unaided  senses  show  us  them.  ...  He  concludes  from  the  body  to  the  atom. 

Both  therefore  make  hypotheses,  and  this  indeed  is  necessary,  since  no 
scientist  has  ever  been  able  to  get  on  without  them.  The  essential  thing  is 
never  to  make  them  unconsciously.  (417)  h.  poincar6 

If  a  distinction  is  to  be  made  between  men  and  monkeys,  it  is  largely 
measurable  by  the  quantity  of  the  subconscious  which  a  higher  order  of 
being  makes  conscious.  That  man  really  lives  who  brings  the  greatest 
fraction  of  his  daily  experience  into  the  realm  of  the  conscious.* 

MARTIN  H.  FISCHER 

The  thought  of  the  painter,  the  musician,  the  geometrician,  the  trades¬ 
man,  and  the  philosopher  may  take  very  different  forms;  still  more  so  the 
thought  of  the  uncultivated  man,  which  remains  rudimentary  and  revolves 
for  ever  in  the  same  circles.  (4ii>  henri  pi£ron 

One  need  only  open  the  eyes  to  see  that  the  conquests  of  industry  which 
have  enriched  so  many  practical  men  would  never  have  seen  the  light,  if 
these  practical  men  alone  had  existed  and  if  they  had  not  been  preceded  by 
unselfish  devotees  who  died  poor,  who  never  thought  of  utility,  and  yet 
had  a  guide  far  other  than  caprice.  (417)  h.  poincare 

*  Soinal  Cord  Education.  III.  Med .  Jour.  Dec.,  1928. 

NON-ARISTOTELIAN  FACTORS 

The  men  most  disdainful  of  theory  get  from  it,  without  suspecting  it, 
their  daily  bread;  deprived  of  this  food,  progress  would  quickly  cease,  and 
we  should  soon  congeal  into  the  immobility  of  old  China.  (417)  h.  poincar£ 

If  one  wishes  to  obtain  a  definite  answer  from  Nature  one  must  attack 
the  question  from  a  more  general  and  less  selfish  point  of  view.  (415) 

M. PLANCK 

In  particular — if  we  use  the  word  intelligence  as  a  synonym  for  mental 
activity,  as  is  often  done — we  must  differentiate  between  the  primitive  forms 
of  sensory  intelligence,  with  their  ill-developed  symbolism  beyond  which 
backward  children  cannot  advance,  .  .  .  and  the  forms  of  verbal  intelligence 
created  by  social  education,  abstract  and  conceptual  forms.  (411) 

HENRI  PI&RON 

A  civilisation  which  cannot  burst  through  its  current  abstractions  is 
doomed  to  sterility  after  a  very  limited  period  of  progress,  (575) 

A.  N.  WHITEHEAD 

.  .  .  almost  any  idea  which  jogs  you  out  of  your  current  abstractions 
may  be  better  than  nothing.  (575)  a.  n.  whitehead 

That  is  precisely  what  common  sense  is  for,  to  be  jarred  into  uncommon 
sense.  One  of  the  chief  services  which  mathematics  has  rendered  the  human 
race  in  the  past  century  is  to  put  ‘common  sense’  where  it  belongs,  on  the 
topmost  shelf  next  to  the  dusty  canister  labeled  ‘discarded  nonsense.’  (23) 

E.  T.  BELL 

If  you  have  had  your  attention  directed  to  the  novelties  in  thought  in 
your  own  lifetime,  you  will  have  observed  that  almost  all  really  new  ideas 
have  a  certain  aspect  of  foolishness  when  they  are  first  produced.  (575) 

A.  N.  WHITEHEAD 

To  know  how  to  criticize  is  good,  to  know  how  to  create  is  better.  (417) 

H.  poincarG 

The  explanatory  crisis  which  now  confronts  us  in  relativity  and  quantum 
phenomena  is  but  a  repetition  of  what  has  occurred  many  times  in  the  past. 
. . .  Every  kitten  is  confronted  with  such  a  crisis  at  the  end  of  nine  days.  (55) 

P.  W.  BRIDGMAN 

The  concept  does  not  exist  for  the  physicist  until  he  has  the  possibility 

of  discovering  whether  or  not  it  is  fulfilled  in  an  actual  case _ As  long  as 

this  requirement  is  not  satisfied,  I  allow  myself  to  be  deceived  as  a  physicist 
(and  of  course  the  same  applies  if  I  am  not  a  physicist),  when  I  imagine 
that  I  am  able  to  attach  a  meaning  to  the  statement  of  simultaneity.  (I 
would  ask  the  reader  not  to  proceed  farther  until  he  is  fully  convinced  on 
this  point.)  (150)  A.  EINSTEIN 

Einstein,  in  thus  analyzing  what  is  involved  in  making  a  judgment  of 
simultaneity,  and  in  seizing  on  the  act  of  the  observer  as  the  essence  of  the 
situation,  is  actually  adopting  a  new  point  of  view  as  to  what  the  concepts 
of  physics  should  be,  namely,  the  operational  view  ...  if  we  had  adopted  the 
operational  point  of  view,  we  would,  before  the  discovery  of  the  actual 
physical  facts,  have  seen  that  simultaneity  is  essentially  a  relative  concept, 
and  would  have  left  room  in  our  thinking  for  the  discovery  of  such  effects 
as  were  later  found.  (55)  p,  w.  bridgman 

NON  ARISTOTELIAN  FACTORS 

Let  any  one  examine  in  operational  terms  any  popular  present-da  v  dis¬ 
cussion  of  religious  or  moral  questions  to  realize  the  magnitude  of  the  re¬ 
formation  awaiting  us.  Wherever  we  temporize  or  compromise  in  applying 
our  theories  of  conduct  to  practical  life  we  may  suspect  a  failure  of  opera¬ 
tional  thinking.  (55)  p*  w*  bridgman 

I  believe  that  many  of  the  questions  asked  about  social  and  philosophical 
subjects  will  be  found  to  be  meaningless  when  examined  from  the  point  of 
view  of  operations.  It  would  doubtless  conduce  greatly  to  clarity  of  thought 
if  the  operational  mode  of  thinking  were  adopted  in  all  fields  of  inquiry  as 
well  as  in  the  physical.  Just  as  in  the  physical  domain,  so  in  other  domains, 
one  is  making  a  significant  statement  about  his  subject  in  stating  that  a 
certain  question  is  meaningless.  (55)  P.  w.  bridgman 

There  is  a  sharp  disagreement  among  competent  men  as  to  what  can  be 
proved  and  what  cannot  be  proved,  as  well  as  an  irreconcilable  divergence 
of  opinion  as  to  what  is  sense  and  what  is  nonsense.  (22)  e.  t.  bell 

Notice  the  word  “nonsense”  above.  It  was  their  inability,  among  other 
things,  to  define  this  word  .  .  .  that  brought  to  grief  the  heroic  attempt  of 
Russell  and  Whitehead  to  put  mathematical  reasoning  on  a  firm. basis.  (22) 

E.  T.  BELL 

The  structure  of  all  linguistic  material  is  inextricably  mixed  up  with,  and 
dependent  upon,  the  course  of  the  activity  in  which  the  utterances  are 
embedded.  (332)  b.  malinowski 

To  sum  up,  we  can  say  that  the  fundamental  grammatical  categories, 
universal  to  all  human  languages,  can  be  understood  only  with  reference 
to  the  pragmatic  Weltanshauung  of  primitive  man,  and  that,  through  the 
use  of  Language,  the  barbarous  primitive  categories  must  have  deeply  in¬ 
fluenced  the  later  philosophies  of  mankind.  (332)  b.  malinowski 

Since  no  two  events  are  identical,  every  atom,  molecule,  organism,  per¬ 
sonality,  and  society  is  an  emergent  and,  at  least  to  some  extent,  a  novelty. 
And  these  emergents  are  concatenated  in  such  a  way  as  to  form  vast  rami¬ 
fying  systems,  only  certain  ideal  sections  of  which  seem  to  have  elicited  the 
attention  of  philosophers,  owing  to  their  avowedly  anthropocentric  and 
anthropodoxic  interests.  (555)  william  morton  wheeler 

The  words  is  and  is  not,  which  imply  the  agreement  or  disagreement  of 
two  ideas,  must  exist,  explicitly  or  implicitly,  in  every  assertion.  (354) 

AUGUSTUS  DE  MORGAN 

The  little  word  is  has  its  tragedies;  it  marries  and  identifies  different 
things  with  the  greatest  innocence;  and  yet  no  two  are  ever  identical,  and 
if  therein  lies  the  charm  of  wedding  them  and  calling  them  one,  therein  too 
lies  the  danger.  Whenever  I  use  the  word  is,  except  in  sheer  tautology,  I 
deeply  misuse  it;  and  when  I  discover  my  error,  the  world  seems  to  fall 
asunder  and  the  members  of  my  family  no  longer  know  one  another.  (461) 

G. SANTAYANA 

The  complete  attempt  to  deal  with  the  term  is  would  go  to  the  form  and 
matter  of  every  thing  in  existence,  at  least,  if  not  to  the  possible  form  and 
matter  of  all  that  does  not  exist,  but  might.  As  far  as  it  could  be  done,  it 
would  give  the  grand  Cyclopaedia,  and  its  yearly  supplement  would  be  the 
history  of  the  human  race  for  the  time.  (354)  Augustus  de  Morgan 

Consciousness  is  the  feeling  of  negation:  in  the  perception  of  ‘the  stone 
as  grey,’  such  feeling  is  in  barest  germ;  in  the  perception  of  ‘the  stone  as 
not  grey,'  such  feeling  is  full  development.  Thus  the  negative  perception 
is  the  triumph  of  consciousness.  (578)  A.  N.  whitehead 

NON  AK ISTOTKLI AN  FACTORS 

But,  if  we  designate  as  intelligence,  quantitatively,  the  totality  of  mental 
functioning,  it  is  evident  that  the  suppression  of  verbal  thought  involves 
a  defect,  relatively  very  important  among  cultivated  individuals  leading  a 
complex  social  life:  the  uneducated  person  from  this  point  of  view  is  a  de¬ 
fective.  (411)  HENRI  PlfeRON 

The  philosophy  of  the  common  man  is  an  old  wife  that  gives  him  no 
pleasure,  yet  he  cannot  live  without  her,  and  resents  any  aspersions  that 
strangers  may  cast  on  her  character.  (46i)  G.  Santayana 

It  is  terrible  to  see  how  a  single  unclear  idea,  a  single  formula  without 
meaning,  lurking  in  a  young  man’s  head,  will  sometimes  act  like  an  ob¬ 
struction  of  inert  matter  in  an  artery,  hindering  the  nutrition  of  the  brain, 
and  condemning  its  victim  to  pine  away  in  the  fullness  of  his  intellectual 
vigor  and  in  the  midst  of  intellectual  plenty.  (402)  Charles  s.  peirce 

PART  I 

PRELIMINARIES 

Corpus  Errorum  Biohgicorum 

But  exactly  the  distinctive  work  of  science  is  the  modification,  the  recon¬ 
struction,  the  abandonment  of  old  ideas;  the  construction  of  new  ones  on 
the  basis  of  observation.  This  however  is  a  distressing  operation,  and 
many  refuse  to  undergo  it ;  even  many  whose  work  is  the  practice  of  scientific 
investigation.  The  old  ideas  persist  along  with  the  new  observations;  they 
form  the  basis— often  unconsciously— for  many  of  the  conclusions  that  are 
drawn. 

This  is  what  has  occurred  in  the  study  of  heredity.  A  burden  of  concepts 
and  definitions  has  come  down  from  pre-experimental  days;  the  pouring 
of  the  new  wine  of  experimental  knowledge  into  these  has  resulted  in  con¬ 
fusion.  And  this  confusion  is  worse  confounded  by  the  strange  and  strong 
propensity  of  workers  in  heredity  to  flout  and  deny  and  despise  the  ob¬ 
servations  of  the  workers  in  environmental  action;  the  equally  strange  and 
strong  propensity  of  students  of  environmental  effects  to  flout  and  deny  and 
despise  the  work  on  inheritance.  If  one  accepts  the  affirmative  results  of 
both  sets,  untroubled  by  their  negations,  untroubled  by  definitions  that 
have  come  from  the  past,  there  results  a  simple,  consistent  and  useful  body 
of  knowledge;  though  with  less  pretentious  claims  than  are  set  forth  by 
either  single  set. 

Our  first  fallacy  springs  from  the  situation  just  described.  It  is: 

I.  The  fallacy  of  non-experimental  judgments,  in  matters  of  heredity 
and  development.  .  .  . 

Our  second  general  fallacy  is  one  that  appears  in  the  interpretation  of 
observational  and  experimental  results;  it  underlies  most  of  the  special 
fallacies  seen  in  genetic  biology.  This  is  the  fallacy  that  Morley  in  his  life 
of  Gladstone  asserts  to  be  the  greatest  affliction  of  politicians;  it  is  indeed 
a  common  plague  of  humanity.  It  is: 

II.  The  fallacy  of  attributing  to  one  cause  what  is  due  to  many  causes. 

III.  The  fallacy  of  concluding  that  because  one  factor  plays  a  role, 
another  does  not;  the  fallacy  of  drawing  negative  conclusions  from  positive 
observations.  ... 

IV.  The  fallacy  that  the  characteristics  of  organisms  are  divisible  into 
two  distinct  classes;  one  due  to  heredity,  the  other  to  environment.  .  .  . 

VII.  The  fallacy  of  basing  conclusions  on  implied  premises  that  when 
explicitly  stated  are  rejected.  ... 

Many  premises  influencing  reasoning  are  of  this  hidden,  unconscious 
type.  Such  ghostly  premises  largely  affect  biological  reasoning  on  the  topics 
here  dealt  with;  they  underlie  several  of  the  fallacies  already  stated,  and 
several  to  come.  .  .  . 

VIII.  The  fallacy  that  showing  a  characteristic  to  be  hereditary  proves 
that  it  is  not  alterable  by  the  environment.  .  .  , 

\}\<  KIJ  Ml  N  AR1KS 

IX.  The  fallacy  that  showing  a  characteristic  to  be  altered  by  the  en¬ 
vironment  proves  that  it  is  not  hereditary.  .  .  . 

It  appears  indeed  probable,  from  the  present  state  of  knowledge  and  the 
trend  of  discovery,  that  the  following  sweeping  statements  will  ultimately 
turn  out  to  be  justified: — 

(1)  All  characteristics  of  organisms  may  be  altered  by  changing  the 
genes;  provided  we  can  learn  how  to  change  the  proper  genes. 

( 2)  .  All  characteristics  may  be  altered  by  changing  the  environmental 
conditions  under  which  the  organism  develops;  provided  that  we  learn 
what  conditions  to  change  and  how  to  change  them. 

.  (3)  Any  kind  of  change  of  characteristics  that  can  be  induced  by  alter- 
ihg  genes,  can  likewise  be  induced  (if  we  know  how)  by  altering  conditions. 
(This  statement  is  open  to  more  doubt  than  the  other  two;  but  it  is  likely 
eventually  to  be  found  correct.)  .  .  . 

x*  T1?e  fallacy  that  since  all  human  characteristics  are  hereditary, 
heredity  is  all-important  in  human  affairs,  environment  therefore  unim¬ 
portant.  .  .  . 

XI*  The  fallacy  that  since  all  important  human  characteristics  are 
environmental,  therefore  environment  is  all-important,  heredity  unim¬ 
portant,  in  human  affairs.  (247)  H.  s.  tbnnings 

CHAPTER  I 

AIMS,  MEANS  AND  CONSEQUENCES  OF  A 
NON-ARISTOTELIAN  REVISION 

The  process  of  intellectualism  is  not  the  subject  I  wish  to  treat:  I  wish 
to  speak  of  science,  and  about  it  there  is  no  doubt;  by  definition,  so  to 
speak,  it  will  be  intellectualistic  or  it  will  not  be  at  all.  Precisely  the  ques¬ 
tion  is,  whether  it  will  be.  (417)  h.  poincar£ 

The  aim  of  science  is  to  seek  the  simplest  explanations  of  complex  facts. 

. .  .  Seek  simplicity  and  distrust  it.  (573)  a.  n.  whitehead 

The  present  enquiry  originated  in  my  attempt  to  build  a  science  of 
man.  The  first  task  was  to  define  man  scientifically  in  non-elementalistic, 
functional  terms.  I  accomplished  that  in  my  book  Manhood  of  Human¬ 
ity  (New  York,  E.  P.  Dutton  &  Co.),  and  in  it  I  called  the  special 
characteristic  which  sharply  distinguishes  man  from  animal  the  time¬ 
binding  characteristic. 

In  the  present  volume  I  undertake  the  investigation  of  the  mechan¬ 
ism  of  time-binding.  The  results  are  quite  unexpected.  We  discover 
that  there  is  a  sharp  difference  between  the  nervous  reactions  of  animal 
and  man,  and  that  judging  by  this  criterion,  nearly  all  of  us,  even  now, 
copy*  animals  in  our  nervous  responses,  which  copying  leads  to  the 
general  state  of  un-sanity  reflected  in  our  private  and  public  lives,  insti¬ 
tutions  and  systems.  By  this  discovery  the  whole  situation  is  radically 
changed.  If  we  copy  animals  in  our  nervous  responses  through  the  lack 
of  knowledge  of  what  the  appropriate  responses  of  the  human  nervous 
system  should  be,  we  can  stop  doing  so,  both  individually  and  collectively, 
and  we  are  thus  led  to  the  formulation  of  a  first  positive  theory  of  sanity. 

The  old  dictum  that  we  ‘are*  animals  leaves  us  hopeless,  but  if  we 
merely  copy  animals  in  our  nervous  responses,  we  can  stop  it,  and  the 
hopeless  becomes  very  hopeful,  provided  we  can  discover  a  physiological 
difference  in  these  reactions.  Thus  we  are  provided  with  a  definite  and 
promising  program  for  an  investigation. 

Such  an  investigation  is  undertaken  in  the  present  volume. 

The  result  of  this  enquiry  turned  out  to  be  a  non-aristotelian  sys¬ 
tem,  the  first  to  be  formulated,  as  far  as  I  know,  and  the  first  to  express 
the  very  scientific  tendency  of  our  epoch,  which  produced  the  non- 
euclidean  and  non-newtonian  (Einstein's  and  the  newer  quantum  theories) 
systems.  It  seems  that  these  three,  the  non-aristotelian,  non-euclidean 
and  non-newtonian  systems  are  as  much  interwoven  and  interdependent 

♦The  use  of  the  term  ‘copy’  is  explained  in  Chapter  II. 

J.  PKKL1 M  IN  ARIES 

as  were  the  corresponding  older  systems.  The  aristotelian  and  the  non- 
aristotelian  systems  are  the  more  general,  the  others  being  only  special 
and  technical  consequences  arising  from  them. 

Both  the  aristotelian  and  the  non-aristotelian  systems  affect  our 
lives  deeply,  because  of  psycho-logical  factors  and  the  immediacy  of  their 
application.  Each  is  the  expression  of  the  psycho-logical  tendencies  of 
its  period.  Each  in  its  period  must  produce  in  the  younger  generations 
a  psycho-logical  background  which  makes  the  understanding  of  its  ap¬ 
propriate  disciplines  ‘natural*  and  simple.  In  an  aristotelian  human 
world  the  euclidean  and  newtonian  systems  are  ‘natural*,  while  the  youth 
educated  in  the  non-aristotelian  habits  will  find  the  non-euclidean  and 
non-newtonian  systems  simpler,  more  ‘natural*,  and  the  older  systems 
‘unthinkable*. 

The  functioning  of  the  human  nervous  system  is  a  more  generalized 
affair  than  that  of  the  animal,  with  more  possibilities.  The  latter  is  a 
special  case  of  the  former,  but  not  vice  versa.  John  Smith,  through 
ignorance  of  the  mechanism,  may  use  his  nervous  system  as  a  Fido ;  but 
Fido  cannot  copy  Smith.  Hence,  the  danger  for  Smith,  but  not  for  Fido. 
Fido  has  many  of  his  own  difficulties  for  survival,  but,  at  least,  he  has 
no  self-imposed  conditions,  mostly  silly  and  harmful,  such  as  Smith  has 
ignorantly  imposed  on  himself  and  others.  The  field  covered  by  this 
enquiry  is  very  wide  and  involves  unexpectedly  special  suggestive  con¬ 
tributions  in  diverse  branches  of  science.  To  list  a  few  for  orientation : 

1.  The  formulation  of  General  Semantics,  resulting  from  a  General 
Theory  of  Time-binding,  supplies  the  scientists  and  the  laymen  with  a 
general  modern  method  of  orientation,  which  eliminates  the  older  psycho¬ 
logical  blockages  and  reveals  the  mechanisms  of  adjustment ; 

2.  The  departure  from  aristotelianism  will  allow  biologists,  physiol¬ 
ogists,  etc.,  and  particularly  medical  men  to  ‘think*  in  modern  colloidal 
and  quantum  terms,  instead  of  the  inadequate,  antiquated  chemical  and 
physiological  terms.  Medicine  may  then  become  a  science  in  the  1933 
sense ; 

3.  In  psychiatry  it  indicates  on  colloidal  grounds  the  solution  of  the 
‘body-mind*  problem ; 

4.  It  shows  clearly  that  desirable  human  characteristics  have  a 
definite  psycho  physiological  mechanism  which,  up  till  now,  has  been  mis¬ 
used,  to  the  detriment  of  all  of  us ; 

5.  It  gives  the  first  definition  of  ‘consciousness*  in  simpler  physico¬ 
chemical  terms ; 

6.  A  general  theory  of  sanity  leads  to  a  general  theory  of  psycho¬ 
therapy,  including  all  such  existing  medical  schools,  as  they  all  deal  with 

AIMS,  MEANS  AND  CONSEQUENCES 

disturbances  of  the  semantic  reactions  (psycho-logical  responses  to  words 
and  other  stimuli  in  connection  with  their  meanings)  ; 

7.  It  formulates  a  physiological  foundation  for  ‘mental’  hygiene, 
which  turns  out  to  be  a  most  general  preventive  psychophysiological  ex¬ 
perimental  method; 

8.  It  shows  the  psychophysiological  foundation  of  the  childhood  of 
humanity  as  indicated  by  the  infantilism  in  our  present  private,  public, 
and  international  lives ; 

9.  In  biology  it  gives  a  semantic  and  structural  solution  of  the 
‘organism-as-a-whole*  problem ; 

10.  In  physiology  and  neurology  it  reformulates  to  human  levels  the 
Pavlov  theory  of  conditional  reflexes,  suggesting  a  new  scientific  field 
of  psychophysiology  for  experiments ; 

11.  In  epistemology  and  semantics  it  establishes  a  definite  non- 
elemen tali stic  theory  of  meanings  based  not  only  on  definitions  but  also 
on  undefined  terms ; 

12.  It  introduces  a  new  development  and  use  of  ‘structure’ ; 

13.  It  establishes  structure  as  the  only  possible  content  of 
knowledge ; 

14.  It  discovers  the  multiordinality  of  the  most  important  terms 
we  have,  thus  removing  the  psycho-logical  blockage  of  semantic  origin 
and  helping  the  average  man  or  scientist  to  become  a  ‘genius’,  etc. ; 

15.  It  formulates  a  new  and  physiological  theory  of  mathematical 
types  of  extreme  simplicity  and  very  wide  application ; 

16.  It  offers  a  non-aristotelian  solution  of  the  problem  of  mathe¬ 
matical  ‘infinity’ ; 

17.  It  offers  a  new  non-aristotelian,  semantic  (from  Greek,  to  sig¬ 
nify)  definition  of  mathematics  and  number,  which  clarifies  the  mysteries 
about  the  seemingly  uncanny  importance  of  number  and  measurement 
and  throws  a  new  light  on  the  role,  structural  significance,  meaning,  and 
methods  of  mathematics  and  its  teaching; 

18.  In  physics,  the  enquiry  explains  some  fundamental,  but  as  yet 
disregarded,  semantic  aspects  of  physics  in  general,  and  of  Einstein’s 
and  the  new  quantum  theories  in  particular ; 

19.  It  resolves  simply  the  problem  of  ‘indeterminism’  of  the  newer 
quantum  mechanics,  etc. 

I  realize  that  the  thoughtful  reader  may  be  staggered  by  such  a 
partial  list.  I  am  in  full  sympathy  with  him  in  this.  I  also  was  staggered. 

As  this  enquiry  claims  to  be  scientific,  in  the  1933  sense,  I  must 
explain  how,  in  spite  of  great  difficulties  and  handicaps,  I  was  able  to 
accomplish  the  work.  As  my  work  progressed,  it  turned  out  to  be 

I.  PRELIMINARIES 

‘speaking  about  speaking'.  Now  all  scientific  works  in  all  fields  are 
written  or  spoken,  and  so  are  ultimately  verbal.  In  order  to  speak  about 
speaking,  in  any  satisfactory  and  fundamental  1933  sense,  I  had  to 
become  acquainted  with  the  special  languages  used  by  scientists  in  all 
fields.  I  did  not  realize  beforehand  what  a  very  serious  undertaking  this 
was.  It  took  many  years  and  much  hard  labour  to  accomplish  it,  but,  once 
accomplished,  the  rest  was  simple.  Scientists  do  not  differ  from  the 
rest  of  us.  They  usually  disregard  entirely  structural,  linguistic,  and 
semantic  issues,  simply  because  no  one  has,  as  yet,  formulated  these 
problems  or  shown  their  importance.  The  structural  revision  of  their 
language  led  automatically  to  new  results  and  new  suggestions,  and 
hence  the  surprising  list. 

The  present  enquiry  is  limited  and  partial,  but  because  it  deals  with 
linguistic  and  semantic  issues  and  their  physiological  and  psycho-logical 
aspects,  it  is,  as  far  as  it  goes,  unusually  general .  I  found  that,  in 
writing,  it  is  extremely  difficult  and  impracticable  always  to  state  ex¬ 
plicitly  the  limitations  of  a  statement.  It  seems  most  practical  to  say 
here  that,  in  general,  all  statements  here  made  are  limited  by  further 
considerations  of  the  actualities  of  an  analysed  problem. 

Thus,  for  instance,  a  ‘theory  of  sanity'  deals  with  the  most  im¬ 
portant  semantic  issues  from  limited  semantic  aspects,  and  has  nothing 
to  do  with  forms  of  ‘insanity'  arising  from  different  organic,  or  toxic, 
or  other  disturbances,  which  remain  as  serious  as  ever.  The  statements 
made  cover  just  as  much  as  further  investigations  will  allow  them  to 
cover — and  no  more. 

The  reader  should  be  warned  against  undue  generalizations,  as  they 
may  be  unjustified.  It  is  impossible,  at  this  stage,  to  foresee  all  the  rami¬ 
fications  of  the  present  work.  The  verbal  issues,  which  correspond 
roughly  to  the  older  ‘mental'  issues,  seem  to  pervade  all  human  problems 
to  some  extent,  and  so  the  field  of  application  and  influence  of  any  such 
enquiry  must  be  very  large.  Most  of  the  results  of  the  present  work 
involve  factors  of  unusual  security  of  conclusion,  though  they  may  vio¬ 
late  canons  of  our  ‘philosophical'  creeds. 

The  explanation  is  astonishingly  simple  and  easily  verified.  The 
present  non-aristotelian  system  is  based  on  fundamental  negative  prem¬ 
ises;  namely,  the  complete  denial  of  ‘identity',  which  denial  cannot  be 
denied  without  imposing  the  burden  of  impossible  proof  on  the  person 
who  denies  the  denial.  If  we  start,  for  instance,  with  a  statement 
that  ‘a  word  is  not  the  object  spoken  about',  and  some  one  tries  to  deny 
that,  he  would  have  to  produce  an  actual  physical  object  which  would 
be  the  word , — impossible  of  performance,  even  in  asylums  for  the  ‘men- 

AIMS,  M  ft  A  N  S  AND  CONSKyUKNCKS 

tally*  ill.  Hence  my  security,  often  ‘blasphemously  cheerful*,  as  one  of 
my  friends  calls  it. 

This  general  denial  of  the  ‘is*  of  identity  gives  the  main  funda¬ 
mental  non-aristotelian  premise,  which  necessitates  a  structural  treat¬ 
ment.  The  status  of  negative  premises  is  much  more  important  and 
secure  to  start  with  than  that  of  the  positive  ‘is*  of  identity,  found  in  the 
aristotelian  system,  but  easily  shown  to  be  false  to  fact,  and  involving 
important  delusional  factors. 

Any  map  or  language,  to  be  of  maximum  usefulness,  should,  in 
structure,  be  similar  to  the  structure  of  the  empirical  world.  Likewise, 
from  the  point  of  view  of  a  theory  of  sanity,  any  system  or  language 
should,  in  structure,  be  similar  to  the  structure  of  our  nervous  system. 
It  is  easily  shown  that  the  aristotelian  system  differs  structurally  from 
these  minimal  requirements,  and  that  the  non-aristotelian  system  is  in 
accordance  with  them. 

This  fact  turns  out  to  be  of  psychophysiological  importance.  The 
above  considerations,  and  others  impossible  to  mention  in  this  chapter, 
have  suggested  to  me  the  form  and  structure  of  the  whole  work.  I  have 
spared  no  effort  to  make  the  presentation  as  connected,  simple,  and, 
particularly,  as  workable  as  I  could.  As  I  deal  with  structure,  and  simi¬ 
larity  of  structure,  of  languages  and  the  empirical  world,  a  definite  selec¬ 
tion  of  topics  is  immediately  suggested.  I  must  give  enough  structural 
data  about  languages  in  general,  and  enough  structural  data  about  the 
empirical  world,  and  then  select,  or,  if  necessary,  build,  my  terminology 
and  system  of  similar  structure. 

The  reader  should  not  be  afraid  if  some  parts  of  the  book  look 
technical  and  mathematical.  In  reality,  they  are  not  so.  Speaking  of  the 
language  called  mathematics,  from  a  structural  point  of  view,  I  have  had 
to  illustrate  what  was  said,  and  the  few  symbols  or  diagrams  are  used 
only  for  that  purpose.  Many  of  the  structural  points  are  of  genuine 
importance  and  interest  to  professional  scientists,  teachers,  and  others, 
who  seldom,  if  ever,  deal  with  such  structural,  linguistic,  and  semantic 
problems  as  are  here  analysed.  The  layman  who  will  read  the  book 
diligently  and  repeatedly,  without  skipping  any  part  of  it,  will  get  at 
least  a  feeling  or  vague  notion  that  such  problems  do  exist ,  which  will 
produce  a  very  important  psycho-logical  effect  or  release  from  the  old 
animalistic  unconditionality  of  responses,  whether  or  not  he  feels  that 
he  has  ‘understood*  them  fully. 

My  earnest  suggestion,  backed  by  experience,  to  the  reader  is  to 
read  the  book  through  several  times,  but  not  to  dwell  on  points  which 
are  not  clear  to  him.  At  each  reading  the  issues  will  become  clearer. 

I.  PRELIMINARIES 

until  they  will  become  entirely  his  own.  Superficial  reading  of  the  book 
is  to  be  positively  discouraged,  as  it  will  prove  to  be  so  much  time  wasted. 
Experience  teaches  me  that  the  number  of  semantic  maladjustments, 
particularly  among  the  white-collar  class,  is  very  large.  At  present,  I 
do  not  know  any  case  where  a  thorough  training  in  such  a  non-aristo- 
telian  semantic  discipline  would  not  give  very  serious  means  for  better 
adjustment.  It  will  quiet  down  affective,  semantic  disturbances,  sharpen 
orientation,  judgement,  the  power  of  observation,  and  so  forth;  it  will 
eliminate  different  psycho-logical  blockages,  help  to  overcome  the  very 
annoying  and  common  ‘inferiority’  feelings ;  it  will  assist  the  outgrow¬ 
ing  of  the  adult  infantile  state ,  which  is  a  nervous  deficiency  practically 
always  connected  with  some  pathological  sex-reactions  or  lack  of  normal 
and  healthy  impulses. 

After  all,  we  should  not  be  surprised  at  this.  Language,  as  such, 
represents  the  highest  and  latest  physiological  and  neurological  function 
of  an  organism.  It  is  unique  with  Smith  and  of  uniquely  human  cir¬ 
cular  structure,  to  use  a  logical  term — or  of  spiral  structure,  to  use  a 
four-dimensional  or  a  physico-chemical-aspect  term.  Before  we  can  use 
the  semantic  nervous  apparatus  properly,  we  must  first  know  how  to 
use  it,  and  so  formulate  this  use. 

In  these  processes  an  ‘effect’  becomes  a  causative  factor  for  future 
effects,  influencing  them  in  a  manner  particularly  subtle,  variable,  flex¬ 
ible,  and  of  an  endless  number  of  possibilities.  ‘Knowing’,  if  taken  as 
an  end-product,  must  be  considered  also  as  a  causative  psychophysio- 
logical  factor  of  the  next  stage  of  the  semantic  response.  The  disregard 
of  this  mechanism  is  potentially  of  serious  danger,  particularly  in  the 
rearing  of  children,  as  it  trains  them  in  unanalysed  linguistic  habits,  the 
more  so  since  the  human  nervous  system  is  not  complete  at  birth.  This 
structural  and  functional  circularity  introduces  real  difficulties  in  our 
analysis,  disregarded  or  neglected  in  the  aristotelian  system.  Human 
life,  in  its  difference  from  animal  life,  involves  many  more  factors  and 
is  inherently  of  different  and  more  complex  structure.  Before  we  can  be 
fully  human  and,  therefore,  ‘sane’,  as  a  ‘normal’  human  being  should  be, 
we  must  first  know  how  to  handle  our  nervous  responses — a  circular 
affair. 

A  non-aristotelian  system  must  not  disregard  this  human-natural  - 
history  structural  fact  of  the.  inherent  circularity  of  all  physiological 
functions  which  in  any  form  involve  human  ‘knowing’.  A  non-aristo¬ 
telian  system  differs  essentially  in  structure  from  its  predecessor,  which, 
by  necessity,  through  the  lack  of  knowledge  characteristic  of  its  epoch, 

AIMS,  MKANS  AND  CONSKQlJKNt'KS 

disregarded  these  structural  semantic  issues  and  so  was  constructed  on 
cruder  animalistic  patterns. 

The  difficulty  in  passing  from  the  old  system  to  another  of  different 
structure  is  not  in  the  non-aristotelian  system  as  such,  which  is  really 
simpler  and  more  in  accord  with  common  sense ;  but  the  serious  difficulty 
lies  rather  in  the  older  habits  of  speech  and  nervous  responses,  and  in 
the  older  semantic  reactions  which  must  be  overcome.  These  difficulties 
are,  perhaps,  more  serious  than  is  generally  realized.  Only  those  who 
have  experienced  the  passing  from  euclidean  to  non-euclidean,  and  from 
newtonian  to  non-newtonian  systems  can  fully  appreciate  this  semantic 
difficulty;  as  a  rule,  it  takes  a  new  generation  to  do  it  painlessly  and 
with  entire  success.  This  applies  to  the  general  public,  but  is  not  an 
excuse  for  scientists,  educators,  and  others  who  are  entrusted  with  the 
education  of,  or  who  otherwise  influence,  the  semantic  reactions  of 
children.  If  any  reader  realizes  his  difficulties  and  seriously  wants  to 
overcome  them,  another  suggestion  may  be  given.  A  structural  diagram 
in  the  present  work,  called  the  Structural  Differential,  shows  the  struc¬ 
tural  difference  between  the  world  of  animal  and  the  world  of  man. 
This  structural  difference  is  not  yet  fully  realized ;  neither  is  its  semantic 
importance  understood,  as  it  has  never  been  formulated  in  a  simple  way 
before ;  yet  the  permanent  and  instinctive  realization  of  these  structural 
differences  is  unconditionally  necessary  for  the  mastering  of  the  present 
theory  of  sanity.  This  diagram,  indeed,  involves  all  the  psychophysio- 
logical  factors  necessary  for  the  transition  from  the  old  semantic  reac¬ 
tions  to  the  new,  and  it  gives  in  a  way  a  structural  summary  of  the  whole 
non-aristotelian  system.  As  the  diagram  is  based  on  the  denial  of  the 
‘is’  of  identity,  its  use  is  practically  indispensable;  it  has  been  made  in 
relief  and  in  printed  forms,  to  be  kept  on  the  wall  or  the  desk  as  a  per¬ 
manent  visual  structural  and  semantic  reminder.  Without  actual  hand¬ 
ling,  pointing  the  finger  or  waving  the  hand  at  it,  seeing  the  order,  and 
so  on,  it  is  practically  impossible,  or  very  difficult,  to  become  trained,  or 
to  explain  the  present  system  to  ourselves  or  others,  because  the  foun¬ 
dation  of  all  'knowing’  is  structural,  and  the  Structural  Differential 
actually  shows  this  structural  difference  between  the  world  of  animal 
and  the  world  of  man. 

One  of  the  best  ways  for  grown-up  persons  to  train  themselves  in 
the  present  theory  of  sanity  is  to  try  to  explain  it  to  others,  repeatedly 
pointing  to  the  Structural  Differential.  In  my  experience,  those  who 
have  disregarded  this  advice  have  always  made  very  slow  progress,  and 
have  never  got  the  full  semantic  benefit  of  their  efforts.  As  regards  the 
verbal  side  of  the  training,  it  is  as  important  to  use  exclusively  the  terms 

I.  PRELIMINARIES 

given  in  this  book,  which  are  non-aristotelian  and  non-elementalistic,  as 
it  is  to  abandon  entirely  the  ‘is’  of  identity  and  some  of  the  elemental^ 
istic  primitive  terms. 

The  reader  should  be  warned  from  the  beginning  of  a  very  funda¬ 
mental  semantic  innovation ;  namely,  of  the  discovery  of  the  mulHordin- 
ality  of  the  most  important  terms  we  have.  This  leads  to  a  conscious 
use  of  these  terms  in  the  multiordinal,  extremely  flexible,  full-of -con¬ 
ditionality  sense.  Terms  like  ‘yes’,  ‘no’,  ‘true’,  ‘false’,  ‘fact’,  ‘reality’, 
‘cause/  ‘effect*,  ‘agreement’,  ‘disagreement*,  proposition’,  ‘number’,  ‘rela¬ 
tion’,  ‘order’,  ‘structure’,  ‘abstraction’,  ‘characteristic’,  ‘love’,  ‘hate’, 
‘doubt’,  etc.,  are  such  that  if  they  can  be  applied  to  a  statement  they  can 
also  be  applied  to  a  statement  about  the  first  statement,  and  so,  ultimately, 
to  all  statements,  no  matter  what  their  order  of  abstraction  is.  Terms  of 
such  a  character  I  call  tnultiordinal  terms .  The  main  characteristic  of 
these  terms  consists  of  the  fact  that  on  different  levels  of  orders  of  ab¬ 
stractions  they  may  have  different  meanings,  with  the  result  that  they 
have  no  general  meaning ;  for  their  meanings  are  determined  solely  by  the 
given  context,  which  establishes  the  different  orders  of  abstractions. 
Fsycho-logically,  in  the  realization  of  the  multiordinality  of  the  most  im¬ 
portant  terms,  we  have  paved  the  way  for  the  specifically  human  full 
conditionality  of  our  semantic  responses.  This  allows  us  great  freedom 
in  the  handling  of  multiordinal  terms  and  eliminates  very  serious  psycho¬ 
logical  fixities  and  blockages,  which  analysis  shows  to  be  animalistic  in 
their  nature,  and,  consequently,  pathological  for  man.  Once  the  reader 
understands  this  multiordinal  characteristic,  this  semantic  freedom  does 
not  result  in  confusion. 

Accidentally,  our  vocabulary  is  enormously  enriched  without  becom¬ 
ing  cumbersome,  and  is  made  very  exact.  Thus  a  ‘yes’  may  have  an 
indefinite  number  of  meanings,  depending  on  the  context  to  which  it  is 
applied.  Such  a  blank  ‘yes’  represents,  in  reality,  ‘yes#,  but  this  includes 
‘yesi\  <yes2*>  ‘yes3’,  etc.,  all  of  which  are,  or  may  be,  different.  All  specu¬ 
lations  about  such  terms  in  general — as,  for  instance,  ‘what  a  fact  or 
reality  is?’ — are  futile,  and,  in  general,  illegitimate,  as  the  only  correct 
answer  is  that  ‘the  terms  are  multiordinal  and  devoid  of  meaning  outside 
of  a  context’.  This  settles  many  knotty  epistemological  and  semantic 
questions,  and  gives  us  a  most  powerful  method  for  promoting  human 
mutual  freedom  of  expression,  thus  eliminating  misunderstandings  and 
blockages  and  ultimately  leading  to  agreement. 

I  suspect  that  without  the  discovery  of  the  multiordinality  of  terms 
the  present  work  could  not  have  been  written,  as  I  needed  a  more  flexible 
language,  a  larger  vocabulary,  and  yet  I  had  to  avoid  confusion.  With 

AIMS,  MEANS  AND  CONSEQUENCES 

the  introduction  of  the  multiordinality  of  terms,  which  is  a  natural  but, 
as  yet,  an  unnoticed  fact,  our  ordinary  vocabulary  is  enormously  en¬ 
riched  ;  in  fact,  the  number  of  words  in  such  a  vocabulary  natural  for 
man  is  infinite.  The  multiordinality  of  terms  is  the  fundamental  mechan¬ 
ism  of  the  full  conditionality  of  human  semantic  reactions ;  it  eliminates 
an  unbelievable  number  of  the  old  animalistic  blockages,  and  is  funda¬ 
mental  for  sanity. 

A  number  of  statements  in  the  present  work  have  definite  meanings 
for  different  specialists,  often  running  entirely  counter  to  the  accepted 
scientific  creeds.  As  they  followed  naturally  from  the  context,  I  inserted 
them  for  the  specialist,  without  warning,  for  which  I  have  to  apologize 
to  the  general  reader,  although  they  will  be  useful  to  him  also. 

To  make  issues  sharper,  some  words  will  be  repeated  so  often  that 
I  abbreviate  them  as  follows : 

Abbreviation 

Stands  for 

Abbreviation 

Stands  for 

A 

aristotelian 

r 

non-newtonian 

A 

non-aristotelian 

el 

elementalistic 

E 

euclidean 

non~el 

non-elementalistic 

E 

non-euclidean 

m.o  or  (fn.o) 

multiordinal 

N 

newtonian 

s.r  or  ( s.r ) 

semantic  reactions, 
both  singular  and 
plural 

In  some  instances,  for  special  emphasis,  the  words  will  be  spelled 
in  full. 

A  A- system,  being  extensional,  requires  the  enumeration  of  long 
lists  of  names,  which,  in  principle,  cannot  be  exhausted.  Under  such 
conditions,  I  have  to  list  a  few  representatives  followed  by  an  ‘etc.’,  or 
its  equivalents.  As  the  extensional  method  is  characteristic  of  a 
A  treatment,  the  expression  ‘etc/  occurs  so  often  as  to  necessitate  a 
special  A  extensional  punctuation  whenever  the  period  does  not  indicate 
another  abbreviation,  as  follows : 

I.  PKKLIMINARIKS 

Abbreviation 

Stands  for 

•  * 

etc., 

t  • 

,etc. 

•  j 

etc. ; 

Abbreviation 

Stands  for 

etc. : 

etc.? 

etc. ! 

This  book  is  intended  as  a  handbook,  and  I  have  avoided  referring 
the  reader  to  other  books,  but  have  given  as  much  of  structural  data  as 
I  deemed  useful  for  a  general  orientation.  In  a  work  of  such  wide 
scope  and  novelty,  it  seemed  desirable  to  give  a  general  outline  rather 
than  to  elaborate  in  detail  on  some  particular  points,  so  that  this  work 
is  not  exhaustive  in  any  field ;  nor,  at  present,  can  it  be. 

The  notes  at  the  end  of  the  book  are  given  for  the  purposes 
(among  others)  of  indicating  sources  of  information,  as  an  acknowl¬ 
edgement,  and  to  facilitate  the  work  of  the  future  student.  As  much  as 
I  could,  I  have  avoided  direct  quotations  from  other  authors,  because 
usually  it  has  seemed  more  expedient  to  change  the  wording  slightly. 
In  many  instances,  I  have  followed  the  original  wordings  very  closely, 
always  giving  the  proper  credit. 

I  have  not  avoided  repetitions,  because  I  have  found,  through  sad 
experience,  that  many  times,  when  I  was  reproached  for  a  repetition,  the 
hearer  or  reader  was  disregarding  quite  happily  and  unconsciously  the 
said  ‘repetition',  as  if  he  had  never  heard  it  before.  For  such  a  work 
as  the  present  one,  the  standard  literary  habits — ‘avoid  repetitions',  ‘let 
the  reader  discover  it  for  himself'. ,  are  extremely  detrimental  to  the 
understanding  of  a  few  fundamental  issues  and  to  the  acquiring  of  A 
habits  and  new  s.r.  To  facilitate  the  student's  task,  I  had  no  other  choice 
than  to  write  as  I  did. 

In  1933,  scientific  opinion  is  divided  as  to  whether  we  need  more 
science  or  less  science.  Some  prominent  men  even  suggest  that  scientists 
should  take  a  vacation  and  let  the  rest  of  mankind  catch  up  with  their 
achievements.  There  seems  no  doubt  that  the  discrepancy  between 
human  adjustments  and  the  advances  of  science  is  becoming  alarming. 
Is,  then,  such  a  suggestion  justified? 

The  answer  depends  on  the  assumptions  underlying  such  opinions. 
If  humans,  as  such,  have  reached  the  limit  of  their  nervous  development, 
and  if  the  scientific  study  of  man,  as  man,  should  positively  disclose 
these  limitations,  then  such  a  conclusion  would  be  justified.  But  is  this 
the  case? 

AIMS,  MHANS  AND  CONSEOU ENCKS 

The  present  investigation  shows  most  emphatically  that  this  is  not 
the  case.  All  sciences  have  progressed  exclusively  because  they  have 
succeeded  in  establishing  their  own  A  languages.  For  instance,  a  science 
of  thermodynamics  could  not  have  been  built  on  the  terms  of  ‘cold*  and 
!warm\  Another  language,  one  of  relations  and  structure,  was  needed ; 
and,  once  this  was  produced,  a  science  was  born  and  progress  secured. 
Could  modern  mathematics  be  built  on  the  Roman  notation  for  numbers 
— I,  II,  III,  IV,  V.?  No,  it  could  not.  The  simplest  and  most  child¬ 
like  arithmetic  was  so  difficult  as  to  require  an  expert ;  and  all  progress 
was  very  effectively  hampered  by  the  symbolism  adopted.  History  shows 
that  only  since  the  unknown  Hindu  discovered  the  most  revolutionary 
and  modern  principle  of  positional  notation — 1,  10,  100,  1000.,  modern 
mathematics  has  become  possible.  Every  child  today  is  more  skilful  in 
his  arithmetics  than  the  experts  of  those  days.  Incidentally,  let  us  notice 
that  positional  notation  has  a  definite  structure . 

Have  we  ever  attempted  anything  similar  in  the  study  of  man? 
As-a-whole?  In  all  his  activities?  Again,  most  emphatically.  No!  We 
have  never  studied  man-as-a-whole  scientifically.  If  we  make  an  attempt, 
such  as  the  present  one,  for  instance,  we  discover  the  astonishing,  yet 
simple,  fact  that,  even  now,  we  all  copy  animals  in  our  nervous  re¬ 
sponses,  although  these  can  be  brought  to  the  human  level  if  the  differ¬ 
ence  in  the  mechanism  of  responses  is  discovered  and  formulated. 

Once  this  is  understood,  we  must  face  another  necessity.  To  abolish 
the  discrepancy  between  the  advancement  of  science  and  the  power  of 
adjustment  of  man,  we  must  first  establish  the  science  of  man-as-a- 
whole,  embracing  all  his  activities,  science,  mathematics  and  ‘mental’  ills 
not  excluded.  Such  an  analysis  would  help  us  to  discover  the  above- 
mentioned  difference  in  responses,  and  the  s.r  in  man  would  acquire  new 
significance. 

If  the  present  work  has  accomplished  nothing  more  than  to  suggest 
such  possibilities,  I  am  satisfied.  Others,  I  hope,  will  succeed  where  I 
may  have  failed.  Under  such  conditions,  the  only  feasible  resort  is  to 
produce  a  science  of  man,  and  thus  have  not  less,  but  more,  science, 
ultimately  covering  all  fields  of  human  endeavour,  and  thereby  putting 
a  stop  to  the  animalistic  nervous  reactions,  so  vicious  in  their  effects 
on  man. 

At  present,  nowhere  in  the  world  are  there  such  psychophysiological 
researches  being  made.  There  are  large  sums  of  money  invested  in  dif¬ 
ferent  well-established  institutions  for  scientific  research,  for  ‘mental’ 
hygiene,  for  international  peace,  and  so  forth,  but  not  for  what  is  pos¬ 
sibly  the  most  important  of  all  lines  of  research;  namely,  a  general 

I.  PRELIMINARIES 

science  of  man  in  alj  aspects  of  his  behaviour,  science,  mathematics,  and 
‘mental’  ills  included. 

It  is  to  be  hoped  that,  in  the  not-too-distant  future,  some  individuals 
and  universities  will  awaken  to  the  fact  that  language  is  a  fundamental 
psychophysiological  function  of  man,  and  that  a  scientific  investigation 
of  man  in  all  his  activities,  is  a  necessary,  pressing,  very  promising,  and 
practical  undertaking.  Then,  perhaps,  special  chairs  will  be  established 
in  universities,  and  some  such  researches  in  semantic  reactions  and  san¬ 
ity  will  command  as  much  interest  and  public  encouragement  as  other 
scientific  investigations. 

I,  personally,  have  no  doubt  that  this  would  mark  the  beginning  of 
a  new  era,  the  scientific  era ,  in  which  all  human  desirable  characteristics 
would  be  released  from  the  present  animalistic,  psychophysiological,  A 
semantic  blockages,  and  that  sanity  would  prevail. 

That  this  is  not  a  dream,  and  that  such  nervous  mechanisms  pro¬ 
ducing  blockages  do  exist,  has  been  demonstrated  by  Pavlov  on  his  dogs, 
by  all  psychotherapy,  and  the  experiments  now  being  made  on  the 
elimination  of  the  disturbances  of  the  s.r.  The  abundance  of  geniuses 
among  younger  physicists,  since  the  einsteinian  structural  revolution  and 
semantic  release,  is  also  an  important  empirical  evidence  that  different 
man-made  verbal  systems  can  stimulate  or  hamper  the  functioning  of  the 
human  nervous  system. 

What  has  been  said  here  has  very  solid  structural,  neurological 
foundations.  For  our  purpose,  we  may  consider  a  rough  structural  differ¬ 
ence  between  the  nervous  systems  of  man  and  animal.  Briefly,  we  can 
distinguish  in  the  brain  two  kinds  of  nervous  fibres,  the  radiating  pro¬ 
jection  fibres  and  the  tangential  correlation  and  association  fibres.  With 
the  increase  of  complexities  and  modifiability  of  the  behaviour,  we  find 
an  increased  number  and  more  complex  interrelations  of  association 
fibres.  The  main  difference,  for  instance,  between  the  brain  of  a  man 
and  the  brain  of  a  higher  ape  is  found  not  in  the  projection  apparatus, 
but  in  the  association  paths,  which  are  enormously  enlarged,  more  numer¬ 
ous,  and  more  complex  in  man  than  in  any  animal.  Obviously,  if  these 
association  paths  are  blocked  to  the  passage  of  nervous  impulses  by 
some  psychophysiological  process,  the  reactions  of  the  individual  must 
be  of  a  lower  order,  and  such  blockage  must  give  the  effect  of  the  given 
individual’s  being  organically  deficient,  and  must,  therefore,  result  in 
animalistic  behaviour. 

The  present  investigation  discloses  that  the  s.r  may  assume  very 
diversified  forms,  one  of  which  is  the  production  of  very  powerful 
psychophysiological  blockages.  These,  when  once  we  understand  their 
mechanism,  can  be  eliminated  by  proper  education  and  training  in  ap¬ 
propriate  s.r. 

CHAPTER  II 

TERMINOLOGY  AND  MEANINGS 

The  representation  of  mental  phenomena  in  the  form  of  reactions,  con¬ 
ditioned  reflexes,  Bechterew’s  ‘psycho-reflexes/  leads  to  a  truly  physio¬ 
logical  schematization.  .  .  .  (4ii)  henri  piero n 

Now  I  claim  that  the  Ethnographer’s  perspective  is  the  one  relevant 
and  real  for  the  formation  of  fundamental  linguistic  conceptions  and  for 
the  study  of  the  life  of  languages,  whereas  the  Philologist’s  point  of  view 
is  fictitious  and  irrelevant.  ...  To  define  Meaning,  to  explain  the  essential 
grammatical  and  lexical  characters  of  language  on  the  material  furnished 
by  the  study  of  dead  languages,  is  nothing  short  of  preposterous  in  the 
light  of  our  argument.  (332)  b.  Malinowski 

If  he  contend,  as  sometimes  he  will  contend,  that  he  has  defined  all  his 
terms  and  proved  all  his  propositions,  then  either  he  is  a  performer  of 
logical  miracles  or  he  is  an  ass;  and,  as  you  know,  logical  miracles  are  im¬ 
possible.  (264)  CASSIUS  J.  KBYSER 

Finally,  in  semantic  aphasia,  the  full  significance  of  words  and  phrases 
is  lost.  Separately,  each  word  or  each  detail  of  a  drawing  can  be  under¬ 
stood,  but  the  general  significance  escapes;  an  act  is  executed  upon  com¬ 
mand,  though  the  purpose  of  it  is  not  understood.  Reading  and  writing 
are  possible  as  well  as  numeration,  the  correct  use  of  numbers;  but  the 
appreciation  of  arithmetical  processes  is  defective.  ...  A  general  concep¬ 
tion  cannot  be  formulated,  but  details  can  be  enumerated.  (4in 

HENRI  PI&RON 

Moreover,  the  aphasic  patient  in  his  mode  of  life,  in  his  acts  and  in  all 
his  behaviour  may  seem  biologically  and  socially  normal.  But  he  has 
nevertheless  suffered  an  unquestionable  loss,  for  he  no  longer  has  any 
chance  of  undergoing  further  modifications  of  social  origin,  ana  of  reacting 
in  his  turn  as  a  factor  in  evolution  and  progress.  <4U)  henri  pi£ron 

Particularly  it  expresses  that  most  important  step  in  the  treatment,  the 
passing  over  from  a  mere  intellectual  acceptance  of  the  facts  of  the  analysis, 
whether  in  interpretation  of  the  underlying  complexes  or  in  recognition  of 
the  task  to  be  accepted,  to  an  emotional  appreciation  and  appropriation 
of  the  same.  Intellectual  acceptance  can  work  no  cure  but  may  prove  seri¬ 
ously  misleading  to  the  patient  who  is  attempting  to  grasp  the  situation 
and  to  the  beginner  in  analysis  as  well.  (24i)  smith  ely  jelliffe 

Section  A.  On  semantic  reactions . 

The  term  semantic  reaction  is  fundamental  for  the  present  work  and 
non-elementalistic  systems .  The  term  ‘semantic*  is  derived  from  the 
Greek  semantikos,  ‘significant’,  from  semainein  ‘to  signify’,  ‘to  mean*, 
and  was  introduced  into  literature  by  Michel  Breal  in  his  Essai  de 
Semantique .  The  term  has  been  variously  used  in  a  more  or  less  gen¬ 
eral  or  restricted  sense  by  different  writers.  Of  late,  this  term  has  been 
used  by  the  Polish  School  of  Mathematicians,  and  particularly  L.  Chwis- 

I.  PRELIMINARIES 

tek  (see  Supplement  III),  A.  F.  Bentley1,  and  has  been  given  a  medical 
application  by  Henry  Head2  in  the  study  of  different  forms  of  Aphasias. 
‘ Aphasia',  from  the  Greek  aphasia ,  'speechlessness',  is  used  to  describe 
disorders  in  comprehension  or  expression  of  written  and  spoken  lan¬ 
guage  which  result  from  lesions  of  the  brain.  Disturbances  of  the 
semantic  reactions  in  connection  with  faulty  education  and  ignorance 
must  be  considered  in  1933  as  sub-microscopic  colloidal  lesions. 

Among  the  many  subdivisions  of  the  symbolic  disturbance,  we  find 
semantic  aphasia >  to  be  described  (after  Head)  as  the  want  of  recogni¬ 
tion  or  the  full  significance  or  intention  of  words  and  phrases,  combined 
with  the  loss  of  power  of  appreciating  the  'ultimate  or  non-verbal  mean¬ 
ing  of  words  and  phrases'  to  be  investigated  presently,  and  the  failure  to 
recognize  the  intention  or  goal  of  actions  imposed  upon  the  patient. 

The  problems  of  'meaning'  are  very  complex  and  too  little  investi¬ 
gated,  but  it  seems  that  'psychologists'  and  'philosophers'  are  not  entirely 
in  sympathy  with  the  attitude  of  the  neurologists.  It  is  necessary  to  show 
that  in  a  ^-system,  which  involves  a  new  theory  of  meanings  based  on 
non-el  semantics,  the  neurological  attitude  toward  ‘meaning'  is  the  only 
structurally  correct  and  most  useful  one. 

The  explanation  is  quite  simple.  We  start  with  the  negative  A 
premise  that  words  are  not  the  un-speakable  objective  level,  such  as 
the  actual  objects  outside  of  our  skin  and  our  personal  feelings  inside 
our  skin.  It  follows  that  the  only  link  between  the  objective  and  the 
verbal  world  is  exclusively  structural,  necessitating  the  conclusion  that 
the  only  content  of  all  'knowledge'  is  structural.  Now  structure  can  be 
considered  as  a  complex  of  relations,  and  ultimately  as  multi-dimensional 
order. 

From  this  point  of  view,  all  language  can  be  considered  as  names 
either  for  un-speakable  entities  on  the  objective  level,  be  it  things  or 
feelings,  or  as  names  for  relations .  In  fact,  even  objects,  as  such,  could 
be  considered  as  relations  between  the  sub-microscopic  events  and  the 
human  nervous  system.  If  we  enquire  what  the  last  relations  represent, 
we  find  that  an  object  represents  an  abstraction  of  low  order  pro¬ 
duced  by  our  nervous  system  as  the  result  of  the  sub-microscopic  events 
acting  as  stimuli  upon  the  nervous  system.  If  the  objects  represent 
abstractions  of  some  order,  then,  obviously,  when  we  come  to  the  enquiry 
as  to  language,  we  find  that  words  are  still  higher  abstractions  from 
objects.  Under  such  conditions,  a  theory  of  'meaning'  looms  up  natur¬ 
ally.  If  the  objects,  as  well  as  words,  represent  abstractions  of  different 
order,  an  individual,  A,  cannot  know  what  B  abstracts,  unless  B  tells 
him,  and  so  the  'meaning'  of  a  word  must  be  given  by  a  definition.  This 

TKKMINOUXiY  AN!)  MKANINGS 

would  lead  to  the  dictionary  meanings  of  words,  provided  we  could  define 
all  our  words.  But  this  is  impossible.  If  we  were  to  attempt  to  do  so, 
we  should  soon  find  that  our  vocabulary  was  exhausted,  and  we  should 
reach  a  set  of  terms  which  could  not  be  any  further  defined,  from  lack 
of  words.  We  thus  see  that  all  linguistic  schemes,  if  analysed  far 
enough,  would  depend  on  a  set  of  undefined  terms.  If  we  enquire  about 
the  ‘meaning’  of  a  word,  we  find  that  it  depends  on  the  ‘meaning’  of 
other  words  used  in  defining  it,  and  that  the  eventual  new  relations 
posited  between  them  ultimately  depend  on  the  m.o  meanings  of  the 
undefined  terms ,  which,  at  a  given  period,  cannot  be  elucidated  any 
further. 

Naturally,  any  fundamental  theory  of  ‘meaning’  cannot  avoid  this 
issue,  which  must  be  crucial.  Here  a  semantic  experiment  suggests 
itself.  I  have  performed  this  experiment  repeatedly  on  myself  and 
others,  invariably  with  similar  results.  Imagine  that  we  are  engaged 
in  a  friendly  serious  discussion  with  some  one,  and  that  we  decide  to 
enquire  into  the  meanings  of  words.  For  this  special  experiment,  it  is 
not  necessary  to  be  very  exacting,  as  this  would  enormously  and  unneces¬ 
sarily  complicate  the  experiment.  It  is  useful  to  have  a  piece  of  paper 
and  a  pencil  to  keep  a  record  of  the  progress. 

We  begin  by  asking  the  ‘meaning’  of  every  word  uttered,  being 
satisfied  for  this  purpose  with  the  roughest  definitions ;  then  we  ask  the 
‘meaning’  of  the  words  used  in  the  definitions,  and  this  process  is  con¬ 
tinued  usually  for  no  more  than  ten  to  fifteen  minutes,  until  the  victim 
begins  to  speak  in  circles — as,  for  instance,  defining  ‘space’  by  ‘length’ 
and  ‘length’  by  ‘space’.  When  this  stage  is  reached,  we  have  come  usually 
to  the  undefined  terms  of  a  given  individual.  If  we  still  press,  no  matter 
how  gently,  for  definitions,  a  most  interesting  fact  occurs.  Sooner  or 
later,  signs  of  affective  disturbances  appear.  Often  the  face  reddens; 
there  is  a  bodily  restlessness ;  sweat  appears — symptoms  quite  similar  to 
those  seen  in  a  schoolboy  who  has  forgotten  his  lesson,  which  he  ‘knows 
but  cannot  tell’.  If  the  partner  in  the  experiment  is  capable  of  self- 
observation,  he  invariably  finds  that  he  feels  an  internal  affective  pres¬ 
sure ,  connected,  perhaps,  with  the  rush  of  blood  to  the  brain  and  prob¬ 
ably  best  expressed  in  some  such  words  as  ‘what  he  “knows”  but  cannot 
tell’,  or  the  like.  Here  we  have  reached  the  bottom  and  the  foundation 
of  all  non-elementalistic  meanings — the  meanings  of  undefined  terms , 
which  we  ‘know’  somehow,  but  cannot  tell.  In  fact,  we  have  reached  the 
un-speakable  level.  This  ‘knowledge’  is  supplied  by  the  lower  nerve 
centres ;  it  represents  affective  first  order  effects,  and  is  interwoven  and 
interlocked  with  other  affective  states,  such  as  those  called  ‘wishes’, 

I.  PRELIMINARIES 

‘intentions',  ‘intuitions',  ‘evaluation',  and  many  others.  It  should  be 
noticed  that  these  first  order  effects  have  an  objective  character,  as  they 
are  un-speakable — are  not  words. 

‘Meaning'  must  be  considered  as  a  multiordinal  term,  as  it  applies 
to  all  levels  of  abstractions,  and  so  has  no  general  content.  We  can  only 
speak  legitimately  of  ‘meanings'  in  the  plural.  Perhaps,  we  can  speak 
of  the  meanings  of  meanings,  although  I  suspect  that  the  latter  would 
represent  the  un-speakable  first  order  effect,  the  affective,  personal  raw 
material,  out  of  which  our  ordinary  meanings  are  built. 

The  above  explains  structurally  why  most  of  our  ‘thinking'  is  to 
such  a  large  extent  ‘wishful'  and  is  so  strongly  coloured  by  affective 
factors.  Creative  scientists  know  very  well  from  observation  of  them¬ 
selves,  that  all  creative  work  starts  as  a  ‘feeling',  ‘inclination',  ‘suspicion', 
‘intuition',  ‘hunch',  or  some  other  un-speakable  affective  state,  which  only 
at  a  later  date,  after  a  sort  of  nursing,  takes  the  shape  of  a  verbal  ex¬ 
pression,  worked  out  later  in  a  rationalized,  coherent,  linguistic  scheme 
called  a  theory.  In  mathematics  we  have  some  astonishing  examples  of 
intuitively  proclaimed  theorems,  which,  at  a  later  date,  have  been  proven 
to  be  true,  although  the  original  proof  was  false. 

The  above  explanation,  as  well  as  the  neurological  attitude  toward 
‘meaning',  as  expressed  by  Head,  is  non-elementalistic .  We  have  not 
illegitimately  split  organismal  processes  into  ‘intellect'  and  ‘emotions'. 
These  processes,  or  the  reactions  of  the  organism-as-a-whole,  can  be 
contemplated  at  different  neurological  stages  in  terms  of  order,  but  must 
never  be  split  or  treated  as  separate  entities.  This  attitude  is  amply 
justified  structurally  and  empirically  in  daily  and  scientific  life.  For  in¬ 
stance,  we  may  assume  that  educated  Anglo-Saxons  are  familiar  with 
the  Oxford  Dictionary,  although  it  must  be  admitted  that  they  are  handi¬ 
capped  in  the  knowledge  of  their  language  by  being  born  into  it ;  yet  we 
know  from  experience  how  words  which  have  one  standard  definition 
carry  different  meanings  to,  and  produce  different  affective  individual 
reactions  on,  different  individuals.  Past  experiences,  the  knowledge . ,  of 
different  individuals  are  different,  and  so  the  evaluation  (affective)  of 
the  terms  is  different.  We  are  accustomed  to  such  expressions  as  ‘it 
means  nothing  to  me',  even  in  cases  when  the  dictionary  wording  is 
accepted ;  or  ‘it  means  a  great  deal  to  me',  and  similar  expressions  which 
indicate  that  the  meanings  of  meanings  are  somehow  closely  related  to, 
or  perhaps  represent,  the  first  order  un-speakable  affective  states  or 
reactions. 

Since  ‘knowledge',  then,  is  not  the  first  order  un-speakable  objective 
level,  whether  an  object,  a  feeling. ;  structure,  and  so  relations,  becomes 

TKKMlNOUXiY  AN L)  MKAN1NGS 

l ht‘  only  possible  content  of  'knowledge'  and  of  meanings.  On  the  lowest 
Irvel  of  our  analysis,  when  we  explore  the  objective  level  (the  un¬ 
speakable  feelings  in  this  case),  we  must  try  to  define  every  ‘meaning'  as 
;t  conscious  feeling  of  actual,  or  assumed,  or  wished . ,  relations  which 
pertain  to  first  order  objective  entities,  psycho-logical  included,  and  which 
can  be  evaluated  by  personal,  varied,  and  racial — again  un-speakable  first 
order — psychophysiological  effects.  Because  relations  can  be  defined  as 
multi-dimensional  order,  both  of  which  terms  are  non-el applying  to 
‘senses'  and  'mind',  after  naming  the  un-speakable  entities,  all  experience 
ran  be  described  in  terms  of  relations  or  multi-dimensional  order.  The 
meanings  of  meanings,  in  a  given  case,  in  a  given  individual  at  a  given 
moment . ,  represent  composite,  affective  psycho-logical  configurations  of 
all  relations  pertaining  to  the  case,  coloured  by  past  experiences,  state  of 
health,  mood  of  the  moment,  and  other  contingencies. 

If  we  consistently  apply  the  organism-as-a-whole  principle  to  any 
psycho-logical  analysis,  we  must  conjointly  contemplate  at  least  both 
aspects,  the  'emotional'  and  the  'intellectual',  and  so  deliberately  ascribe 
'emotional'  factors  to  any  'intellectual'  manifestation,  and  'intellectual' 
factors  to  any  ‘emotional’  occurrence.  That  is  why,  on  human  levels,  the 
el  term  'psychological'  must  be  abolished  and  a  new  term  psycho-logical 
introduced,  in  order  that  we  may  construct  a  science. 

From  what  has  been  said,  we  see  that  not  only  the  structure  of  the 
world  is  such  that  it  is  made  up  of  absolute  individuals,  but  that  mean¬ 
ings  in  general,  and  the  meanings  of  meanings  in  particular — the  last 
representing  probably  the  un-speakable  first  order  effects — also  share,  in 
common  with  ordinary  objects,  the  absolute  individuality  of  the  objective 
level. 

The  above  explains  why,  by  the  inherent  structure  of  the  world, 
life,  and  the  human  nervous  system,  human  relations  are  so  enormously 
complex  and  difficult;  and  why  we  should  leave  no  stone  unturned  to 
discover  beneath  the  varying  phenomena  more  and  more  general  and 
invariant  foundations  on  which  human  understanding  and  agreement 
may  be  based.  In  mathematics  we  find  the  only  model  in  which  we  can 
study  the  invariance  of  relations  under  transformations,  and  hence  the 
need  for  future  psycho-logicians  to  study  mathematics. 

It  follows  from  these  considerations  that  any  psycho-logical  occur¬ 
rence  has  a  number  of  aspects,  an  'affective',  and  an  ‘intellectual',  a 
physiological,  a  colloidal,  and  what  not.  For  the  science  of  psychophysiol¬ 
ogy,  resulting  in  a  theory  of  sanity,  the  above  four  aspects  are  of  most 
importance.  As  our  actual  lives  are  lived  on  objective,  un-speakable 
levels,  and  not  on  verbal  levels,  it  appears,  as  a  problem  of  evaluation, 

I.  PRELIMINARIES 

that  the  objective  level,  including,  of  course,  our  un-speakable  feelings, 
'emotions’. ,  is  the  most  important,  and  that  the  verbal  levels  are  only 
auxiliary,  sometimes  useful,  but  at  present  often  harmful,  because  of  the 
disregard  of  the  s.r.  The  role  of  the  auxiliary  verbal  levels  is  only  ful¬ 
filled  if  these  verbal  processes  are  translated  back  into  first  order  effects. 
Thus,  through  verbal  intercourse,  in  the  main,  scientists  discover  useful 
first  order  abstractions  (objective),  and  by  verbal  intercourse  again, 
culture  is  built ;  but  this  only  when  the  verbal  processes  affect  the  un¬ 
speakable  psycho-logical  manifestations,  such  as  our  feelings,  'emotions’, . 

Some  extraordinary  parrot  could  be  taught  to  repeat  all  the  verbal 
'wisdom’  of  the  world ;  but,  if  he  survived  at  all,  he  would  be  just  a  par¬ 
rot.  The  repeated  noises  would  not  have  affected  his  first  order  effects — 
his  affects — these  noises  would  'mean’  nothing  to  him. 

Meanings,  and  the  meanings  of  meanings,  with  their  inseparable 
affective  components,  give  us,  therefore,  not  only  the  non-elementalistic 
foundation  on  which  all  civilization  and  culture  depends,  but  a  study  of 
the  non-el  mechanisms  of  meanings,  through  psychophysiology  and 
general  semantics,  gives  us,  also,  powerful  physiological  means  to  achieve 
a  host  of  desirable,  and  to  eliminate  a  large  number  of  undesirable, 
psycho-logical  manifestations. 

The  physiological  mechanism  is  extremely  simple  and  necessitates  a 
breaking  away  from  the  older  elementalism.  But  it  is  usually  very  diffi¬ 
cult  for  any  given  individual  to  break  away  from  this  older  elementalism, 
as  it  involves  the  established  s.r ,  and  to  be  effective  is,  by  necessity  *  a 
little  laborious.  The  working  tool  of  psychophysiology  is  found  in  the 
semantic  reaction.  This  can  be  described  as  the  psycho-logical  reaction 
of  a  given  individual  to  words  and  language  and  other  symbols  and 
events  in  connection  with  their  meanings ,  and  the  psycho-logical  reac¬ 
tions,  which  become  meanings  and  relational  configurations  the  moment 
the  given  individual  begins  to  analyse  them  or  somebody  else  does  that 
for  him.  It  is  of  great  importance  to  realize  that  the  term  'semantic'  is 
non-elementalistic ,  as  it  involves  conjointly  the  'emotional’  as  well  as 
the  'intellectual’  factors. 

From  the  non-el  point  of  view,  any  affect,  or  impulse,  or  even 
human  instinct,  when  made  conscious  acquires  non-el  meanings,  and 
becomes  ultimately  a  psycho-logical  configuration  of  desirable  or  undesir¬ 
able  to  the  individual  relations,  thus  revealing  a  workable  non-el  mechan¬ 
ism.  Psychotherapy,  by  making  the  unconscious  conscious,  and  by  ver¬ 
balization,  attempts  to  discover  meanings  of  which  the  patient  was  not 
aware.  If  the  attempt  is  successful  and  the  individual  meanings  are 
revealed,  these  are  usually  found  to  belong  to  an  immature  period  of 

TKkMlNOL(X.Y  AND  MKANINDS 

evaluation  in  the  patient's  life.  They  are  then  consciously  revised  and 
rejected,  and  the  given  patient  either  improves  or  is  entirely  relieved. 
The  condition  for  a  successful  treatment  seems  to  be  that  the  processes 
should  be  managed  in  a  non-el ementalistic  way.  Mere  verbal  formalism 
is  not  enough,  because  the  full  non-elementalistic  meanings  to  the  patient 
are  not  divulged ;  consequently,  in  such  a  case,  the  s.r  are  not  affected, 
and  the  treatment  is  a  failure. 

The  non-el  study  of  the  s.r  becomes  an  extremely  general  scientific 
discipline.  The  study  of  relations,  and  therefore  order,  reveals  to  us 
the  mechanism  of  non-el  meanings ;  and,  in  the  application  of  an  ordinal 
physiological  discipline,  we  gain  psychophysiological  means  by  which 
powerfully  to  affect,  reverse,  or  even  annul,  undesirable  s.r.  In  psycho¬ 
physiology  we  find  a  non-el  physiological  theory  of  meanings  and  sanity. 

From  the  present  point  of  view,  all  affective  and  psycho-logical 
responses  to  words  and  other  stimuli  involving  meanings  are  to  be  con¬ 
sidered  as  s.r.  What  the  relation  between  such  responses  and  a  corres¬ 
ponding  persistent  psycho-logical  state  may  be,  is  at  present  not  clear, 
although  a  number  of  facts  of  observation  seem  to  suggest  that  the 
re-education  of  the  s.r  results  often  in  a  beneficial  change  in  some  of 
these  states.  But  further  investigation  in  this  field  is  needed. 

The  realization  of  this  difference  is  important  in  practice,  because 
most  of  the  psycho-logical  manifestations  may  appear  as  evoked  by 
some  event,  and  so  are  to  be  called  responses  or  reflexes.  Such  a 
response,  when  lasting,  should  be  called  a  given  state ,  perhaps  a  semantic 
state,  but  not  a  semantic  reflex.  The  term,  ‘semantic  reaction1,  will  be 
used  as  covering  both  semantic  reflexes  and  states.  In  the  present  work, 
we  are  interested  in  s.r ,  from  a  psychophysiological,  theoretical  and 
experimental  point  of  view,  which  include  the  corresponding  states. 

If,  for  instance,  a  statement  or  any  event  evokes  some  individual’s 
attention,  or  one  train  of  associations  in  preference  to  another,  or  envy, 
or  anger,  or  fear,  or  prejudice . ,  we  would  have  to  speak  of  all  such 
responses  on  psycho-logical  levels  as  s.r.  A  stimulus  was  present,  and  a 
response  followed ;  so  that,  by  definition,  we  should  speak  of  a  reaction. 
As  the  active  factor  in  the  stimulus  was  the  individual  meanings  to 
the  given  person,  and  his  response  had  meanings  to  him  as  a  first  order 
effect,  the  reaction  must  be  called  a  semantic  reaction. 

The  present  work  is  written  entirely  from  the  s.r  point  of  view; 
and  so  the  treatment  of  the  material,  and  the  language  used,  imply,  in 
general,  a  psycho-logical  response  to  a  stimulus  in  connection  with 
meanings,  this  response  being  expressed  by  a  number  of  such  words  as 
‘implies’,  ‘follows’,  ‘becomes’,  ‘evokes’,  ‘results’,  ‘feels’,  ‘reacts’,  ‘evalu- 

1.  PRELIMINARIES 

ates’,  and  many  others.  All  data  taken  from  science  are  selected,  and  only 
those  which  directly  enter  as  factors  in  s.r  are  given  in  an  elementary 
outline.  The  meanings  to  the  individual  are  dependent,  through  the 
influence  of  the  environment,  education,  languages  and  their  structure, 
and  other  factors,  on  racial  meanings  called  science,  which,  to  a  large 
extent,  because  of  the  structural  and  relational  character  of  science, 
become  physiological  semantic  factors  of  the  reactions.  In  fact,  science, 
mathematics,  ‘logic*. ,  may  be  considered  from  a  non-elementcdistic  point 
of  view  as  generalized  results  of  s.r  acceptable  to  the  majority  of  informed 
and  not  heavily  pathological  individuals. 

To  facilitate  the  writing  and  the  reading  of  the  work,  I  am  com¬ 
pelled  to  use  definite  devices.  As  in  case  of  structure,  multiordinal  terms, 
so  in  the  case  of  s.r ,  I  often  employ  an  ordinary  form  of  expression  and 
use  the  words  ‘structural,  ‘multiordinai*,  ‘semantic*,  as  adjectives,  or 
‘structurally*,  ‘semantically*. ,  as  adverbs,  always  implying  the  full  mean¬ 
ings,  that  under  such  and  such  conditions  of  a  given  stimulus,  the  given 
s.r  would  be  such  and  such.  In  many  instances,  the  letters  s.r  or  (j.r) 
will  be  inserted  to  remind  the  reader  that  we  deal  with  semantic  reactions 
or  the  psycho-logical  reactions  in  connection  with  the  meanings  of  the 
problems  analysed.  It  is  not  only  useful,  but  perhaps  essential,  that  the 
reader  should  stop  in  such  places  and  try  to  evoke  in  himself  the  given  s.r. 
The  present  work  leads  to  new  s.r  which  are  beneficial  to  every  one  of  us 
and  fundamental  for  sanity.  The  casual  reading  of  the  present  book  is 
not  enough.  Any  one  who  wants  the  full  or  partial  benefit  of  the  joint 
labours  of  the  author  and  the  reader  must,  even  in  the  reading,  begin  to 
re-train  his  s.r. 

As  the  organism  works  as-a-whole,  and  as  the  training  is  psycho- 
physiological  in  terms  of  order,  reversing  the  reversed  pathological  order. , 
organism-as-a-whole  means  must  be  employed.  For  this  purpose,  the 
Structural  Differential  has  been  developed.  The  reader  will  later  under¬ 
stand  that  it  is  practically  impossible  to  achieve,  without  its  help,  the 
maximum  beneficial  semantic  results. 

From  a  non-el  point  of  view,  which  makes  illegitimate  any  el  verbal 
splitting  of  ‘emotions*  and  ‘intellect*. ,  these  processes  must  be  analysed 
in  terms  of  order,  indicating  the  stages  of  the  psycho-neural  process-as- 
a-whole.  Empirically,  there  is  a  difference  between  an  ‘emotion*  which 
becomes  ‘rationalized*  and  ‘emotions*  invoked  or  produced  by  ‘ideas*. 
The  order  is  different  in  each  instance,  and  if,  in  a  given  nervous  system, 
at  a  given  moment,  or  under  some  special  conditions,  the  lower  or  higher 
nerve  centres  work  defectively,  the  nervous  reactions  are  not  well  bal¬ 
anced  and  the  manifestations  acquire  a  one-sided  character.  The  other 

TERMINOLOGY  AND  MEANINGS 

aspect  is  not  abolished,  but  is  simply  less  prominent  or  less  effective. 
Thus,  in  morons,  imbeciles,  and  in  many  forms  of  infantilism,  the  ‘think¬ 
ing’  is  very  ‘emotional’  and  of  a  low  grade;  in  so-called  ‘moral  imbeciles’, 
and  perhaps  in  ‘schizophrenia’,  the  ‘thinking’  may  be  seemingly  ‘normal’, 
yet  it  does  not  affect  the  ‘feelings’,  which  are  deficient. 

From  the  non-el  semantic  human  point  of  view,  any  affect  only 
gains  meanings  when  it  is  conscious ;  or,  in  other  words,  when  an  actual 
or  assumed  set  of  relations  is  present.  In  an  ideally  balanced  and  efficient 
human  nervous  system,  the  ‘emotions’  would  be  translated  into  ‘ideas’, 
and  ‘ideas’  translated  into  ‘emotions’,  with  equal  facility.  In  other 
words,  the  s.r  of  a  given  individual  would  be  under  full  control  and 
capable  of  being  educated,  influenced,  transformed  quickly  and  efficiently 
— the  very  reverse  of  the  present  situation.  The  present  enquiry  shows 
that  the  lack  of  psychophysiological  methods  for  training  and  lack  of 
analysis  and  understanding  of  the  factors  involved,  are  responsible  for 
this  deplorable  situation. 

The  above  processes  are  quite  obvious  on  racial  grounds,  if  we 
study  science  and  mathematics  from  the  semantic  point  of  view.  With 
very  few  exceptions,  we  only  fail  individually.  For  instance,  a  Euclid 
and  a  Newton  had  ‘hunches’,  ‘intuitions*. ;  then  they  rationalized  and  ver¬ 
balized  them  and  so  affected  the  rest  of  us  and  established  the  ‘natural’ 
feeling  for  E  geometries,  N  mechanics , .  When  new  E  or  R  systems  were 
produced,  many  of  the  older  scientists  could  ‘understand’  them,  could 
even  master  the  new  symbolic  technique ;  yet  their  ‘feelings’. ,  were  sel¬ 
dom  affected.  They  ‘thought’  in  the  new  way,  but  they  continued  to  ‘feel’ 
in  the  old;  their  s.r  did  not  follow  fully  the  transformation  of  their 
‘ideas’,  and  this  produced  a  split  personality. 

Any  fundamentally  new  system  involves  new  s.r;  and  this  is  the 
main  difficulty  which  besets  us  when  we  try  to  master  a  new  system.  We 
must  re-educate,  or  change,  our  older  s.r.  As  a  rule,  the  younger  genera¬ 
tion,  which  began  with  the  new  s.r ,  has  no  such  difficulties  with  the  new 
systems.  Just  the  opposite — the  older  s.r  become  as  difficult  or  impossible 
to  them  as  the  new  were  to  the  older  generation.  To  both  generations, 
with  their  corresponding  s.r ,  the  non-habitual  s.r  are  ‘new’,  no  matter 
what  their  historical  order  and  how  difficult  or  how  simple  they  are. 
However,  there  is  an  important  difference.  The  newer  systems,  as,  for 
instance,  the  E ,  N,  and  the  present  corresponding  ^-system,  are  more 
general:  which  means  that  the  newer  systems  include  the  older  as  particu¬ 
lar  cases,  so  that  the  younger  generation  has  s.r  which  are  more  dexible , 
more  conditional ,  with  a  broader  outlook . ,  semantic  conditions  absent  in 
the  older  systems. 

I.  PRELIMINARIES 

The  problems  connected  with  the  s.r  are  not  new,  because  these  are 
inherent  in  man,  no  matter  on  what  low  or  primitive  level  or  on  what 
high  level  of  development  he  may  be ;  but,  up  to  the  undertaking  of  the 
present  analysis,  the  problems  of  s.r  were  not  formulated,  their  psycho- 
physiological  mechanisms  were  not  discovered,  and  so,  to  the  detriment 
of  all  of  us,  we  have  had  no  workable  educational  means  by  which  to 
handle  them  effectively. 

That  is  why  the  passing  from  one  era  to  another  is  usually  so  diffi¬ 
cult  and  so  painful.  The  new  involves  new  s.r ,  while,  as  a  rule,  the  older 
generations  have  enforced  their  systems,  and,  through  them,  by  means  of 
controlled  education  and  linguistic  structure  and  habits,  the  old  s.r.  This 
the  younger  generation,  always  having  more  racial  experience,  cannot 
accept,  so  that  revolutions,  scientific  or  otherwise,  happen,  and,  when 
successful,  the  new  systems  are  imposed  on  the  older  generation  without 
the  older  generation's  changing  their  s.r.  All  of  which  is  painful  to  all 
concerned.  The  next  generation  after  such  a  ‘revolution'  does  not  have 
similar  difficulties,  because  from  childhood  they  are  trained  in  the  new 
s.r,  and  all  appears  as  ‘natural’  to  them,  and  the  older  as  ‘unthinkable’, 
‘silly’,. 

As  a  descriptive  fact,  the  present  stage  of  human  development  is 
such  that  with  a  very  few  exceptions  our  nervous  systems  do  not  work 
properly  in  accordance  with  their  survival  structure.  In  other  words, 
although  we  have  the  potentialities  for  correct  functioning  in  our  nervous 
system,  because  of  the  neglect  of  the  physiological  control-mechanism  of 
our  s.r ,  we  have  semantic  blockages  in  our  reactions,  and  the  more  bene¬ 
ficial  manifestations  are  very  effectively  prevented. 

The  present  analysis  divulges  a  powerful  mechanism  for  the  control 
and  education  of  s.r ;  and,  by  means  of  proper  evaluation,  a  great  many 
undesirable  manifestations  on  the  psycho-logical  level  can  be  very  effi¬ 
ciently  transformed  into  highly  desirable  ones.  In  dealing  with  such  a 
fundamental  experimental  issue  as  the  s.r ,  which  have  been  with  us  since 
the  dawn  of  mankind,  it  is  impossible  to  say  new  things  all  the  time. 
Very  often  the  issues  involved  become  ‘common  sense’;  but  what  is  the 
use,  in  practice,  of  this  ‘common  sense’,  if  it  is  seldom,  if  ever,  applied, 
and  in  fact  cannot  be  applied  because  of  the  older  lack  of  workable 
psychophysiological  formulations?  For  instance,  what  could  be  simpler 
or  more  ‘common  sense’  than  the  A  premise  that  an  object  is  not  words ; 
yet,  to  my  knowledge,  no  one  fully  applies  this,  or  has  fully  acquired  the 
corresponding  s.r.  Without  first  acquiring  this  new  s.r ,  it  is  impossible  to 
discover  this  error  and  corresponding  s.r  in  others ;  but  as  soon  as  we 
have  trained  ourselves,  it  becomes  so  obvious  that  it  is  impossible  to  miss 

TliKMlNOLCXiY  AND  MEANINGS 

it.  We  shall  see,  later,  that  the  older  s.r  were  due  to  the  lack  of  structural 
investigations,  to  the  old  structure  of  language,  to  the  lack  of  conscious¬ 
ness  of  abstracting,  to  the  low  order  conditionality  of  our  conditional 
reactions  (the  semantic  included),  and  a  long  list  of  other  important  fac¬ 
tors.  All  scientific  discoveries  involve  s.r ,  and  so,  once  formulated,  and 
the  new  reactions  acquired,  the  discoveries  become  ‘common  sense',  and 
we  often  wonder  why  these  discoveries  were  so  slow  in  coming  in  spite 
of  their  ‘obviousness'.  These  explanations  are  given  because  they  also 
involve  some  s.r;  and  we  must  warn  the  reader  that  such  evaluations 
(s.r)  :  ‘Oh,  a  platitude !',  ‘A  baby  knows  that',  are  very  effective  s.r  to 
prevent  the  acquisition  of  the  new  reactions.  This  is  why  the  ‘discovery 
of  the  obvious'  is  often  so  difficult;  it  involves  very  many  of  semantic 
factors  of  new  evaluation  and  meanings. 

A  fuller  evaluation  is  only  reached  at  present  on  racial  grounds  in 
two  or  more  generations,  and  never  on  individual  grounds;  which,  of 
course,  for  personal  generalised  adjustment  and  happiness,  is  very  detri¬ 
mental.  Similarly,  only  in  the  study  of  racial  achievements  called  science 
and  mathematics  can  we  discover  the  appropriate  s.r  and  the  nervous 
mechanism  of  these  so  varied,  so  flexible,  and  so  fundamental  reactions. 

In  fact,  without  a  structural  formulation  and  a  A  revision  based  on 
the  study  of  science  and  mathematics,  it  is  impossible  to  discover,  to  con¬ 
trol,  or  to  educate  these  s.r.  For  this  reason  it  was  necessary  to  analyse 
the  semantic  factors  in  connection  with  brief  and  elementary  considera¬ 
tions  taken  from  modern  science.  But,  when  all  is  said  and  done,  and  the 
important  semantic  factors  discovered,  the  whole  issue  becomes  extremely 
simple,  and  easily  applied,  even  by  persons  without  much  education.  In 
fact,  because  the  objective  levels  are  not  words,  the  only  possible  aim  of 
science  is  to  discover  structure,  which,  when  formulated,  is  always  simple 
and  easily  understood  by  everyone,  with  the  exception,  of  course,  of  very 
pathological  individuals.  We  have  already  seen  that  structure  is  to  be  con¬ 
sidered  as  a  configuration  of  relations,  and  that  relations  appear  as  the 
essential  factors  in  meanings,  and  so  of  s.r.  The  present  enquiry,  because 
structural,  reveals  vital  factors  of  s.r.  The  consequences  are  extremely 
simple,  yet  very  important.  We  see  that  by  a  simple  structural  re-educa< 
tion  of  the  s.ry  which  in  the  great  mass  of  people  are  still  on  the  level  of 
copying  animals  in  their  nervous  reactions,  we  powerfully  affect  the  s.r , 
and  so  are  able  to  impart  very  simply,  to  all,  in  the  most  elementary  edu¬ 
cation  of  the  s.r  of  the  child,  cultural  results  at  present  sometimes 
acquired  unconsciously  and  painfully  in  university  education. 

The  above  considerations  have  forced  upon  me  the  structure  of  the 
present  work  and  the  selection  and  presentation  of  the  material.  Of 

I.  PRELIMINARIES 

course,  the  reader  can  skip  many  parts  and  at  once  plunge  into  Part  VII, 
and  discover  that  it  is  all  ‘childishly  simple’,  ‘obvious*  and  ‘common 
sense*.  Such  a  reader  or  a  critic  with  this  particular  s.r  would  miss  the 
point,  which  can  be  verified  as  an  experimental  fact  in  the  meantime,  that 
in  spite  of  its  seeming  simplicity,  no  one ,  not  even  the  greatest  genius, 
fully  applies  these  ‘platitudes’  outside  of  his  special  work,  which  s.r ,  in 
his  limited  field,  represent  the  semantic  components  that  make  up 
his  genius. 

The  full  acquisition  of  the  new  s.r  requires  special  training;  but, 
when  acquired,  it  solves  for  a  given  individual,  without  any  outside  inter¬ 
ference,  all  important  human  problems  I  know  of.  It  imparts  to  him 
some  of  the  s.r  of  so-called  ‘genius*,  and  thus  enlarges  his  so-called 
‘intelligence*. 

The  problems  of  the  structure  of  a  given  language  are  of  extreme, 
and  as  yet  unrealized,  semantic  importance.  Thus,  for  instance,  the  whole 
Einstein  theory,  or  any  other  fundamental  scientific  theory,  must  be  con¬ 
sidered  as  the  building  of  a  new  language  of  similar  structure  to  the 
empirical  facts  known  at  a  given  date.  In  1933,  the  general  tendency  of 
science,  as  made  particularly  obvious  in  the  works  of  J.  Loeb,  C.  M. 
Child,  psychiatry,  the  Einstein  theory,  the  new  quantum  mechanics . ,  and 
the  present  work,  is  to  build  languages  which  take  into  consideration  the 
many  important  invariant  relations,  a  condition  made  possible  only  by 
the  use  of  non-el  languages.  In  my  case,  I  must  construct  a  non-el  lan¬ 
guage  in  which  ‘senses*  and  ‘mind*,  ‘emotions*  and  ‘intellect*.,  are  no 
longer  to  be  verbally  split,  because  a  language  in  which  they  are  split  is 
not  similar  in  structure  to  the  known  empirical  facts,  and  all  speculations 
in  such  an  el  language  must  be  misleading. 

This  non-el  language  involves  a  new  non-el  theory  of  meanings,  as 
just  explained.  The  term  ‘semantic*,  ‘semantically*,  ‘semantic  reactions*, 
‘semantic  states*. ,  are  non-el ,  as  they  involve  both  ‘emotions*  and  ‘intellect*, 
since  they  depend  on  ‘meanings*,  ‘evaluation*,  ‘significance*,  and  the  like, 
based  on  structure,  relations,  and  ultimately  multi-dimensional  order.  All 
these  terms  apply  equally  to  ‘senses*  and  to  ‘mind*,  to  ‘emotions’  and  to 
‘intellect’ — they  are  not  artificially  split. 

It  is  important  to  preserve  the  non-el  or  organism-as-a-whole  atti¬ 
tude  and  terminology  throughout,  because  these  represent  most  important 
factors  in  our  s.r.  Sometimes  it  is  necessary  to  emphasize  the  origin,  or 
the  relative  importance,  of  a  given  aspect  of  the  impulse  or  reaction,  or  to 
translate  for  the  reader  a  language  not  entirely  familiar  to  him  into  one 
to  which  he  is  more  accustomed.  In  such  cases,  I  use  the  old  el  terms  in 
quotation  marks  to  indicate  that  I  do  not  eliminate  or  disregard  the  other 

TERMINOLOGY  AND  MEANINGS 

aspects — a  disregard  which  otherwise  would  be  implied  by  the  use  of  the 
old  terms. 

The  term  psycho-logical  will  always  be  used  either  with  a  hyphen  to 
indicate  its  non-el  character,  or  in  quotation  marks,  without  a  hyphen, 
when  we  refer  to  the  old  elementalism.  Similarly,  with  the  terms  psycho¬ 
logies,  psycho-logicians,  for  ‘psychology’  and  ‘pyschologist’.  The  terms 
‘mental  ills',  ‘mental  hygiene'  are  unfortunate  ones,  since  they  are  used 
by  the  majority  as  el.  Psychiatrists,  it  is  true,  use  them  in  the  organism- 
as-a-whole  sense  to  include  ‘emotions'.  Because  of  the  great  semantic 
influence  of  the  structure  of  language  on  the  masses  of  mankind,  leading, 
as  it  does,  through  lack  of  better  understanding  and  evaluation  to  specula¬ 
tion  on  terms ,  it  seems  advisable  to  abandon  completely  terms  which 
imply  to  the  many  the  suggested  elementalism,  although  these  terms  are 
used  in  a  proper  non-el  way  by  the  few. 

If  specialists,  to  satisfy  their  s.r ,  disregard  these  issues  and  persist 
in  the  use  of  el  terms,  or  use  such  expressions  as  ‘man  is  an  animal'  and 
the  like,  they  misunderstand  the  importance  of  semantic  factors.  Through 
lack  of  appreciation  or  of  proper  evaluation  of  the  problems  involved, 
they  artificially  and  most  effectively  prevent  the  rest  of  us  from  follow¬ 
ing  their  work  without  being  led  astray  by  the  inappropriate  structure 
of  their  language.  The  harm  done  through  such  practices  is  quite  serious, 
and,  at  present,  mostly  disregarded.  For  this  reason,  I  either  use  quota¬ 
tion  marks  on  the  terms  ‘mental',  'mental'  ills,  ‘mental’  hygiene . ,  or  else  I 
use  the  terms  psycho-logical,  semantic  ills,  psycho-logical  or  semantic 
hygiene,.  The  above  two  terms  are  not  only  non-el  but  also  have  an 
important  advantage  of  being  international.  The  terms  ‘affects',  'affec¬ 
tive'  are  little  used  outside  of  scientific  literature,  where  they  are  used 
mostly  in  the  non-el  ordinal  sense.  I  use  them  in  a  similar  way,  without 
quotation  marks. 

All  the  issues  involved  in  the  present  work  are,  of  necessity,  inter¬ 
connected.  Thus,  order  leads  to  relations,  relations  to  structure,  and 
these,  in  turn,  to  non-el  meanings  and  evaluations,  which  are  the  funda¬ 
mental  factors  of  all  psycho-logical  states  and  responses,  called  more 
specifically  semantic  reactions,  states,  and  reflexes.  The  reader  should 
be  careful  to  remain  at  all  times  aware  of  these  connections  and  implica¬ 
tions.  Whenever  we  find  order,  or  relations,  or  structure,  in  the  outside 
world,  or  in  our  nervous  system,  these  terms,  because  of  their  non-el 
character,  imply  similar  order,  relations,  and  structure  in  our  psycho¬ 
logical  processes,  thus  establishing  meanings,  proper  evaluations . ,  ulti¬ 
mately  leading  toward  appropriate  s.r.  The  reverse  applies  also.  When- 

I.  PRELIMINARIES 

ever  we  speak  of  s.r,  non-el  meanings,  structure,  relations,  and,  finally, 
order,  are  implied. 

The  use  of  non-el  languages  is  seriously  beneficial,  as  it  is  structur¬ 
ally  more  correct  and  establishes  s.r  which  are  more  appropriate,  more 
flexible,  or  of  higher  order  conditionality,  a  necessity  for  the  optimum 
working  of  the  human  nervous  system, — all  of  which  results  follow  auto¬ 
matically  from  the  structure  of  the  language  used. 

A  non-el,  structurally  correct,  but  non-formulated,  attitude  is  a  pri¬ 
vate  benefit.  Once  it  is  formulated  in  a  non-el  language,  it  becomes  a 
public  benefit,  as  it  induces  in  others  the  non-el  attitudes,  thus  transform¬ 
ing  the  former  s.r.  In  this  way,  a  ‘feeling'  has  been  translated  structur¬ 
ally  into  language;  which,  in  turn,  through  structure,  involves  other 
people's  attitudes  and  ‘feelings',  and  so  their  s.r . 

The  whole  process  is  extremely  simple,  elementary,  and  automatic ; 
yet,  before  we  acquire  the  new  s.r ,  we  find  difficulties  because  of  the 
fundamental  novelty  of  these  reactions.  Any  persistent  student  will 
acquire  them  easily,  provided  he  does  not  expect  too  rapid  a  progress. 
The  subject  matter  of  the  present  analysis  is  closely  related  to  the  ‘feel¬ 
ings'  of  everybody ;  yet  the  difficulties  in  acquiring  the  new  reactions  are 
similar  to  those  the  older  scientists  found  in  acquiring  the  s.r  necessary 
for  mastering  the  E  and  R  systems. 

In  physics,  we  often  need  ‘space-like'  or  ‘time-like'  intervals,  although 
the  non-el  implications  of  the  term  ‘interval'  remain.  Similarly,  in  our 
problems  when  we  are  interested  in  the  ‘emotion-like'  or  ‘mind-like* 
aspects  of  the  non-el  s.r ,  we  shall  indicate  the  special  aspects  by  using  the 
old  terms  in  quotation  marks.  This  method  prevents  wasteful  and  futile 
speculations  on  el  terms,  and  serves  as  a  reminder  that  the  other  aspects 
are  present,  although  in  a  given  discussion  we  do  not  deem  them  to  be 
important.  The  above  has,  by  itself,  very  far-reaching  semantic  influence 
on  our  reactions. 

From  what  has  already  been  said,  it  is  clear  that  the  terminology  of 
semantic  reactions . ,  covers  in  a  non-el  way  all  psycho-logical  reactions 
which  were  formerly  covered  by  el  terms  of  ‘emotions'  and  ‘intellect', 
the  reactions  themselves  always  being  on  the  objective  levels  and 
un-speakable.  As  s.r  can  always  be  analysed  into  terms  of  meanings  and 
evaluation,  and  the  latter  into  terms  of  structure,  relations,  and  multi¬ 
dimensional  order,  which  involves  physiological  factors,  the  term  ‘seman¬ 
tic'  ultimately  appears  as  a  physiological  or  rather  psychophysiological 
term.  It  suggests  workable  and  simple  educational  methods  which  will 
be  explained  later.  The  reader  should  notice  that  the  use  of  a  language 

TERMINOLOGY  AND  MEANINGS 

of  a  new  structure  has  led  to  new  results,  which,  in  turn,  directly  affect 
our  s.r. 

An  important  point  should  be  stressed ;  namely,  that  the  issues  are 
fundamentally  simple,  because  they  are  similar  in  structure  to  the  struc¬ 
ture  of  human  ‘knowledge*  and  to  the  nervous  structure  on  which  so-called 
‘human  nature*  depends.  Because  of  this  similarity,  it  is  unconditionally 
necessary  to  become  fully  acquainted  with  the  new  terms  of  new  struc¬ 
ture,  and  to  use  them  habitually.  Only  then  will  the  beneficial  results 
follow.  All  languages  have  some  structure ;  and  so  all  languages  involve 
automatically  the,  of  necessity,  interconnected  s.r.  Any  one  who  tries  to 
translate  the  new  language  into  the  old  while  ‘thinking*  in  the  older 
terms  is  confronted  with  an  inherent  neurological  difficulty  and  involves 
himself  in  a  hopeless  confusion  of  his  own  doing.  The  reader  must  be 
warned  against  making  this  mistake. 

In  the  present  work,  I  have  tried  to  realize  fully  my  duties  toward 
my  reader ;  and  I  am  certain  that  the  reader  who  will  read  the  book  dili¬ 
gently  and  repeatedly  will  be  repaid  for  his  labours.  The  realization  that 
some  problems  do  exist,  even  if  we  do  not  fully  appreciate  or  understand 
them,  has  very  serious  semantic  influence  on  all  of  us.  Realizing  my 
responsibilities  toward  the  reader,  I  have  not  spared  difficult  labour  in 
order  to  bring  these  semantic  facts  to  his  attention.  I  seriously  suggest 
that  no  reader  ought  to  disregard  Parts  VIII,  IX,  and  X,  but  that  he 
should  become  at  least  acquainted  with  the  existence  of  the  problems 
there  discussed.  If  this  is  conscientiously  done,  many  beneficial  s.r  will 
appear  sooner  or  later. 

The  present  system  is  an  interconnected  whole :  the  beginning  implies 
the  end,  and  the  end  implies  the  beginning.  Because  of  this  characteristic, 
the  book  should  be  read  at  least  twice,  and  preferably  oftener.  I  wish 
positively  to  discourage  any  reader  who  intend,0  to  give  it  merely  a 
superficial  reading. 

The  problems  of  s.r  have  not,  so  far,  been  analysed  at  all  from  the 
point  of  view  of  structure,  and  the  present  enquiry  is,  as  far  as  my 
knowledge  goes,  the  first  in  existence.  The  problems  of  meanings  are 
vast,  extremely  important,  and  very  little  analysed.  The  interested  reader 
will  find  some  material  in  the  excellent  critical  review  of  the  problems 
of  meanings  inOgden*s  and  Richards*  The  Meaning  of  Meaning,  in  some 
parts  of  Baldwin’s  Thought  and  Things  or  Genetic  Logic ,  and  in  Lady 
Welby’s  article  in  the  Encyclopaedia  Britannica  on  Signifies.  In  these 
three  studies,  a  partial  literature  of  the  subject  is  given. 

The  present  work  involves  issues  taken  from  many  and  diverse 
branches  of  knowledge  which  have  not  hitherto  been  seen  to  be  connected 

I.  PRELIMINARIES 

What  is  of  importance  is  that  the  issues  presented  should  be  sound  in 
the  main ,  even  if  not  perfect  in  details,  which  often  have  no  bearing  on 
the  subject.  Specialists  in  the  fields  here  analysed  should  pass  their  pro¬ 
fessional  judgement  as  to  the  soundness  of  their  special  parts  of  the  sys¬ 
tem.  They  do  not  need  even  to  be  enthusiastic,  it  is  enough  if  they 
approve  it.  The  main  issue  is  the  building  of  a  ^-system,  which 
co-ordinates  many  disconnected  fields  of  knowledge  on  the  basis  of  struc¬ 
ture,  from  the  special  point  of  view  of  non-el  s.r .  If  these  results  have 
been  accomplished,  the  author  is  satisfied. 

Section  B.  On  the  un-speakable  objective  level . 

The  term  ‘un-speakable*  expresses  exactly  that  which  we  have  up 
to  now  practically  entirely  disregarded;  namely,  that  an  object  or  feeling, 
say,  our  toothache,  is  not  verbal,  is  not  words.  Whatever  we  may  say 
will  not  be  the  objective  level,  which  remains  fundamentally  un-speakable. 
Thus,  we  can  sit  on  the  object  called  ‘a  chair’,  but  we  cannot  sit  on  the 
noise  we  made  or  the  name  we  applied  to  that  object.  It  is  of  utmost 
importance  for  the  present  ^-system  not  to  confuse  the  verbal  level  with 
the  objective  level,  the  more  so  that  all  our  immediate  and  direct  ‘mental* 
and  ‘emotional*  reactions,  and  all  s.r,  states,  and  reflexes,  belong  to  the 
un-speakable  objective  levels,  as  these  are  not  words.  This  fact  is  of 
great,  but  unrealized,  importance  for  the  training  of  appropriate  s.r.  We 
can  train  these  reactions  simply  and  effectively  by  ‘silence  on  the  objec¬ 
tive  levels’,  using  familiar  objects  called  ‘a  chair*  or  ‘a  pencil*,  and  this 
training  automatically  affects  our  ‘emotions*,  ‘feelings’,  as  well  as  other 
psycho-logical  immediate  responses  difficult  to  reach,  which  are  also  not 
words.  We  can  train  simply  and  effectively  the  s.r  inside  our  skins  by 
training  on  purely  objective  and  familiar  grounds  outside  our  skins, 
avoiding  unnecessary  psycho-logical  difficulties,  yet  achieving  the  desired 
semantic  results.  The  term  ‘un-speakable*  is  used  in  its  strict  English 
meaning.  The  objective  level  is  not  words,  can  not  be  reached  by  words 
alone,  and  has  nothing  to  do  with  ‘good*  or  ‘bad’;  neither  can  it  be 
understood  as  ‘non-expressible  by  words*  or  ‘not  to  be  described  by 
words’,  because  the  terms  ‘expressible’  or  ‘described’  already  presuppose 
words  and  symbols.  Something,  therefore,  which  we  call  ‘a  chair*  or  ‘a 
toothache*  may  be  expressed  or  described  by  words ;  yet,  the  situation  is 
not  altered,  because  the  given  description  or  expression  will  not  be  the 
actual  objective  level  which  we  call  ‘a  chair’  or  ‘a  toothache’. 

Semantically,  this  problem  is  genuinely  crucial.  Any  one  who  misses 
that — and  it  is  unfortunately  easily  missed — will  miss  one  of  the  most 

TERM  1  N()L( )GY  AND  MEANINGS 

important  psycho-logical  factors  in  all  s.r  underlying  sanity.  This  omis¬ 
sion  is  facilitated  greatly  by  the  older  systems,  habits  of  thought,  older 
s.r ,  and,  above  all,  by  the  primitive  structure  of  our  A  language  and  the 
use  of  the  ‘is’  of  identity.  Thus,  for  instance,  we  handle  what  we  call  a 
pencil.  Whatever  we  handle  is  un-speakable ;  yet  we  say  ‘this  is  a  pencil , 
which  statement  is  unconditionally  false  to  facts,  because  the  object 
appears  as  an  absolute  individual  and  is  not  words.  Thus  our  s.r  are  at 
once  trained  in  delusional  values,  which  must  be  pathological. 

I  shall  never  forget  a  dramatic  moment  in  my  experience.  I  had  a 
very  helpful  and  friendly  contact  prolonged  over  a  number  of  years  with 
a  very  eminent  scientist.  After  many  discussions,  I  asked  if  some  of  the 
special  points  of  my  work  were  clear  to  him.  His  answer  was,  ‘Yes,  it  is 
all  right,  and  so  on,  but,  how  can  you  expect  me  to  follow  your  work  all 
through,  if  I  still  do  not  know  what  an  object  is?  It  was  a  genuine 
shock  to  me.  The  use  of  the  little  word  ‘is’  as  an  identity  term  applied 
to  the  objective  level  had  paralysed  most  effectively  a  great  deal  of  hard 
and  prolonged  work.  Yet,  the  semantic  blockage  which  prevented  him 
from  acquiring  the  new  s.r  is  so  simple  as  to  seem  trifling,  in  spite  of  the 
semantic  harm  done.  The  definite  answer  may  be  expressed  as  follows : 
‘Say  whatever  you  choose  about  the  object,  and  whatever  you  might  say 
is  not  it.’  Or,  in  other  words:  ‘Whatever  you  might  say  the  object  “is”, 
well  it  is  not /  This  negative  statement  is  final,  because  it  is  negative. 

I  have  enlarged  upon  this  subject  because  of  its  crucial  semantic 
importance.  Whoever  misses  this  point  is  missing  one  of  the  most  vital 
factors  of  practically  all  s.r  leading  toward  sanity.  The  above  is  easily 
verified.  In  my  experience  I  have  never  met  any  one,  even  among  scien¬ 
tists,  who  would  fully  apply  this  childish  ‘wisdom’  as  an  instinctive  ‘feel¬ 
ing’  and  factor  in  all  his  s.r.  I  want  also  to  show  the  reader  the  extreme 
simplicity  of  a  ^-system  based  on  the  denial  of  the  ‘is’  of  identity,  and  to 
forewarn  him  against  very  real  difficulties  induced  by  the  primitive  struc¬ 
ture  of  our  language  and  the  s.r  connected  with  it.  Our  actual  lives  are 
lived  entirely  on  the  objective  levels,  including  the  un-speakable  ‘feelings’, 
‘emotions’. ,  the  verbal  levels  being  only  auxiliary,  and  effective  only  if 
they  are  translated  back  into  first  order  un-speakable  effects,  such  as  an 
object,  an  action,  a  ‘feeling’. ,  all  on  the  silent  and  un-speakable  objective 
levels.  In  all  cases  of  which  I  know  at  present,  where  the  retraining  of 
our  s.r  has  had  beneficial  effects,  the  results  were  obtained  when  this 
‘silence  on  the  objective  levels’  has  been  attained,  which  affects  all  our 
psycho-logical  reactions  and  regulates  them  to  the  benefit  of  the  organism 
and  of  his  survival  adaptation. 

1.  PRELIMINARIES 

Section  C.  On  ' copying ’  in  our  nervous  reactions. 

The  selection  of  the  term  'copying’  was  forced  upon  me  after  much 
meditation.  Its  standard  meaning  implies  'reproduction  after  a  model’, 
applicable  even  to  mechanical  processes,  and  although  it  does  not  exclude, 
it  does  not  necessarily  include  conscious  copying.  It  is  not  generally 
realized  to  what  an  important  extent  copying  plays  its  role  in  higher 
animals  and  man. 

Some  characteristics  are  inborn,  some  are  acquired.  Long  ago, 
Spalding  made  experiments  with  birds.  Newly  hatched  birds  were 
enclosed  in  small  boxes  which  did  not  allow  them  to  stretch  their  wings 
or  to  see  other  birds  fly.  At  the  period  when  usually  flying  begins,  they 
were  released  and  began  to  fly  at  once  with  great  skill,  showing  that 
flying  in  birds  is  an  inborn  function.  Other  experiments  were  made  by 
Scott  to  find  out  if  the  characteristic  song  of  the  oriole  was  inborn  or 
acquired.  When  orioles,  after  being  hatched,  were  kept  away  from  their 
parents,  at  a  given  period  they  began  to  sing ;  but  the  peculiar  melody  of 
their  songs  was  different  from  the  songs  of  their  parents.  Thus,  singing 
is  an  inborn  characteristic,  but  the  special  melody  is  due  to  copying 
parents,  and  so  is  acquired.3 

In  our  human  reactions,  speech  in  general  is  an  inborn  characteristic, 
but  what  special  language  or  what  special  structure  of  language  we 
acquire  is  due  to  environment  and  copying — much  too  often  to  uncon¬ 
scious  and,  therefore,  uncritical  copying.  As  to  the  copying  of  animals 
in  our  nervous  reactions,  this  is  quite  a  simple  problem.  Self-analysis, 
which  is  rather  a  difficult  affair,  necessitating  a  serious  and  efficient 
‘mentality’,  was  impossible  in  the  primitive  stage.  Copying  parents  in 
many  respects  began  long  before  the  appearance  of  man,  who  has 
naturally  continued  this  practice  until  the  present  day.  The  results, 
therefore,  are  intimately  connected  with  reactions  of  a  pre-human  stage, 
transmitted  from  generation  to  generation.  But  for  our  present  purpose, 
the  most  important  form  of  the  copying  of  animals  was,  and  is,  the 
copying  of  the  comparative  unconditionality  of  their  conditional  reflexes, 
or  lower  order  conditionality ;  the  animalistic  identification  or  confusion 
of  orders  of  abstractions,  and  the  lack  of  consciousness  of  abstracting, 
which,  while  natural,  normal,  and  necessary  with  animals,  becomes  a 
source  of  endless  semantic  disturbances  for  humans.  More  about  copying 
will  be  explained  as  we  proceed. 

It  should  be  noticed  also  that  because  of  the  structure  of  the  nervous 
system  and  the  history  of  its  development,  the  more  an  organism  became 
‘conscious’,  the  more  this  copying  became  a  neurological  necessity,  as 

TERMINOLOGY  AND  MEANINGS 

sxemplified  in  parrots  and  apes.  With  man,  owing  to  the  lack  of  con¬ 
sciousness  of  abstracting,  his  copying  capacities  became  also  much  more 
pronounced  and  often  harmful.  Even  the  primitive  man  and  the  child 
are  ‘intelligent'  enough  to  observe  and  copy,  but  not  informed  enough  in 
the  racial  experiences  usually  called  science,  which,  for  him,  are  non¬ 
existent,  to  discriminate  between  the  reactions  on  the  ‘psychological' 
levels  of  animals  and  the  typical  responses  which  man  with  his  more  com¬ 
plex  nervous  system  should  have.  Only  an  analysis  of  structure  and 
semantic  reactions t  resulting  in  consciousness  of  abstracting,  can  free 
us  from  this  unconscious  copying  of  animals,  which,  let  us  repeat,  must 
be  pathological  for  man,  because  it  eliminates  a  most  vital  regulating 
factor  in  human  nervous  and  s.r ,  and  so  vitiates  the  whole  process.  This 
factor  is  not  simply  additive,  so  that,  when  it  is  introduced  and  super¬ 
imposed  on  any  response  of  the  human  nervous  system  allowing  such 
superimposition,  the  whole  reaction  is  fundamentally  changed  in  a 
beneficial  way. 

CHAPTER  III 

INTRODUCTION 

And  so  far  as  the  actual,  fundamental,  biological  structure  of  our  society 
is  concerned  and  notwithstanding  its  stupendous  growth  in  size  and  all  the 
tinkering  to  which  it  has  been  subjected,  we  are  still  in  much  the  same 
infantile  stage.  But  if  the  ants  are  not  despondent  because  they  have  failed 
to  produce  a  new  social  invention  or  convention  in  65  million  years,  why 
should  we  be  discouraged  because  some  of  our  institutions  and  castes  have 
not  been  able  to  evolve  a  new  idea  in  the  past  fifty  centuries?  (553) 

WILLIAM  MORTON  WHEELER 

The  ancient  who  desired  to  illustrate  illustrious  virtue  throughout  the 
empire,  first  ordered  well  their  own  state.  Wishing  to  order  well  their  own 
state,  they  first  regulated  their  families.  Wishing  to  regulate  their  families, 
they  first  cultivated  their  own  persons.  Wishing  to  cultivate  their  persons, 
they  first  rectified  their  heart.  Wishing  to  rectify  their  hearts,  they  first 
sought  to  be  sincere  in  their  thoughts.  Wishing  to  be  sincere  in  their 
thoughts,  they  extended  their  knowledge  to  the  utmost;  and  this  exten¬ 
sion  of  knowledge  lay  in  the  investigation  of  things.  Things  being  investi¬ 
gated,  knowledge  became  complete.  Their  knowledge  being  complete,  their 
thoughts  were  sincere.  Their  thoughts  being  sincere,  their  hearts  were 
then  rectified.  Their  heart  being;  rectified,  their  persons  were  cultivated. 
Their  persons  being  cultivated,  their  families  were  regulated.  Their  family 
being  regulated,  their  states  were  rightly  governed.  Their  states  being 
rightly  governed,  their  whole  empire  was  made  tranquil  and  happy.  From 
the  emperor  down  to  the  mass  of  the  people,  all  must  consider  the  cultiva¬ 
tion  of  the  person,  the  root  of  every  thing  besides.  Confucius 

My  service  at  the  front  during  the  World  War  and  an  intimate 
knowledge  of  life-conditions  in  Europe  and  the  United  States  of  Amer¬ 
ica  have  convinced  me  that  a  scientific  revision  of  all  our  notions  about 
ourselves  is  needed.  Investigation  disclosed  that  all  disciplines  dealing 
with  the  affairs  of  man  either  do  not  have  a  definition  of  man,  or,  if  they 
do,  that  it  is  formulated  in  metaphysical,  el,  subject-predicate  languages, 
which,  are  unscientific  and  ultimately  semantically  harmful. 

As  we  have,  at  present,  no  general  science  of  man  embracing  all 
his  functions,  language,  mathematics,  science  and  ‘mental*  ills  included, 
I  believed  that  to  originate  such  a  science  would  be  useful.  This  task 
I  began  in  my  Manhood  of  Humanity,  and  have  continued  in  the  present 
volume.  The  selection  of  a  name  for  such  a  science  is  difficult.  The  only 
really  appropriate  name,  ‘Anthropology*,  is  already  pre-empted  to  cover 
a  most  fundamental  and  sound  discipline,  without  which  even  modern 
psychiatry  would  be  impossible.  This  name,  at  present,  is  used  in  a 
restricted  sense  to  signify  the  animalistic  natural  history  of  man,  dis¬ 
regarding  the  fact  that  the  natural  history  of  man  must  include  factors 
non-existent  in  the  animal  world,  but  which  are  his  natural  functions, 

INTRODUCTION 

such  as  language  and  its  structure,  the  building  of  his  institutions,  laws, 
doctrines,  science,  mathematics . ,  which  condition  his  environment,  his 
s.r,  which,  in  their  turn,  influence  and  determine  his  development. 

We  see  that  the  ‘natural  history'  of  animals  differs  greatly  in  struc¬ 
ture  from  a  future  scientific  ‘ natural  history/  of  man,  a  structural  differ¬ 
ence  very  seldom  fully  realized.  I  propose,  then,  to  call  the  very  valuable 
existing  Anthropology  the  Restricted  Anthropology,  and  to  call  the 
generalized  science  of  man  General  Anthropology,  so  as  to  include 
all  his  natural  functions,  of  which  those  covered  by  the  Restricted  An¬ 
thropology  would  be  a  part. 

Such  a  definite  General  Anthropology  would  be  very  different  from 
the  existing  restricted  one.  It  would  include  all  disciplines  of  human 
interest  from  a  special  anthropological  and  semantic  point  of  view. 
Very  often  an  anthropological  discipline — for  instance,  anthropological 
psycho-logics,  anthropological  sociology,  law,  history,  or  ‘philosophy’ — 
would  turn  out  to  be  a  comparative  discipline.  Such,  by  necessity,  would 
have  to  use  a  language  of  four-dimensional  structure,  which  would 
necessitate,  as  a  preliminary,  a  fundamental  revision  of  the  structure  of 
the  language  they  use — a  semantic  factor  which,  up  to  now,  has  been 
largely  neglected. 

It  is  to  be  frankly  admitted  that  the  present  enquiry  has  led  to  some 
quite  unexpected  and  startling  results.  In  my  Manhood  of  Humanity, 
I  defined  man  functionally  as  a  time-binder,  a  definition  based  on  a 
non-el  functional  observation  that  the  human  class  of  life  differs  from 
animals  in  the  fact  that,  in  the  rough,  each  generation  of  humans,  at  least 
potentially,  can  start  where  the  former  generation  left  off — a  definition 
which,  in  the  language  of  this  particular  structure,  is  sharp,  and  corre¬ 
sponds  to  empirical  facts.  We  should  notice,  also,  that  in  the  case  of 
primitive  tribes  which  apparently  have  not  progressed  at  all  for  many 
thousands  of  years,  we  always  find,  among  other  reasons,  some  special 
doctrines  or  creeds,  which  proclaim  very  efficiently,  often  by  killing  off 
individuals  (who  always  are  responsible  for  progress  in  general),  that 
any  progress  or  departure  from  ‘time  honoured’  habits  or  prejudices  ‘is 
a  mortal  sin’  or  what  not.  Even  in  our  own  case  we  are  not  free  from 
such  semantic  tendencies.  Only  the  other  day,  historically  speaking,  the 
‘holy  inquisition’  burned  or  silenced  scientists.  The  discovery  of  the 
microscope  and  telescope,  for  instance,  was  delayed  for  a  long  time 
because  the  inventor,  in  fear  of  priestly  persecution,  was  afraid  to  write 
his  scientific  discoveries  in  plain  language.  He  had  to  write  them  in 
cipher — a  fact  discovered  only  a  few  years  ago.  Those  afflicted  with 
diseases  can  easily  realize  where  our  science  in  general,  and  medical 

I.  PRELIMINARIES 

science  in  particular,  might  be  today  if  not  for  the  holy  zeal  of  powerful 
enemies  of  science  who  vehemently  and  ruthlessly  sponsored  ignorance, 
old  s.rt  and  so  disease. 

In  some  countries,  even  at  present,  science  is  persecuted,  and  the 
attempt  is  made  to  starve  scientists,  a  device  often  quite  as  effective  as 
burning  at  the  stake,  of  which  the  Tennessee  trial  and  others  are 
examples.  But,  in  spite  of  all  these  primitive  semantic  tendencies,  which, 
unfortunately,  are  often  very  efficient,  the  general  time-binding  charac¬ 
teristic  of  man  remains  unaltered,  although  its  rate  can  be  slowed  down 
by  the  ignorance  of  those  who  control  our  symbolism — words,  money, . 

The  failure  to  understand  these  problems  is  due  to  the  fundamental 
fact  that,  until  now,  we  have  had  no  scientific  functional  non-el  defini¬ 
tion  of  man ;  neither  have  we  originated  any  scientific  enquiry  into  the 
inherent  ‘nature  of  man',  which  is  impossible  if  we  disregard  s.r .  We 
should  remember  that  in  this  commercialized  era  we  offer  large  incomes 
to  those  who  preach  with  great  zeal  how  ‘evil'  ‘human  nature  is’,  and 
who  tell  us  how,  without  their  services,  all  kinds  of  dreadful  things  will 
happen  to  a  given  individual. 

In  the  light  of  modern  enquiry,  the  above  issues  come  to  a  very 
sharp  focus.  Either  these  apostles  do  know  that  what  they  promise  has 
only  delusional  value,  yet  they  want  to  retain  their  incomes,  or  else  they 
live  in  delusional  worlds,  and  a  sane  mankind  should  take  care  of  them. 
In  either  case,  they  are  unfit  to  be  any  longer  entrusted  with  the  care  of 
the  further  development  of  culture  and  the  future  of  mankind.  Sooner 
or  later,  we  must  meet  this  semantic  situation  squarely,  as  too  many 
factors  of  human  sanity  are  at  stake. 

In  my  Manhood  of  Humanity ,  it  is  shown  that  the  canons  of  what 
we  call  ‘civilization'  or  ‘civilizations'  are  based  on  animalistic  generaliza¬ 
tions  taken  from  the  obvious  facts  of  the  lives  of  cows,  horses,  dogs, 
pigs . ,  and  applied  to  man.  Of  course,  such  generalizations  started  with 
insufficient  datat  The  generalizations  had  to  be  primitive,  superficial ;  and 
when  applied  in  practice,  periodical  collapses  were  certain  to  follow. 
No  bridge  would  stand  or  could  even  be  built,  if  we  tried  to  apply  rules 
of  surfaces  to  volumes.  The  rules  or  generalizations  in  the  two  cases 
are  different,  and  so  the  results  of  such  primitive  semantic  confusion 
must  be  disastrous  to  all  of  us. 

The  present  enquiry  began  with  the  investigation  of  the  character¬ 
istic  difference  between  animal  and  man;  namely,  the  mechanism  of 
time-binding.  This  analysis,  because  of  the  different  structure  of  the 
language  used,  had  to  be  carried  on  independently  and  anew.  The 
results  are,  in  many  instances,  new,  unexpected  even  by  myself,  and 

INTRODUCTION 

they  show  unmistakably  that,  to  a  large  extent,  even  now  we  nearly  all 
copy  animals  in  our  nervous  processes.  Investigation  further  shows  that 
such  nervous  reactions  in  man  lead  to  non-survival,  pathological  states 
of  general  infantilism ,  infantile  private  and  public  behaviour,  infantile 
institutions,  infantile  ‘civilizations'  founded  on  strife,  fights,  brute  com¬ 
petitions  . ,  these  being  supposedly  the  ‘natural’  expression  of  ‘human 
nature’,  as  different  commercialists  and  their  assistants,  the  militarists 
and  priests,  would  have  us  believe. 

As  always  in  human  affairs,  in  contrast  to  those  ot  animals,  the 
issues  are  circular.  Our  rulers,  who  rule  our  symbols,  and  so  rule  a 
symbolic  class  of  life,  impose  their  own  infantilism  on  our  institutions, 
educational  methods,  and  doctrines.  This  leads  to  nervous  maladjust¬ 
ment  of  the  incoming  generations  which,  being  born  into,  are  forced  to 
develop  under  the  un-natural  (for  man)  semantic  conditions  imposed 
on  them.  In  turn,  they  produce  leaders  afflicted  with  the  old  animalistic 
limitations.  The  vicious  circle  is  completed ;  it  results  in  a  general  state 
of  human  un-sanity,  reflected  again  in  our  institutions.  And  so  it  goes, 
on  and  on. 

At  first,  such  a  discovery  is  shocking.  On  second  consideration, 
however,  it  seems  natural  that  the  human  race,  being  relatively  so  recent, 
and  having  passed  through  different  low  levels  of  development,  should 
misunderstand  structurally  their  human  status,  should  misuse  their 
nervous  system , .  The  present  work,  which  began  as  the  ‘Manhood  of 
Humanity’  turned  out  to  be  the  ‘Adulthood  of  Humanity’,  for  it  dis¬ 
closes  a  psychophysiological  mechanism  of  infantilism,  and  so  points 
toward  its  prevention  and  to  adulthood. 

The  term  ‘infantilism’  is  often  used  in  psychiatry.  No  one  who  has 
had  any  experience  with  the  ‘mentally’  ill,  and  studied  them,  can  miss  the 
ract  that  they  always  exhibit  some  infantile  symptoms.  It  is  also  known 
that  an  adult,  otherwise  considered  ‘normal’,  but  who  exhibits  marked 
infantile  semantic  characteristics,  cannot  be  a  fully  adjusted  individual, 
and  usually  wrecks  his  own  and  other  persons’  lives. 

In  the  present  investigation,  we  have  discovered  and  formulated  a 
definite  psychophysiological  mechanism  which  is  to  be  found  in  all  cases 
of  ‘mental’  ills,  infantilism,  and  the  so-called  ‘normal’  man.  The  differ¬ 
ences  between  such  neural  disturbances  in  different  individuals  turn  out 
to  vary  only  in  degree,  and  as  they  resemble  closely  the  nervous  responses 
of  animals,  which  are  necessarily  regressive  for  man,  we  must  conclude 
that,  generally,  we  do  not  use  our  nervous  system  properly,  and  that  we 
have  not,  as  yet,  entirely  emerged  from  a  very  primitive  semantic  stage 
of  development,  in  spite  of  our  technical  achievements. 

I.  PRELIMINARIES 

Indeed,  experience  shows  that  the  more  technically  developed  a 
nation  or  race  is,  the  more  cruel,  ruthless,  predatory,  and  commercial¬ 
ized  its  systems  tend  to  become.  These  tendencies,  in  turn,  colour  and 
vitiate  international,  national,  capital-labour,  and  even  family,  relations. 

Is,  then,  the  application  of  science  at  fault?  No,  the  real  difficulty 
lies  in  the  fact  that  different  primitive,  animalistic,  un-revised  doctrines 
and  creeds  with  corresponding  s.r  have  not  advanced  in  an  equal  ratio 
with  the  technical  achievements.  When  we  analyse  these  creeds  semanti¬ 
cally,  we  find  them  to  be  based  on  structural  assumptions  which  are  false 
to  facts,  but  which  are  strictly  connected  with  the  unrevised  structure 
of  the  primitive  language,  all  of  which  is  the  more  dangerous  because  it 
works  unconsciously. 

When  we  study  comparatively  the  nervous  responses  of  animals 
and  man,  the  above  issues  become  quite  clear,  and  we  discover  a  definite 
psychophysiological  mechanism  which  marks  this  difference.  That  the 
above  has  not  been  already  formulated  in  a  workable  way  is  obviously 
due  to  the  fact  that  the  structure  of  the  old  language  successfully  pre¬ 
vented  the  discovery  of  these  differences,  and,  indeed,  has  been  largely 
responsible  for  these  human  semantic  disturbances.  Similarly,  in  the 
present  ^-system,  the  language  of  a  new  and  modern  structure,  as  exem¬ 
plified  by  terms  such  as  ‘time-binding’,  ‘orders  of  abstractions’,  ‘multi¬ 
ordinal  terms’,  ‘semantic  reactions’. ,  led  automatically  to  the  disclosure 
of  the  mechanism,  pointing  the  way  toward  the  means  of  control  of  a 
special  therapeutic  and  preventive  character. 

The  net  results  are,  in  the  meantime,  very  promising.  Investigation 
shows  that,  in  general,  the  issues  raised  are  mostly  linguistic ,  and  that, 
in  particular,  they  are  based  on  the  analysis  of  the  structure  of  languages 
in  connection  with  s.r.  All  statements,  therefore,  which  are  made  in  this 
work  are  about  empirical  facts,  language  and  its  structure.  We  deal  with 
an  obvious  and  well-known  inherent  psychophysiological  function  of  the 
human  organism,  and,  therefore,  all  statements  can  be  readily  verified 
or  eventually  corrected  and  refined,  allowing  easy  application,  and  auto¬ 
matically  eliminating  primitive  mythologies  and  s.r . 

After  all  is  done  and  said,  one  can  only  wonder  why  such  a  simple 
fact  that  language  represents  a  very  important,  unique,  and  inherent 
psychophysiological  function  of  the  human  organism  has  been  neglected 
so  long. 

The  answer  seems  to  be  that:  (1)  the  daily  language  is  structurally 
extremely  complex ;  (2)  it  is  humanly  impossible  to  analyse  its  structure 
by  using  the  language  of  A  structure,  so  that  before  anything  can  be 
done  at  all  in  this  field  a  ^-system  must  first  be  formulated ;  (3)  there  is 

INTRODUCTION 

a  general  innocence  on  the  part  of  nearly  all  specialists,  a  very  few 
mathematicians  excepted,  of  the  structural  and  semantic  role  of  the 
simplest — although  still  inadequate—^  language  called  mathematics; 
(4)  all  these  issues  involve  most  powerful  unconscious  factors  which 
work  automatically  against  any  revision,  and  (5)  the  building  of  a 
A- system  in  1933  is  an  extremely  laborious  enterprise,  to  say  the  least, 
and,  in  all  probability,  really  beyond  the  power  of  any  single  man  to 
complete. 

The  last  point  is  quite  important ;  and,  although  I  have  no  intention 
to  apologize  or  present  any  alibis,  because  any  thoughtful  reader  will 
understand  it,  I  must  explain,  nevertheless,  briefly  why  the  present  work 
has  probably  fallen  far  short  of  what  it  eventually  could  be. 

In  the  days  of  Aristotle,  we  knew  extremely  little  of  science  in  the 
1933  sense.  Aristotle,  in  his  writings,  formulated  for  us  a  whole  scien¬ 
tific  program,  which  we  followed  until  very  lately.  Whoever,  in  1933, 
attempts  to  build  a  ^-system,  must,  by  internal  necessity,  connected  with 
the  problems  of  the  structure  of  language,  do  something  similar.  Obvi¬ 
ously,  in  1933,  with  the  overwhelming  number  of  most  diversified  facts 
known  to  science,  the  question  is  no  more  to  sketch  a  scientific  program 
for  the  future,  but  to  build  a  system  which,  at  least  in  structure,  is 
similar  to  the  structure  of  the  known  facts  from  all  branches  of 
knowledge. 

Let  me  repeat:  the  necessity  is  internal,  and  connected  with  the 
structure  of  language  as  such,  involving  new  s.r,  and  so  no  one  can  avoid 
it,  as  this  whole  work  shows  in  detail. 

Now  such  structural  adjustment  requires  an  immense  amount  of 
study  of  diverse  empirical  facts,  and  then  it  must  depend  on  new  gen¬ 
eralizations,  concerned  in  the  main  with  structure.  Many  statements  of 
scientists,  when  even  accepted  as  reliable,  still  have  to  be  translated  into 
a  special  language  in  which  structural  issues  are  made  quite  obvious, 
divulging  factors  in  s.r .  This  is  a  very  serious  difficulty,  particularly 
when  many  branches  of  knowledge  are  drawn  upon,  as  each  uses  its 
own  special  language;  so  that  such  a  unitary  translation  in  terms  of 
structure  imposes  a  serious  burden  on  the  memory  of  the  translator, 
and  often  little  details  escape  attention  in  the  implications  of  the  transla¬ 
tion,  although  they  may  be  well  known  to  the  translator.  As  this  is 
probably  the  chief  difficulty,  it  is  in  this  field  that  the  main  corrections 
will  have  to  be  made. 

I  admit  that  I  started  this  enquiry  without  fully  realizing  its  inher¬ 
ent  difficulties,  or  whither  it  would  eventually  lead.  The  more  I  advanced, 
the  more  special  knowledge  was  required.  I  had  to  go  to  sources,  and, 

I.  PRELIMINARIES 

in  a  way,  partially  specialize  in  many  branches  of  science  which  were 
never  connected  before.  The  progress  was  extremely  slow ;  in  fact,  it 
has  taken  ten  years  to  write  this  book,  but  I  had  to  go  through  the 
necessary  preliminaries  or  abandon  the  whole  enterprise. 

Now  I  present  the  results  of  this  work  to  the  public.  It  is  the  best 
I  can  do,  although  I  fully  realize  its  limitations  and  imperfections.  The 
unexpected  drama  of  such  an  enterprise  is  found,  in  that  a  ^-system, 
like  its  predecessor,  involves  full-fledged  structural  metaphysics  of  some 
sort,  to  be  explained  later. 

The  A -system  involved  primitive  structural  metaphysics ;  a  A- sys¬ 
tem,  to  be  of  any  semantic  value  at  all,  must  start  with  the  structural 
metaphysics  or  structural  assumptions  as  given  by  science  1933.  The 
first  step  in  building  such  a  system  is  to  study  science  1933  and  mathe¬ 
matics,  and  so  to  know  these  structural  data  (and  assumptions  where 
we  lack  data) .  Such  a  study  is  very  laborious,  slow,  and  even  ungrate¬ 
ful,  because  the  issues  with  which  we  are  concerned  are  structural . 
Thus,  years  of  patient  and  sometimes  painful  labour  often  result  merely 
in  a  very  few  and  brief,  but  important,  sentences. 

The  active,  and  only  very  lately  relaxed,  persecution  of  those  schol¬ 
ars  who  dared  to  attempt  the  revision  of  Aristotle  has  been  very  effective 
in  keeping  the  primitive  s.r.  There  are  in  this  field  practically  no  im¬ 
portant  works  of  a  critical  character,  and  this  fact,  naturally,  made  my 
own  work  more  difficult. 

It  appears  that,  during  the  last  few  years,  most  of  the  physiological 
functions  of  the  human  organism  have  been  investigated,  with  the 
exception  of  psychophysiological  semantic  reactions  and  their  disturb¬ 
ances  from  the  present  point  of  view. 

The  study  of  aphasia  is  rather  recent,  and  that  of  semantic  aphasia 
still  more  so.  Only  since  the  World  War  has  much  new  knowledge 
been  accumulated  in  this  field.  With  the  1933  scientific  outlook,  macro¬ 
scopic  structure  becomes  a  function  of  the  sub-microscopic  dynamic 
structure,  and  the  considerations  of  colloidal  structure  and  disturbances 
become  extremely  important.  We  must,  therefore,  enlarge  the  study  of 
semantic  aphasia  as  connected  with  macroscopic  lesions,  to  include 
semantic  phasic  (not  only  a-phasic)  sub-microscopic  functional  disturb¬ 
ances  connected  with  order,  natural  survival  order  and  its  pathological 
reversal,  the  disturbances  of  the  multiordinal  semantic  reactions. 

It  is  known  that  ‘mental*  ills  or  difficulties  often  disturb  physio¬ 
logical  functions  of  the  human  organism,  and  vice  versa.  Something 
similar  appears  to  be  true  about  the  last  and  little-investigated  s.r.  In 
this  case,  more  and  special  difficulties  arise,  because  of  the  fact  that 

INTRODUCTION 

these  particular  reactions  are  strictly  connected  with  different  ‘emotional* 
or  affective  responses,  which  are  due  to  the  knowledge  (or  lack  of 
knowledge)  of  their  mechanism.  They  are  circular,  as  all  functions  con¬ 
nected  with  knowledge  are.  This  difficulty  is  very  serious  and  closely 
connected  with  the  structure  of  language ,  disclosing  also  a  tnost  impor¬ 
tant  fact,  that  languages  may  have  structure.  This  subject  could  not 
have  been  even  suggested  by  the  ^-system ;  nor  could  it  have  been 
analysed  by  A  means. 

The  most  encouraging  feature  of  this  work  is  the  fact  that  it  is 
experimental ,  and  that  in  cases  where  it  has  been  applied,  it  worked 
remarkably  well.  It  appears  that  all  desirable  human  characteristics,  high 
mentality*  included,  have  a  definite  psychophysiological  mechanism, 
easily  understood  and  easily  trained.  One  should  not  expect  this  train¬ 
ing  to  be  more  quickly  acquired  than  the  mastering  of  spelling,  or  driving 
a  car,  or  typewriting.  Practice  shows  that  it  requires  approximately  as 
much  diligence  and  persistence  as  learning  to  spell  or  to  typewrite.  The 
results  accomplished  in  the  field  of  ‘mental*  health,  widened  horizons,  and 
unlimited  possibilities  for  personal  and  public  adjustment,  justify  so 
small  a  price.  This  applies  to  adults,  but  in  a  different  way  is  true  for 
children.  From  an  educational  point  of  view,  it  is  as  simple  or  as  com¬ 
plex  to  train  children  in  the  improper  use  of  an  important  physiological 
function,  such  as  language,  as  to  train  them  in  the  proper  use  of  the 
nervous  system  and  appropriate  s.r.  In  fact,  the  new  is  simpler  and 
easier,  if  we  start  with  it,  because  it  is  in  accordance  with  ‘human 
nature*.  In  theory,  it  plays  a  most  important  role  in  the  prevention  of 
many  future  eventual  break-downs,  which  the  old  misuse  of  the  func¬ 
tion  was  certain  to  involve. 

The  problems  of  a  A- system  are,  to  the  best  of  my  knowledge, 
novel.  They  are  of  two  kinds:  (1)  scientific,  leading  to  a  theoretical, 
general  structural  revision  of  all  systems,  and  (2)  purely  practical,  such 
as  can  be  grasped  and  applied  by  any  individual  who  will  spend  the  time 
and  effort  necessary  to  master  this  system  and  acquire  the  correspond¬ 
ing  s.r. 

The  results  are  far-reaching.  They  help  any  individual  to  solve  his 
problems  by  himself,  to  his  own  and  others*  satisfaction.  They  also 
build  up  an  affective  semantic  foundation  for  personal  as  well  as  for 
national  and  international  agreement  and  adjustment. 

Some  of  the  results  are  quite  unexpected.  For  instance,  it  is  shown 
that  the  older  systems,  with  their  linguistic  methods  of  handling  our 
nervous  system,  led  inevitably  to  ‘universal  disagreement*.  In  individual 
life  this  led  to  pathological  conflicts  with  ourselves ;  in  private  life,  to 

I.  PRELIMINARIES 

family  strifes  and  unhappiness,  and  so  to  nervous  disturbances;  in 
national  life,  to  political  strifes,  revolutions . ;  in  international  affairs,  to 
mutual  misunderstanding,  suspicion,  impossibility  to  agree,  wars,  World 
Wars,  'trade  wars’. ,  ultimately  ending  in  slaughter,  general  unemploy¬ 
ment,  and  an  unnecessarily  great  amount  of  general  unrest,  worry,  con¬ 
fusion,  and  suffering  in  different  degrees  for  all,  helping  again  to  dis¬ 
turb  the  proper  working  of  the  human  nervous  system. 

The  subject  of  this  work  is  ultimately  'speaking  about  speaking’. 
As  all  human  institutions  depend  upon  speaking— even  the  World  War 
could  not  have  been  staged  without  speaking — and  as  all  science  is  ulti¬ 
mately  verbal,  such  an  analysis  must  cover  a  large  field.  In  such  an 
attempt,  therefore,,  we  must  first  understand  the  speaking  of  scientists, 
of  different  specialists.,  and  so  must  get  acquainted  with  their  languages, 
and  what  they  are  talking  about.  This  is  the  semantic  reason  why  I  have 
had  to  explain  to  the  reader  many  simple,  yet  necessary,  scientific  struc¬ 
tural  issues. 

The  present  book  is  written  on  the  level  of  the  average  intelligent 
reader,  and  any  such  reader  will  get  the  full  benefit  for  his  labour  pro¬ 
vided  he  is  willing  to  put  into  it  the  necessary  work  and  persistence. 
Perhaps  a  word  of  warning  is  necessary.  My  own  personal  experience 
is  that,  when  once  we  have  acquired  a  bad  habit,  let  us  say  in  making 
errors  in  typewriting,  this  bad  habit  is  very  difficult  to  eliminate.  A 
similar  remark  applies  to  the  old  habits  of  speech,  and  of  the  semantic 
responses  connected  with  them.  A  re-education  is  simple  in  principle, 
but  it  requires  a  great  deal  of  persistent  effort  to  overcome  undesirable 
s.r.  My  experience  convinces  me  that  the  self-satisfied,  the  'happy’ 
person,  who  has  no  problems  at  all,  if  there  is  such  a  person,  should 
not  attempt  to  read  this  book.  He  will  waste  just  so  much  effort.  But  I 
can  confidently  promise  that  any  one  who  has  any  problems  to  solve, — 
be  they  personal  difficulties  with  himself,  his  family,  or  his  associates — 
the  scientist,  the  teacher,  or  the  professional  person  who  wants  to  become 
more  efficient  in  his  own  work,  will  be  amply  repaid  for  spending  the 
necessary  'time’  in  mastering  the  linguistic,  and  so  neurological  problems 
involved  in  such  a  structural  semantic  re-education. 

This  investigation  has  turned  out  to  be  a  general  introduction  to  a 
theory  of  sanity,  the  first  ever  made,  as  far  as  I  know.  When  applied,  it 
genuinely  works;  but,  of  course,  we  have  to  apply  it  fully.  Mere  lip- 
service  will  not  do;  because  while  superficial  agreement  is  quite  easy, 
yet  physiologically,  on  a  deeper  level,  we  continue  to  follow  the  older 
harmful  s.r.  In  such  a  case  nothing  is  actually  changed ;  the  old  neuro- 
logically  harmful  animalistic  responses  persist.  For  this  the  author  and 

INTRODUCTION 

the  present  work  must  not  be  held  responsible;  the  fault  will  lie  in  the 
disregard  of  fundamental  conditions  by  the  reader  or  the  students. 

From  an  educational  point  of  view,  these  problems  are  particularly 
important.  If  teachers  disregard  the  structural  linguistic  semantic  issues, 
they  disregard  a  most  powerful  and  effective  educational  method.  If 
they  train  in  structurally  and  physiologically  harmful  A  habits,  after  this 
mechanism  has  been  disclosed,  such  teachers,  to  my  understanding,  do 
not  honestly  perform  their  very  serious  social  obligations.  Ignorance  is 
no  excuse  when  once  we  know  that  ignorance  is  the  only  possible  excuse. 

The  present  ^-system  is  far  from  perfect.  Such  a  work  as  this 
has,  of  necessity,  to  be  altered  with  the  years,  as  the  structure  of  the 
language  used  has  to  be  continually  adjusted  to  newly  discovered  empiri¬ 
cal  structural  data.  But  the  present  enquiry  at  least  shows  that  in  the 
researches  in  the  linguistic  and  structural  semantic  fields  there  are  un¬ 
dreamed-of  possibilities  of  tremendous  power,  and  the  circularity  of 
human  knowledge  is  made  to  work  with  an  increasing  acceleration  in  a 
constructive  way  toward  the  adulthood  of  man. 

In  Chapter  I,  I  have  given  a  tentative  list  of  some  results  following 
from  the  present  work.  Among  them  we  found  a  new  and  semantic 
definition  of  number  and  mathematics,  to  be  explained  in  Chapter  XVIII. 
This  has  very  far-reaching  consequences,  because  the  existing  definition 
of  number  is  A,  in  terms  of  classes,  and  makes  the  importance  of  mathe¬ 
matics  still  more  mysterious.  With  the  discovery  that  the  only  content 
of  knowledge  is  structural,  understood  as  a  complex  of  relations  and 
multiordinal  and  multi-dimensional  order,  and  that  the  structure  of  the 
nervous  system  is  such  that  only  in  mathematics  do  we  find  a  language 
of  similar  structure ,  the  importance  of  mathematics,  considered  as  a 
language,  becomes  of  fundamental  semantic  significance  for  a  theory 
of  sanity.  But  to  show  that,  and  to  be  able  to  apply  this  fact  in  practice, 
we  must  clarify  or  rather  eliminate  the  mystery  which  surrounds  num¬ 
ber  and  measurement.  The  semantic  definition  of  number  is  given  in 
terms  of  relations,  and  so  number  and  measurement  become  the  most 
potent  factors  for  supplying  us  with  information  about  structure,  which 
we  know  already  gives  the  only  content  of  knowledge. 

At  this  point,  I  feel  it  essential  to  refer  to  the  unique  and  astonish¬ 
ing  work  of  Oswald  Spengler,  The  Decline  of  the  West.  This  work  is 
a  product  of  such  unusual  scholarship  and  breadth  of  vision  that,  in 
many  instances,  the  details  do  not  matter.  Its  method,  its  scope,  and 
the  complete  novelty  of  its  general  point  of  view,  combined  with  such 
tremendous  erudition,  are  of  main  importance.  The  work  is  labeled  by 
the  author  as  a  ‘philosophy  of  history*,  or  a  morphology  of  history,  or 

1.  PRELIMINARIES 

morphology  of  cultures.  The  word  ‘morphology’  is  used  as  implying  the 
study  of  forms,  and  the  term  ‘form’  appears  very  frequently  through¬ 
out  the  book. 

The  main  contention  of  this  work — and  it  is  an  entirely  justified 
observation — is  that  the  behaviour  of  the  organisms  called  humans  is 
such  that,  at  different  periods,  they  have  produced  definite  aggregates  of 
achievements,  which  we  dissect  and  label  ‘science’,  ‘mathematics’,  archi¬ 
tecture’,  ‘sculpture’,  ‘music’. ,  and  that  at  any  given  period  all  these 
achievements  are  interconnected  by  a  psycho-logical  necessity.  To  this 
statement  I  would  add :  the  structure  of  languages  of  a  given  period 
which  affect  the  s.r  should  not  be  disregarded. 

Spengler  is  a  mathematician,  an  extremely  well  and  generally  in¬ 
formed  mathematician  at  that,  with  a  great  vision.  He  surveys  these 
aggregates  as  definite  units  and  shows  the  necessary  psycho-logical  con¬ 
nections  between  all  the  achievements  and  the  evolution  of  the  notion 
of  number.  It  does  not  matter  whether  all  his  connections  are  always 
beyond  criticism.  That  some  such  connections  do  exist,  seems  beyond 
doubt.  All  human  achievements  have  been  accomplished  in  some  definite 
period,  and  they  have  been  accomplished  at  a  definite  period  only  because 
of  the  necessary  psycho-logical  attitude  and  s.r  of  that  period. 

With  regard  to  the  method  followed  in  this  work  of  Spengler,  we 
must  notice,  first  of  all,  that  the  attitude  of  the  work  is  frankly  anthro¬ 
pological,  in  the  sense  of  General  Anthropology ;  namely,  as  the  natural 
history  of  man ,  not  disregarding  man’s  natural  behaviour,  such  as  build¬ 
ing  up  sciences,  mathematics,  arts  and  institutions,  and  creating  new 
environments,  which  again  influence  his  development.  Morphology 
means  ‘study  of  forms’,  which  carries  static  implications.  Taken  from 
the  dynamic  point  of  view  1933,  when  we  know  that  the  dynamic  unit, 
out  of  which  the  world  and  ourselves  appear  to  be  built,  is  found  in  the 
dynamic  atom  of  ‘action’ ;  his  ‘form’  becomes  four-dimensional  dynamic 
structure ,  the  equivalent  of  ‘function’ ;  and  then  the  whole  outlook  of 
Spengler  becomes  a  structural  enquiry  into  the  world  of  man,  including 
all  his  activities. 

This  ‘form’,  or  rudimentary  structural  point  of  view,  or  feeling,  or 
inclination,  or  tendency,  or  s.r — call  it  what  you  choose — Spengler,  the 
mathematician  and  historian,  acquires  from  the  deep  study  of  mathe¬ 
matics  considered  as  a  form  of  human  behaviour;  which,  in  turn,  is  a 
part  of  his  behaviour  when  he  was  planning  and  accomplishing  his  work, 
a  natural  expression  of  the  strivings  of  his  epoch,  which  is  also  our  own. 
In  my  own  work,  I  have  attempted  to  formulate  these  vague  strivings  of 
our  epoch  in  the  form  of  a  general  semantic  psychophysiological  theory. 

INTRODUCTION 

From  this  point  of  view,  his  achievement  is  momentous,  a  great 
description  of  the  childhood  of  humanity.  In  spite  of  the  title,  there  is 
nothing  pessimistic  about  it,  although  most  of  his  readers  understood  it 
in  that  way.  The  Decline  of  the  West'  implies  the  birth  of  a  new  era, 
perhaps  the  adulthood  of  humanity.  There  is  no  doubt  in  1933  that  the 
collapses  of  the  older  systems  which  we  witness  are  probably  irrevocable. 
Sir  Auckland  Geddes,  the  British  Ambassador  to  the  United  States 
of  America,  foresaw  them  when  he  said  in  1920:  ‘In  Europe,  we  know 
that  an  age  is  dying.  Here  it  would  be  easy  to  miss  the  signs  of  coming 
changes,  but  I  have  little  doubt  that  it  will  come.  A  realization  of  the 
aimlessness  of  life  lived  to  labour  and  to  die,  having  achieved  nothing 
but  avoidance  of  starvation,  and  the  birth  of  children  also  doomed  to  the 
weary  treadmill,  has  seized  the  minds  of  millions/ 

In  1932  Ambassador  Mellon,  of  the  United  States  of  America  to 
Great  Britain,  said: 

Tart  of  our  difficulty  arises  because  we  look  on  the  present  indus¬ 
trial  economic  crisis  as  merely  a  sporadic  illness  of  the  body  politic  due  to 
conditions  in  some  particular  country  or  section  of  the  world  which 
can  be  cured  by  applications  of  some  magic  formula.  Greater  difficulty 
arises  because  we  who  are  left  over  from  the  last  century  continue  to 
look  on  the  last  decade  as  merely  a  prolongation  of  all  that  is  gone 
before.  We  insist  upon  trying  to  make  life  flow  in  the  same  channels 
as  before  the  war,  whereas  in  the  years  since  the  war  ended  are,  in  real¬ 
ity,  the  beginning  of  a  new  era,  not  the  end  of  the  old/ 

To  this  statement  of  Ambassador  Mellon,  the  newspapers  comment 
as  follows: 

This  is  an  important  utterance,  since,  as  far  as  we  know,  it  is  the 
first  admission  from  the  ruling  forces  in  this  country  that  the  present 
panic  is  not  “just  another  panic”/ 

No  doubt,  a  period  of  human  development  has  ended.  The  only 
sensible  way  is  to  look  forward  to  a  full  understanding  of  the  next 
phase,  get  hold  of  this  understanding,  keep  it  under  conscious  and  scien¬ 
tific  control,  and  avoid  this  time,  perhaps  for  the  first  time  in  human 
history,  the  unnecessary  decay,  bewilderment,  apathy,  individual  and 
mass  suffering  in  a  human  life-period,  animalistically  believed,  up  to 
now,  to  be  unavoidable  in  the  passing  of  an  era.  Instead  of  being  swept 
down  by  animalistic  resistance  to  the  humanly  unavoidable  change,  we 
must  analyse,  understand,  and  so  keep  conscious  control  of  one  change 
to  another,  and,  as  yet,  always  higher  state  of  human  culture. 

This  is  no  place  to  analyse  these  issues  in  detail.  Volumes  have 
already  been  written  about  the  work  of  Spengler.  More  volumes  will 

T.  PRELIMINARIES 

be  necessary  to  analyse  the  issues  raised,  and  not  always  solved,  in  this 
present  volume. 

I  want  to  make  clear  only  that  words  are  not  the  things  spoken 
about,  and  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  an  object  in  absolute  isolation. 
These  assertions  are  negative  and  experimental  and  cannot  be  success¬ 
fully  denied  by  any  one,  except  by  producing  positive  evidence,  which  is 
impossible. 

We  must  realize  that  structure,  and  structure  alone ,  is  the  only  link 
between  languages  and  the  empirical  world.  Starting  with  undeniable 
negative  premises,  we  can  always  translate  them  into  positive  terms,  but 
such  translation  has  a  new  and  hitherto  unprecedented  security.  In  the 
era  which  is  passing,  positive  premises  were  supposed  to  be  important, 
and  we  did  not  know  that  a  whole  ^-system  can  be  built  on  negative 
premises.  The  new  era  will  have  to  revaluate  these  data,  and  build  its 
systems  on  negative  premises,  which  are  of  much  greater  security.  A 
priori,  we  cannot  know  if  such  systems  can  be  built  at  all,  for  in  this 
field  the  only  possible  ‘proof*  is  actual  performance  and  the  exhibition 
of  a  sample. 

This  has  been  attempted  in  my  work,  and  so  the  possibility  of  such 
systems  becomes  a  fact  on  record. 

In  the  new  era,  the  role  of  mathematics  considered  as  a  form  of 
human  behaviour  and  as  a  language  will  come  to  the  fore.  Means  can 
be  found,  as  exemplified  in  the  present  volume,  to  impart  mathematical 
structure  to  language  without  any  technicalities.  It  is  enough  to  under¬ 
stand  the  above-mentioned  negative  premises  and  the  role  of  structure, 
and  to  produce  systems  from  this  angle. 

The  role  of  mathematics  has  been  and,  in  general,  is  still  misunder¬ 
stood,  perhaps  because  of  the  very  unsatisfactory  definition  of  number. 
Even  Spengler  asserts  that  ‘If  mathematics  were  a  mere  science,  like 
astronomy  or  mineralogy,  it  would  be  possible  to  define  their  object. 
This,  man  is  not,  and  never  has  been,  able  to  do.’  The  facts  are  that 
mathematicians  have  been  prone  to  impress  us  with  some  religious  awe 
of  mathematics;  meanwhile,  by  definition,  whatever  has  symbols  and 
propositions  must  be  considered  a  language .  All  mystery  vanishes  in 
this  field,  and  the  only  question  is  as  to  what  kind  of  language  mathe¬ 
matics  represents.  From  the  structural  point  of  view,  the  answer  is 
simple  and  obvious.  Mathematics,  although  in  daily  life  it  appears  as  a 
most  insufficient  language,  seems  to  be  the  only  language  ever  produced 
by  man,  which,  in  structure,  is  similar,  or  the  most  similar  known,  to  the 
structure  of  the  world  and  of  our  nervous  system .  To  be  more  explicit, 

INTRODUCTION 

let  me  say  at  once  that  in  this  'similarity  of  structure’  we  find  the  only 
positive  ‘knowledge*  of  1933,  and,  perhaps,  of  any  date. 

So  far,  I  am  in  full  agreement  with  the  great  work  of  Spengler. 
More  than  that,  The  Decline  of  the  West  may  be  considered  as  a  pre¬ 
liminary  and  preparatory  survey  of  the  great  cultural  spasms  which  have 
rocked  mankind.  It  may  be  instructive,  in  the  meantime,  to  point  out 
some  differences,  and  the  eventual  difference  of  conclusions,  between  the 
present  work  and  the  work  of  Spengler. 

The  difference,  to  start  with,  is  in  language.  Spengler  announces  his 
work  as  'intuitive  and  depictive  through  and  through,  which  seeks  to 
present  objects  and  relations  illustratively  instead  of  offering  an  army 
of  ranked  concepts*. 

My  own  aim  is  not  merely  descriptive,  but  structural  and  analytical, 
and  so  I  must  use  a  different  language,  helping  to  discover  semantic 
psychophysiological  mechanisms  of  the  events  of  which  Spengler  is  giving 
us  a  very  exceptional  picture . 

Spengler  missed  two  points :  that  mathematics  must  be  considered  a 
language ;  and  that  the  connection  which  he  asserts  between  the  mathe¬ 
matics  of  each  period  and  other  achievements  is  more  general  than  he 
suspects  and  applies  to  the  inherent  structure  of  languages,  in  general, 
and  the  s.r  of  each  period,  in  particular. 

Although  his  analysis  is  in  effect  A,  yet  the  A  issues  are  not  formu¬ 
lated  clearly  or  consciously ;  nor  does  he  mention  that  the  present-day 
accepted  definition  of  number  in  terms  of  classes  is  still  A .  It  is  true 
that  he  considers  'forms*  and  the  use  of  number  as  relations,  but  he 
does  not  emphasize  that  number  has  not  been  formally  defined  as  a  rela¬ 
tion,  which  is  essential  in  a  ^-system.  His  'form*  is  still  static  and  not 
dynamic  structure ;  nor  did  he  discover  that  the  only  possible  content  of 
knowledge  is  structural,  a  fact  which  is  the  semantic  factor  responsible 
for  'cultures*,  and  'periods',  and  everything  else  in  human  development. 

This  present  work  is  in  great  sympathy  with  the  momentous  work 
of  Spengler ;  but,  as  it  culminates  in  a  ^-system,  it  goes  further  than  his, 
and  is  more  workable  and  more  practical,  confirming  the  general  con¬ 
tention  of  Spengler,  that  cultures  have  their  periods  of  growth  and 
development  and  that,  so  far,  without  conscious  human  intention,  they 
are  superseded  by  others. 

We  should  notice  once  more  in  this  respect  that  the  issues  we  deal 
with,  whenever  human  psycho-logical  reactions  are  involved,  are  circu¬ 
lar,  as  distinguished  from  animal  reactions.  Human  structures,  in 
language  or  in  stone,  reflect  the  psycho-logical  status,  feelings,  intuitions, 
structural  metaphysics,  and  other  s.rt  of  their  makers  and  periods ;  and, 

I.  PRELIMINARIES 

vice  versa,  once  these  structural  strivings  and  tendencies  are  formulated 
as  such,  they  help  to  quicken  and  transform  one  period  into  the  next  one. 

To  the  best  of  my  knowledge,  the  general  analysis  of  this  most  fun¬ 
damental  structural  semantic  problem  of  human  knowledge  is  here 
formulated  for  the  first  time.  It  will  allow,  as  a  result,  the  making  of 
human  progress  conscious ;  it  will  enable  us  to  control  it  and  so  to  make 
it  uninterrupted  by  the  painful  and  wasteful  semantic  periods  of  hope¬ 
lessness  and  helplessness  so  characteristic  of  the  older  periods  of 
transition. 

If  it  is  an  historical  fact  and  also  a  psycho-logical  fact  that  a  time¬ 
binding  class  of  life  has  to  have  periods  of  development,  let  us  have 
them !  Let  us  investigate  the  mechanism  of  time-binding,  of  j.r,  which 
are  the  dynamic  factors  of  those  changes  and  developments !  Let  us  direct 
that  development  consciously,  and  this  will  lead  to  the  elimination  of 
unnecessary  and  painful  panics,  unrest,  and  the  often  bloody  bursting 
of  those  animalistic  barriers  self-imposed  on  the  dynamic  class  of  life 
called  ‘man’. 

When  all  is  said  and  done,  one  cannot  but  see,  at  least  as  far  as 
the  white  race  is  concerned,  that  a  change  from  an  A  to  a  ^-system 
must  be  momentous.  Such  a  change  will  mark  the  difference  between  a 
period  when  the  mystery  of  ‘human  knowledge’  was  not  solved  and  a 
period  when  it  has  been  solved.  This  inherent  human  circular  character¬ 
istic  has,  so  far,  been  neurologically  abused.  We  have  not  known  how 
to  handle  our  nervous  structure.  We  have  imposed  upon  and  hampered 
human  development  by  animalistic  methods.  The  solving  of  the  prob¬ 
lems  of  the  content  of  ‘human  knowledge’  will  open  a  new  era  of  man 
as  a  man ,  leading  toward  proper  handling  of  his  capacities,  and  an  era 
scientific  in  all  respects,  not  merely  in  a  few  exact  sciences.  Psycho¬ 
logically,  it  will  be  an  era  of  sanity,  and,  therefore,  of  human  general 
adjustment,  agreement,  and  co-operation.  The  dreams  of  Leibnitz  will 
become  sober  reality. 

The  only  determined  attempt  made,  so  far,  to  deal  with  the  sym¬ 
bolic  problems  whose  importance  is  emphasized  in  the  present  work  is 
that  of  the  Orthological  Institute  ( 10  King’s  Parade,  Cambridge,  Eng¬ 
land).  This  research  organization,  founded  by  C.  K.  Ogden,  editor  of 
‘The  International  Library  of  Psychology’,  is  concerned  with  the  influ¬ 
ence  of  language  on  ‘thought’  in  all  its  bearings ;  and  it  is  to  be  hoped 
that  further  endowment  may  be  forthcoming  to  enable  the  scope  of  its 
enquiries  to  be  extended  to  include  structure ,  non-elementalistic  semantic 
reactions ,  and  non-aristotelian  systems.  Reference  to  International  Lan¬ 
guages  or  a  Universal  Language  will  be  found  in  the  notes.1 

PART  II 

GENERAL  ON  STRUCTURE 

The  relativity  theory  of  physics  reduces  everything  to  relations;  that  is 
to  say,  it  is  structure,  not  material,  which  counts.  The  structure  cannot 
be  built  up  without  material;  but  the  nature  of  the  material  is  of  no  im¬ 
portance.  (147)  A.  S.  EDDINGTON 

Structure  and  function  are  mutually  related.  Function  produces  struc¬ 
ture  and  structure  modifies  and  determines  the  character  of  function.  <90> 

CHARLES  M.  CHILD 

These  difficulties  suggest  to  my  mind  some  such  possibility  as  this:  that 
every  language  has,  as  Mr.  Wittgenstein  says,  a  structure  concerning  which, 
in  the  language ,  nothing  can  be  said,  but  that  there  may  be  another  language 
dealing  with  the  structure  of  the  first  language,  and  having  itself  a  new 
structure,  and  that  to  this  hierarchy  of  languages  there  may  be  no  limit. 
Mr.  Wittgenstein  would  of  course  reply  that  his  whole  theory  is  applicable 
unchanged  to  the  totality  of  such  languages.  1  he  only  retort  would  be  to 
deny  that  there  is  any  such  totality.  (456)  bertrand  russell 

CHAPTER  IV 

ON  STRUCTURE 

No  satisfactory  justification  has  ever  been  given  for  connecting  in  any 
way  the  consequences  of  mathematical  reasoning  with  the  physical  world, 

(22)  E.  T.  BELL 

Any  student  of  science,  or  of  the  history  of  science,  can  hardly 
miss  two  very  important  tendencies  which  pervade  the  work  of  those 
who  have  accomplished  most  in  this  field.  The  first  tendency  is  to  base 
science  more  and  more  on  experiments ;  the  other  is  toward  greater  and 
more  critical  verbal  rigour.  The  one  tendency  is  to  devise  more  and  bet¬ 
ter  instruments,  and  train  the  experimenters;  the  other  is  to  invent 
better  verbal  forms,  better  forms  of  representation  and  of  theories,  so 
as  to  present  a  more  coherent  account  of  the  experimental  facts. 

The  second  tendency  has  an  importance  equal  to  that  of  the  first ; 
a  number  of  isolated  facts  does  not  produce  a  science  any  more  than  a 
heap  of  bricks  produces  a  house.  The  isolated  facts  must  be  put  in 
order  and  brought  into  mutual  structural  relations  in  the  form  of  some 
theory.  Then,  only,  do  we  have  a  science,  something  to  start  from,  to 
analyse,  ponder  on,  criticize,  and  improve.  Before  this  something  can 
be  criticized  and  improved ,  it  must  first  be  produced,  so  the  investigator 
who  discovers  some  fact,  or  who  formulates  some  scientific  theory,  does 
not  often  waste  his  time.  Even  his  errors  may  be  useful,  because  they 
may  stimulate  other  scientists  to  investigate  and  improve. 

Scientists  found  long  ago  that  the  common  language  in  daily  use 
is  of  little  value  in  science.  This  language  gives  us  a  form  of  representa¬ 
tion  of  very  old  structure  in  which  we  find  it  impossible  to  give  a  full, 
coherent  account  of  ourselves  or  of  the  world  around  us.  Each  science 
has  to  build  a  special  terminology  adapted  to  its  own  special  purposes. 
This  problem  of  a  suitable  language  is  of  serious  importance.  Too  little 
do  we  realize  what  a  hindrance  a  language  of  antiquated  structure  is. 
Such  a  language  does  not  help,  but  actually  prevents,  correct  analysis 
through  the  semantic  habits  and  structural  implications  embodied  in  it. 
The  last  may  be  of  great  antiquity  and  bound  up,  by  necessity,  with 
primitive-made  structural  implications,  or,  as  we  say,  metaphysics, 
involving  primitive  s.r. 

The  above  explains  why  the  popularization  of  science  is  such  a 
difficult  and,  perhaps,  even  a  semantically  dangerous  problem.  We  at¬ 
tempt  to  translate  a  creative  and  correct  language  which  has  a  structure 

IL  GENERAL  ON  STRUCTURE 

similar  to  the  structure  of  the  experimental  facts  into  a  language  of 
different  structure,  entirely  foreign  to  the  world  around  us  and  our¬ 
selves.  Although  the  popularization  of  science  will  probably  remain  an 
impossible  task,  it  remains  desirable  that  the  results  of  science  should 
be  made  accessible  to  the  layman,  if  means  could  be  found  which  do  not, 
by  necessity,  involve  misleading  accounts.  It  seems  that  such  methods 
are  at  hand  and  these  involve  structural  and  semantic  considerations. 

The  term  ‘structure*  is  frequently  used  in  modern  scientific  litera¬ 
ture,  but,  to  the  best  of  my  knowledge,  only  Bertrand  Russell  and  Witt¬ 
genstein  have  devoted  serious  attention  to  this  problem,  and  much 
remains  to  be  done.  These  two  authors  have  analysed  or  spoken  about 
the  structure  of  propositions,  but  similar  notions  can  be  generalized  to 
languages  considered  as-a-whole.  To  be  able  to  consider  the  structure 
of  one  language  of  a  definite  structure,  we  must  produce  another  lan¬ 
guage  of  a  different  structure  in  which  the  structure  of  the  first  can  be 
analysed.  This  procedure  seems  to  be  new  when  actually  performed, 
although  it  has  been  foreseen  by  Russell.1  If  we  produce  a  ^-system 
based  on  ‘relations*,  ‘order*,  ‘structure*. ,  we  shall  be  able  to  discuss  profit¬ 
ably  the  ^-system,  which  does  not  allow  asymmetrical  relations,  and  so 
cannot  be  analysed  by  A  means. 

The  dictionary  meaning  of  ‘structure*  is  given  somewhat  as  follows : 
Structure:  Manner  in  which  a  building  or  organism  or  other  complete 
whole  is  constructed,  supporting  framework  or  whole  of  the  essential 
parts  of  something  (the  structure  of  a  house,  machine,  animal,  organ, 
poem,  sentence ;  sentence  of  loose  structure,  its  structure  is  ingenious ; 
ornament  should  emphasize  and  not  disguise  the  lines  of  structure) , . 
The  implications  of  the  term  ‘structure*  are  clear,  even  from  its  daily 
sense.  To  have  ‘structure*  we  must  have  a  complex  of  ordered  and 
interrelated  parts. 

‘Structure*  is  analysed  in  Principia  Mathematica  and  is  also  simply 
explained  in  Russell’s  more  popular  works.2  The  Tractatus  of  Wittgen¬ 
stein  is  built  on  structural  considerations,  although  not  much  is  explained 
about  structure,  for  the  author  apparently  assumes  the  reader’s  acquaint¬ 
ance  with  the  works  of  Russell.3 

One  of  the  fundamental  functions  of  ‘mental*  processes  is  to  dis¬ 
tinguish.  We  distinguish  objects  by  certain  characteristics,  which  are 
usually  expressed  by  adjectives.  If,  by  a  higher  order  abstraction,  we 
consider  individual  objects,  not  in  some  perfectly  fictitious  ‘isolation’, 
but  as  they  appear  empirically,  as  members  of  some  aggregate  or  col¬ 
lection  of  objects,  we  find  characteristics  which  belong  to  the  collection 

ON  STRUCTURE 

and  not  to  an  "isolated1  object.  Such  characteristics  as  arise  from  the 
fact  that  the  object  belongs  to  a  collection  are  called  ‘relations'. 

In  such  collections,  we  have  the  possibility  of  ordering  the  objects, 
and  so,  for  instance,  we  may  discover  a  relation  that  one  object  is  ‘be¬ 
fore'  or  ‘after'  the  other,  or  that  A  is  the  father  of  B.  There  are  many 
ways  in  which  we  can  order  a  collection,  and  many  relations  which  we 
can  find.  It  is  important  to  notice  that  ‘order'  and  ‘relations’  are,  for 
the  most  part,  empirically  present  and  that,  therefore,  this  language 
is  fit  to  represent  the  facts  as  we  know  them.  The  structure  of  the  actual 
world  is  such  that  it  is  impossible  entirely  to  isolate  an  object.  An  A 
subject-predicate  language,  with  its  tendency  to  treat  objects  as  in  isola¬ 
tion  and  to  have  no  place  for  relations  (impossible  in  complete  ‘isola¬ 
tion'),  obviously  has  a  structure  not  similar  to  the  structure  of  the 
world,  in  which  we  deal  only  with  collections,  of  which  the  members 
are  related. 

Obviously,  under  such  empirical  conditions,  only  a  language  origi¬ 
nating  in  the  analysis  of  collections,  and,  therefore,  a  language  of  ‘rela¬ 
tions’,  ‘order’. ,  would  have  a  similar  structure  to  the  world  around  us. 
From  the  use  of  a  subject-predicate  form  of  language  alone,  many  of 
our  fallacious  anti-social  and  ‘individualistic’  metaphysics  and  sr  follow, 
which  we  will  not  analyse  here,  except  to  mention  that  their  structural 
implications  follow  the  structure  of  the  language  they  use. 

If  we  carry  the  analysis  a  step  further,  we  can  find  relations 
between  relations,  as,  for  instance,  the  similarity  of  relations.  We  fol¬ 
low  the  definition  of  Russell.  Two  relations  are  said  to  be  similar  if 
there  is  a  one-one  correspondence  between  the  terms  of  their  fields, 
which  is  such  that,  whenever  two  terms  have  the  relation  P,  their  cor¬ 
relates  have  the  relation  Q,  and  vice  versa.  For  example,  two  series  are 
similar  when  their  terms  can  be  correlated  without  change  of  order,  an 
accurate  map  is  similar  to  the  territory  it  represents,  a  book  spelt  pho¬ 
netically  is  similar  to  the  sounds  when  read ,  * 

When  two  relations  are  similar,  we  say  that  they  have  a  similar 
structure ,  which  is  defined  as  the  class  of  all  relations  similar  to  the 
given  relation. 

We  see  that  the  terms  ‘collection’,  ‘aggregate’,  ‘class’,  ‘order’,  ‘rela¬ 
tions',  ‘structure’  are  interconnected,  each  implying  the  others.  If  we 
decide  to  face  empirical  ‘reality’  boldly,  we  must  accept  the  Einstein- 
Minkowski  four-dimensional  language,  for  ‘space’  and  ‘time’  cannot  be 
separated  empirically ,  and  so  we  must  have  a  language  of  similar  struc¬ 
ture  and  consider  the  facts  of  the  world  as  series  of  interrelated  ordered 
events ,  to  which,  as  above  explained,  we  must  ascribe  ‘structure’.  Ein- 

II.  GENERAL  ON  STRUCTURE 

5K 

stein’s  theory,  in  contrast  to  Newton’s  theory,  gives  us  such  a  language , 
similar  in  structure  to  the  empirical  facts  as  revealed  by  science  1933 
and  common  experience . 

The  above  definitions  are  not  entirely  satisfactory  for  our  purpose. 
To  begin  with,  let  us  give  an  illustration,  and  indicate  in  what  direction 
some  reformulation  could  be  made. 

Let  us  take  some  actual  territory  in  which  cities  appear  in  the  fol¬ 
lowing  order:  Paris,  Dresden,  Warsaw,  when  taken  from  the  West  to 
the  East.  If  we  were  to  build  a  map  of  this  territory  and  place  Paris 
between  Dresden  and  Warsaw  thus : 

Actual  territory  * - * - - * 

Paris  Dresden  Warsaw 

Map  * — — - - * - * 

Dresden  Paris  Warsaw 

we  should  say  that  the  map  was  wrong,  or  that  it  was  an  incorrect  map, 
or  that  the  map  has  a  different  structure  from  the  territory.  If,  speak¬ 
ing  roughly,  we  should  try,  in  our  travels,  to  orient  ourselves  by  such  a 
map,  we  should  find  it  misleading.  It  would  lead  us  astray,  and  we 
might  waste  a  great  deal  of  unnecessary  effort.  In  some  cases,  even,  a 
map  of  wrong  structure  would  bring  actual  suffering  and  disaster,  as, 
for  instance,  in  a  war,  or  in  the  case  of  an  urgent  call  for  a  physician. 

Two  important  characteristics  of  maps  should  be  noticed.  A  map 
is  not  the  territory  it  represents,  but,  if  correct,  it  has  a  similar  structure 
to  the  territory,  which  accounts  for  its  usefulness.  If  the  map  could  be 
ideally  correct,  it  would  include,  in  a  reduced  scale,  the  map  of  the  map ; 
the  map  of  the  map,  of  the  map;  and  so  on,  endlessly,  a  fact  first  noticed 
by  Royce. 

If  we  reflect  upon  our  languages,  we  find  that  at  best  they  must 
be  considered  only  as  maps .  A  word  is  not  the  object  it  represents  ;  and 
languages  exhibit  also  this  peculiar  self-reflexiveness,  that  we  can 
analyse  languages  by  linguistic  means.  This  self-reflexiveness  of  lan¬ 
guages  introduces  serious  complexities,  which  can  only  be  solved  by  the 
theory  of  multiordinality,  given  in  Part  VII.  The  disregard  of  these 
complexities  is  tragically  disastrous  in  daily  life  and  science. 

It  has  been  mentioned  already  that  the  known  definitions  of  struc¬ 
ture  are  not  entirely  satisfactory.  The  terms  ‘relation’,  ‘order’,  ‘struc¬ 
ture’  are  interconnected  by  implication.  At  present,  we  usually  consider 
order  as  a  kind  of  relation.  With  the  new  four-dimensional  notions 
taken  from  mathematics  and  physics,  it  may  be  possible  to  treat  relations 
and  structure  as  a  form  of  multi-dimensional  order .  Perhaps,  theoreti¬ 
cally,  such  a  change  is  not  so  important,  but,  from  a  practical,  applied, 

ON  STRUCT UR K 

educational,  and  semantic  point  of  view,  it  seems  very  vital.  Order  seems 
neurologically  simpler  and  more  fundamental  than  relation.  It  is  a  char¬ 
acteristic  of  the  empirical  world  which  we  recognize  directly  by  our 
lower  nervous  centres  (‘senses’),  and  with  which  we  can  deal  with  great 
accuracy  by  our  higher  nervous  centres  (‘thinking’).  This  term  seems 
most  distinctly  of  the  organism-as-a-whole  character,  applicable  both  to 
the  activities  of  the  higher,  as  well  as  lower,  nervous  centres,  and  so 
structurally  it  must  be  fundamental. 

The  rest  of  this  volume  is  devoted  to  showing  that  the  common, 
A -system  and  language  which  we  inherited  from  our  primitive  ancestors 
differ  entirely  in  structure  from  the  well-known  and  established  1933 
structure  of  the  world,  ourselves  and  our  nervous  systems  included. 
Such  antiquated  map-language,  by  necessity,  must  lead  us  to  semantic 
disasters,  as  it  imposes  and  reflects  its  unnatural  structure  on  the  struc¬ 
ture  of  our  doctrines  and  institutions.  Obviously,  under  such  linguistic 
conditions,  a  science  of  man  was  impossible ;  differing  in  structure  from 
our  nervous  system,  such  language  must  also  disorganize  the  function¬ 
ing  of  the  latter  and  lead  us  away  from  sanity. 

This  once  understood,  we  shall  see  clearly  that  researches  into  the 
structure  of  language  and  the  adjustment  of  this  structure  to  the  struc¬ 
ture  of  the  world  and  ourselves,  as  given  by  science  at  each  date,  must 
lead  to  new  languages,  new  doctrines,  institutions.,  and,  in  fine,  may 
result  in  a  new  and  saner  civilization,  involving  new  s.r  which  may  be 
called  the  scientific  era. 

The  introduction  of  a  few  new,  and  the  rejection  of  some  old, 
terms  suggests  desirable  structural  changes,  and  adjusts  the  structure  of 
the  language-map  to  the  known  structure  of  the  world,  ourselves,  and 
the  nervous  system,  and  so  leads  us  to  new  s.r  and  a  theory  of  sanity. 

As  words  are  not  the  objects  which  they  represent,  structure,  and 
structure  alone,  becomes  the  only  link  which  connects  our  verbal  processes 
with  the  empirical  data.  To  achieve  adjustment  and  sanity  and  the  con¬ 
ditions  which  follow  from  them,  we  must  study  structural  characteristics 
of  this  world  iirst,  and,  then  only,  build  languages  of  similar  structure, 
instead  of  habitually  ascribing  to  the  world  the  primitive  structure  of 
our  language.  All  our  doctrines,  institutions . ,  depend  on  verbal  argu¬ 
ments.  If  these  arguments  are  conducted  in  a  language  of  wrong  and 
unnatural  structure,  our  doctrines  and  institutions  must  reflect  that  lin¬ 
guistic  structure  and  so  become  unnatural,  and  inevitably  lead  to 
disasters. 

That  languages,  as  such,  all  have  some  structure  or  other  is  a  new 
and,  perhaps,  unexpected  notion.  Moreover,  every  language  having  a 

II.  GENERAL  ON  STRUCTURE 

structure,  by  the  very  nature  of  language,  reflects  in  its  own  structure 
that  of  the  world  as  assumed  by  those  who  evolved  the  language.  In 
other  words,  we  read  unconsciously  into  the  world  the  structure  of  the 
language  we  use.  The  guessing  and  ascribing  of  a  fanciful,  mostly 
primitive-assumed,  structure  to  the  world  is  precisely  what  ‘philosophy’ 
and  ‘metaphysics’  do.  The  empirical  search  for  world-structure  and  the 
building  of  new  languages  (theories),  of  necessary,  or  similar,  structure, 
is,  on  the  contrary,  what  science  does.  Any  one  who  will  reflect  upon 
these  structural  peculiarities  of  language  cannot  miss  the  semantic  point 
that  the  scientific  method  uses  the  only  correct  language-method.  It 
develops  in  the  natural  order,  while  metaphysics  of  every  description 
uses  the  reversed,  and  ultimately  a  pathological,  order. 

Since  Einstein  and  the  newer  quantum  mechanics,  it  has  become 
increasingly  evident  that  the  only  content  of  ‘knowing’  is  of  a  structural 
character ;  and  the  present  theory  attempts  a  formulation  of  this  fact  in 
a  generalized  way.  If  we  build  a  ^-system  by  the  aid  of  new  terms  and 
of  methods  excluded  by  the  ^-system,  and  stop  some  of  our  primitive 
habits  of  ‘thought’  and  s.rt  as,  for  instance,  the  confusion  of  order  of 
abstractions,  reverse  the  reversed  order,  and  so  introduce  the  natural 
order  in  our  analysis,  we  shall  then  find  that  all  human  ‘knowing’  ex¬ 
hibits  a  structure  similar  to  scientific  knowledge,  and  appears  as  the 
' knowing *  of  structure.  But,  in  order  to  arrive  at  these  results,  we  must 
depart  completely  from  the  older  systems,  and  must  abandon  permanently 
the  use  of  the  ‘is’  of  identity. 

It  would  seem  that  the  overwhelming  importance  for  mankind  of 
systems  based  on  ‘relations’,  ‘order’,  ‘structure’.,  depends  on  the  fact 
that  such  terms  allow  of  an  exact  and  ‘logical’  treatment,  as  two  rela¬ 
tions  of  similar  structure  have  all  their  logical  characteristics  in  com¬ 
mon.  It  becomes  obvious  that,  as  in  the  /I -system  we  could  not  deal  in 
such  terms,  higher  rationality  and  adjustment  were  impossible.  It  is  not 
the  human  ‘mind’  and  its  ‘finiteness’  which  is  to  be  blamed,  but  a  primi¬ 
tive  language,  with  a  structure  foreign  to  this  world,  which  has  wrought 
havoc  with  our  doctrines  and  institutions. 

The  use  of  the  term  ‘structure’  does  not  represent  special  difficulties 
when  once  we  understand  its  origin  and  its  meanings.  The  main  dif¬ 
ficulty  is  found  in  the  old  A  habits  of  speech,  which  do  not  allow  the 
use  of  structure,  as,  indeed,  this  notion  has  no  place  in  a  complete  A 
sub j  ect-predicati  vism . 

Let  us  repeat  once  more  the  two  crucial  negative  premises  as  estab¬ 
lished  firmly  by  all  human  experience:  (1)  Words  are  not  the  things 

ON  STRUCTURE 

we  are  speaking  about;  and  (2)  There  is  no  such  thing  as  an  object  in 
absolute  isolation. 

These  two  most  important  negative  statements  cannot  be  denied 
if  any  one  chooses  to  deny  them,  the  burden  of  the  proof  falls  on  him. 
He  has  to  establish  what  he  affirms,  which  is  obviously  impossible.  We 
see  that  it  is  safe  to  start  with  such  solid  negative  premises,  translate 
them  into  positive  language,  and  build  a  ^-system. 

If  words  are  not  things,  or  maps  are  not  the  actual  territory,  then, 
obviously,  the  only  possible  link  between  the  objective  world  and  the 
linguistic  world  is  found  in  structure,  and  structure  alone .  The  only  use¬ 
fulness  of  a  map  or  a  language  depends  on  the  similarity  of  structure 
between  the  empirical  world  and  the  map-languages.  If  the  structure  is 
not  similar,  then  the  traveller  or  speaker  is  led  astray,  which,  in  serious 
human  life-problems,  must  become  always  eminently  harmful , .  If  the 
structures  are  similar,  then  the  empirical  world  becomes  ‘rational’  to  a 
potentially  rational  being,  which  means  no  more  than  that  verbal,  or 
map-predicted  characteristics,  which  follow  up  the  linguistic  or  map- 
structure,  are  applicable  to  the  empirical  world. 

In  fact,  in  structure  we  find  the  mystery  of  rationality,  adjust¬ 
ment.,  and  we  find  that  the  whole  content  of  knowledge  is  exclusively 
structural.  If  we  want  to  be  rational  and  to  understand  anything  at  all, 
we  must  look  for  structure,  relations,  and,  ultimately,  multi-dimensional 
order,  all  of  which  was  impossible  in  a  broader  sense  in  the  ^-system, 
as  will  be  explained  later  on. 

Having  come  to  such  important  positive  results,  starting  with  unde¬ 
niable  negative  premises,  it  is  interesting  to  investigate  whether  these 
results  are  always  possible,  or  if  there  are  limitations.  The  second  nega¬ 
tive  premise ;  namely,  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  an  object  in  absolute 
isolation,  gives  us  the  answer.  If  there  is  no  such  thing  as  an  absolutely 
isolated  object,  then,  at  least,  we  have  two  objects,  and  we  shall  always 
discover  some  relation  between  them,  depending  on  our  interest,  ingenu¬ 
ity,  and  what  not.  Obviously,  for  a  man  to  speak  about  anything  at  all, 
always  presupposes  two  objects  at  least ;  namely,  the  object  spoken  about 
and  the  speaker,  and  so  a  relation  between  the  two  is  always  present. 
Even  in  delusions,  illusions,  and  hallucinations,  the  situation  is  not 
changed ;  because  our  immediate  feelings  are  also  un-speakable  and  not 
words. 

The  semantic  importance  of  the  above  should  not  be  minimized.  If 
we  deal  with  organisms  which  possess  an  inherent  activity,  such  as  eat¬ 
ing,  breathing . ,  and  if  we  should  attempt  to  build  for  them  conditions 

II.  GENERAL  ON  STRUCTURE 

where  such  activity  would  be  impossible  or  hampered,  these  imposed  con¬ 
ditions  would  lead  to  degeneration  or  death. 

Similarly  with  ‘rationality’.  Once  we  find  in  this  world  at  least 
potentially  rational  organisms,  we  should  not  impose  on  them  conditions 
which  hamper  or  prevent  the  exercise  of  such  an  important  and  inherent 
function.  The  present  analysis  shows  that,  under  the  all-pervading  aristo- 
telianism  in  daily  life,  asymmetrical  relations,  and  thus  structure  and 
order,  have  been  impossible,  and  so  we  have  been  linguistically  prevented 
from  supplying  the  potentially  ‘rational’  being  with  the  means  for  ration¬ 
ality.  This  resulted  in  a  semi-human  so-called  ‘civilization’,  based  on  our 
copying  animals  in  our  nervous  process,  which,  by  necessity,  involves 
us  in  arrested  development  or  regression,  and,  in  general,  disturbances 
of  some  sort. 

Under  such  conditions,  which,  after  all,  may  be  considered  as  firmly 
established,  because  this  investigation  is  based  on  undeniable  negative 
premises,  there  is  no  way  out  but  to  carry  the  analysis  through,  and  to 
build  up  a  ^ -system  based  on  negative  fundamental  premises  or  the 
denial  of  the  ‘is’  of  identity  with  which  rationality  will  be  possible. 

Perhaps  an  illustration  will  make  it  clearer,  the  more  that  the  old 
subject-predicate  language  rather  conceals  structure.  If  we  take  a  state¬ 
ment,  ‘This  blade  of  grass  is  green’,  and  analyse  it  only  as  a  statement, 
superficially,  we  can  hardly  see  how  any  structure  could  be  implied  by 
it.  This  statement  may  be  analysed  into  substantives,  adjectives,  verb.; 
yet  this  would  not  say  much  about  its  structure.  But  if  we  notice  that 
these  words  can  also  make  a  question,  ‘Is  this  blade  of  grass  green  ?’,  we 
begin  to  realize  that  the  order  of  the  words  plays  an  important  role  in 
some  languages  connected  with  the  meanings,  and  so  we  can  immediately 
speak  of  the  structure  of  the  sentence.  Further  analysis  would  disclose 
that  the  sentence  under  consideration  has  the  subject-predicate  form  or 
structure. 

If  we  went  to  the  objective,  silent,  un-speakable  level,  and  analysed 
this  objective  blade  of  grass,  we  should  discover  various  structural  char¬ 
acteristics  in  the  blade ;  but  these  are  not  involved  in  the  statement  under 
consideration,  and  it  would  be  illegitimate  to  speak  about  them.  How¬ 
ever,  we  can  carry  our  analysis  in  another  direction.  If  we  carry  it  far 
enough,  we  shall  discover  a  very  intricate,  yet  definite,  relation  or  com¬ 
plex  of  relations  between  the  objective  blade  of  grass  and  the  observer. 
Rays  of  light  impinge  upon  the  blade,  are  reflected  from  it,  fall  on  the 
retina  of  our  eye,  and  produce  within  our  skins  the  feeling  of  ‘green’. ,  an 
extremely  complex  process  which  has  some  definite  structure. 

ON  STRUCTURE 

We  see,  thus,  that  any  statement  referring  to  anything  objective  in 
this  world  can  always  be  analysed  into  terms  of  relations  and  structure, 
and  that  it  involves  also  definite  structural  assumptions.  More  than  that, 
as  the  only  possible  content  of  knowledge  and  science  is  structural, 
whether  we  like  it  or  not,  to  know  anything  we  must  search  for  struc¬ 
ture,  or  posit  some  structure.  Every  statement  can  also  be  analysed  until 
we  come  to  definite  structural  issues.  This  applies,  however,  with  cer¬ 
tainty  only  to  significant  statements,  and,  perhaps,  not  to  the  various 
noises  which  we  can  make  with  our  mouth  with  the  semblance  of  words, 
but  which  are  meaningless,  as  they  are  not  symbols  for  anything.  It 
must  be  added  that  in  the  older  systems  we  did  not  discriminate  between 
words  (symbols)  and  noises  (not  symbols).  In  a  ^-system  such  a  dis¬ 
crimination  is  essential. 

The  structure  of  the  world  is,  in  principle,  unknown;  and  the  only 
aim  of  knowledge  and  science  is  to  discover  this  structure.  The  struc¬ 
ture  of  languages  is  potentially  known,  if  we  pay  attention  to  it.  Our 
only  possible  procedure  in  advancing  our  knowledge  is  to  match  our 
verbal  structures,  often  called  theories,  with  empirical  structures,  and  see 
if  our  verbal  predictions  are  fulfilled  empirically  or  not,  thus  indicating 
that  the  two  structures  are  either  similar  or  dissimilar. 

We  see,  thus,  that  in  the .  investigation  of  structure  we  find  not 
only  means  for  rationality  and  for  adjustment,  and  so  sanity,  but  also 
a  most  important  tool  for  exploring  this  world  and  scientific  advance. 

From  the  educational  point  of  view,  also,  the  results  of  such  an 
investigation  seem  to  be  unusually  important,  because  they  are  extremely 
simple,  automatic  in  their  working,  and  can  be  applied  universally  in 
elementary  education.  As  the  issue  is  merely  one  of  linguistic  structure, 
it  is  enough  to  train  children  to  abandon  the  ‘is*  of  identity,  in  the 
habitual  use  of  a  few  new  terms,  and  to  warn  them  repeatedly  against 
the  use  of  some  terms  of  antiquated  structure.  We  shall  thus  eliminate 
the  pre-human  and  primitive  semantic  factors  included  in  the  structure 
of  a  primitive  language.  The  moralizing  and  combating  of  primitive- 
made  metaphysics  is  not  effectual;  but  the  habitual  use  of  a  language 
of  modern  structure,  free  from  identity,  produces  semantic  results 
where  the  old  failed.  Let  us  repeat  again,  a  most  important  point,  that 
the  new  desirable  semantic  results  follow  as  automatically  as  the  old 
undesirable  ones  followed. 

It  should  be  noticed  that  terms  such  as  'collection*,  'fact*,  ‘reality*, 
'function*,  ‘relation*,  ‘order*,  ‘structure*,  ‘characteristics*,  ‘problem*. , 
must  be  considered  as  multiordinal  terms  (see  Part  VII),  and  so,  in  gen¬ 
eral  oo-valued  and  ambiguous.  They  become  specific  and  one-valued 

II.  GENERAL  ON  STRUCTURE 

only  in  a  given  context,  or  when  the  orders  of  abstractions  are  dis¬ 
tinguished. 

In  the  following  enquiry  an  attempt  to  build  a  science  of  man,  or  a 
non-aristotelian  system,  or  a  theory  of  sanity,  is  made,  and  it  will  be 
necessary  to  introduce  a  few  terms  of  new  structure  and  to  abide  by 
them. 

Let  me  be  entirely  frank  about  it :  the  main  issues  are  found  in  the 
structure  of  language,  and  readers  who  are  interested  in  this  work  will 
facilitate  their  task  if  they  make  themselves  familiar  with  these  new 
terms  and  use  them  habitually.  This  work  will  then  appear  simple,  and 
often  self-evident.  For  those  other  readers  who  insist  on  translating 
the  new  terms  with  new  structural  implications  into  their  old  habitual 
language,  and  choose  to  retain  the  old  terms  with  old  structural  impli¬ 
cations  and  old  s.r. ,  this  work  will  not  appear  simple. 

Examples  illustrating  what  has  just  been  said  abound;  here  I  shall 
mention  only  that  the  E  geometries,  the  new  revision  of  mathematics 
originated  by  Brouwer  and  Weyl,  the  Einstein  theory,  and  the  newer 
quantum  mechanics.,  have  similar  main  aims;  namely,  to  produce 
non-el  statements  which  are  structurally  closer  to  the  empirical  facts 
than  the  older  theories,  and  to  reject  those  unwarranted  structural  as¬ 
sumptions  which  vitiated  the  old  theories.  The  reader  should  not  be 
surprised  to  learn  that  these  new  theories  are  not  a  passing  whim  of 
scientists,  but  represent  lasting  advances  in  method .  Whether  these 
attempts  at  restatements  are  finally  found  to  be  Valid  or  not,  they  remain 
steps  in  the  right  direction. 

It  is  quite  natural  that  with  the  advance  of  experimental  science 
some  generalizations  should  appear  to  be  established  from  the  facts  at 
hand.  Occasionally,  such  generalizations,  when  further  analysed,  are 
found  to  contain  serious  structural,  epistemological  and  methodological 
implications  and  difficulties.  In  the  present  work  one  of  these  empirical 
generalizations  becomes  of  unusual  importance,  so  important,  indeed, 
that  Part  III  of  this  work  is  devoted  to  it.  Here,  however,  it  is  only 
possible  to  mention  it,  and  to  show  some  rather  unexpected  consequences 
which  it  entails. 

That  generalization  states :  that  any  organism  must  be  treated  as-a- 
whole;  in  other  words,  that  the  organism  is  not  an  algebraic  sum,  a 
linear  function  of  its  elements,  but  always  more  than  that.  It  is  seem¬ 
ingly  little  realized,  at  present,  that  this  simple  and  innocent-looking 
statement  involves  a  full  structural  revision  of  our  language,  because 
that  language,  of  great  pre-scientific  antiquity,  is  elementalistic,  and  so 
singularly  inadequate  to  express  non-elementalistic  notions.  Such  a  point 

ON  STRUCTURE 

of  view  involves  profound  structural,  methodological,  and  semantic 
changes,  vaguely  anticipated,  but  never  formulated  in  a  definite  theory. 
The  problems  of  structure,  ‘more',  and  ‘non-additivity'  are  very  important 
and  impossible  to  analyse  in  the  old  way. 

If  this  generalization  be  accepted — and  on  experimental,  structural, 
and  epistemological  grounds  we  cannot  deny  its  complete  structural  justi¬ 
fication — some  odd  consequences  follow ;  that  is  to  say,  odd,  as  long  as 
we  are  not  accustomed  to  them.  For  instance,  we  see  that  ‘emotion'  and 
‘intellect'  cannot  be  divided,  that  this  division  structurally  violates  the 
organism-as-a-whole  generalization.  We  must,  then,  choose  between  the 
two:  we  must  either  abandon  the  organism-as-a-whole  principle,  or 
abandon  accepted  speculations  couched  in  el  verbal  terms  which  create 
insoluble  verbal  puzzles.  Something  similar  could  be  said  about  the  dis¬ 
tinction  of  ‘body'  versus  ‘soul',  and  other  verbal  splittings  which  have 
hampered  sane  advance  in  the  understanding  of  ourselves,  and  have  filled 
for  thousands  of  years  the  libraries  and  tribunes  of  the  world  with  hol¬ 
low  reverberations. 

The  solution  of  these  problems  lies  in  the  field  of  structural,  sym¬ 
bolic,  linguistic,  and  semantic  research,  as  well  as  in  the  fields  of  physics, 
chemistry,  biology,  psychiatry.,  because  from  their  very  nature  these 
problems  are  structural. 

CHAPTER  V 

GENERAL  LINGUISTIC 

...  to  be  an  abstraction  does  not  mean  that  an  entity  is  nothing.  It 
merely  means  that  its  existence  is  only  one  factor  of  a  more  concrete  ele¬ 
ment  of  nature.  (573)  a.  n.  whitehead 

In  my  opinion  the  answer  to  this  question  is  briefly,  this: — As  far  as  the 
laws  of  mathematics  refer  to  reality,  they  are  not  certain;  and  as  far  as 
they  are  certain,  they  do  not  refer  to  reality,  (isi)  A.  einstein 

Thus  it  would  seem  that,  wherever  we  infer  from  perceptions,  it  is  only 
structure  that  we  can  validly  infer;  and  structure  is  what  can  be  expressed 
by  mathematical  logic,  which  includes  mathematics.  (457) 

BERTRAND  RUSSELL 

The  current  accounts  of  perception  are  the  stronghold  of  modern  meta¬ 
physical  difficulties.  They  nave  their  origin  in  the  same  misunderstanding 
which  led  to  the  incubus  of  the  substance-quality  categories.  The  Greeks 
looked  at  a  stone,  and  perceived  that  it  was  grey.  Tne  Greeks  were  ig¬ 
norant  of  modern  physics;  but  modern  philosophers  discuss  perception  in 
terms  of  categories  derived  from  the  Greeks.  <574>  A.  N.  whitehead 

To  the  biochemist,  biophysicist,  biologist,  and  physiological  psychologist, 
however,  life  and  mind  are  so  amazingly  complex  and  comprise  so  many 
heterogeneous  processes  that  their  blanket  designation  as  two  emergent 
levels  cannot  seem  very  illuminating,  and  to  the  observer  who  contemplates 
the  profuse  and  unabated  emergence  of  idiots,  morons,  lunatics,  criminals, 
and  parasites  in  our  midst,  Alexander’s  prospect  of  the  emergence  of  deity 
is  about  as  imminent  as  the  Greek  kalends.  (555) 

WILLIAM  MORTON  WHEELER 

In  speaking  of  linguistic  researches,  I  do  not  mean  only  an  analysis 
of  printed  ‘canned  chatter’,  as  Clarence  Day  would  call  it,  but  I  mean  the 
behaviour,  the  performance,  s.r  of  living  Smiths  and  Browns  and  the 
connections  between  the  noises  uttered  by  them  and  their  behaviour.  No 
satisfactory  analysis  has  been  made,  and  the  reason  seems  to  be  in  the 
fact  that  each  existing  language  really  represents  a  conglomeration  of 
different  languages  with  different  structures  and  is,  therefore,  extremely 
complex  as  long  as  structure  is  disregarded.  That  ‘linguists’,  ‘psycholo¬ 
gists’,  ‘logicians’. ,  were,  and  usually  are,  very  innocent  of  mathematics, 
a  type  of  language  of  the  greatest  simplicity  and  perfection,  with  a  clear- 
cut  structure,  similar  to  the  structure  of  the  world,  seems  to  be  re¬ 
sponsible  for  this  helplessness.  Without  a  study  of  mathematics,  the 
adjustment  of  structure  seems  impossible. 

We  should  not  be  surprised  to  find  that  mathematics  must  be 
considered  a  language.  By  definition,  whatever  has  symbols  and  proposi¬ 
tions  is  called  a  language,  a  form  of  representation  for  this  something- 

GENERAL  LINGUISTIC 

going-on  which  we  call  the  world  and  which  is  admittedly  not  words . 
Several  interesting  statements  can  be  made  about  mathematics  considered 
as  a  language.  First  of  all,  mathematics  appears  as  a  form  of  human 
behaviour,  as  genuine  a  human  activity  as  eating  or  walking,  a  function 
in  which  the  human  nervous  system  plays  a  very  serious  part.  Second, 
from  an  empirical  point  of  view  a  curious  question  arises :  why,  of  all 
forms  of  human  behaviour,  has  mathematizing  proved  to  be  at  each  his¬ 
torical  period  the  most  excellent  human  activity,  producing  results  of 
such  enormous  importance  and  unexpected  validity  as  not  to  be  com¬ 
parable  with  any  other  musings  of  man  ?  Briefly,  it  may  be  said  that  the 
secret  of  this  importance  and  the  validity  of  mathematics  lie  in  the 
mathematical  method  and  structure,  which  the  mathematizing  Smith, 
Brown,  and  Jones  have  used — we  may  even  say,  were  forced  to  use.  It  is 
not  necessary  to  assume  that  the  mathematicians  were  ‘superior'  men.  We 
will  see  later  that  mathematics  is  not  a  very  superior  activity  of  the 
‘human  mind’,  but  it  is  perhaps  the  easiest,  or  simplest  activity;  and, 
therefore,  it  has  been  possible  to  produce  a  structurally  perfect  product 
of  this  simple  kind. 

The  understanding  and  proper  evaluation  of  what  has  been  said 
about  the  structure  and  method  of  mathematics  will  play  a  serious  seman¬ 
tic  role  all  through  this  work,  and,  therefore,  it  becomes  necessary  to 
enlarge  upon  the  subject.  We  shall  have  to  divide  the  abstractions  we 
make  into  two  classes:  (1)  objective  or  physical  abstractions,  which 
include  our  daily-life  notions;  and  (2)  mathematical  abstractions,  at 
present  taken  from  pure  mathematics,  in  a  restricted  sense,  and  later 
generalized.  As  an  example  of  a  mathematical  abstraction,  we  may  take 
a  mathematical  circle.  A  circle  is  defined  as  the  locus  of  all  points  in  a 
plane  at  equal  distance  from  a  point  called  the  centre.  If  we  enquire 
whether  or  not  there  is  such  an  actual  thing  as  a  circle,  some  readers  may 
be  surprised  to  find  that  a  mathematical  circle  must  be  considered  a  pure 
fiction,  having  nowhere  any  objective  existence.  In  our  definition  of  a 
mathematical  circle,  all  particulars  were  included,  and  whatever  we  may 
find  about  this  mathematical  circle  later  on  will  be  strictly  dependent  on 
this  definition,  and  no  new  characteristics,  not  already  included  in  the 
definition,  will  ever  appear.  We  see,  here,  that  mathematical  abstractions 
are  characterized  by  the  fact  that  they  have  all  particulars  included . 

If,  on  the  other  hand,  we  draw  an  objective  ‘circle'  on  a  blackboard 
or  on  a  piece  of  paper,  simple  reflection  will  show  that  what  we  have 
drawn  is  not  a  mathematical  circle,  but  a  ring .  It  has  colour,  temperature, 
thickness  of  our  chalk  or  pencil  mark , .  When  we  draw  a  ‘circle',  it  is  no 
longer  a  mathematical  circle  with  all  particulars  included  in  the  definition. 

11.  GENERAL  ON  STRUCTURE 

but  it  becomes  a  physical  ring  in  which  new  characteristics  appear  not 
listed  in  our  definition. 

From  the  above  observations,  very  important  consequences  follow. 
Mathematizing  represents  a  very  simple  and  easy  human  activity,  because 
it  deals  with  fictitious  entities  with  all  particulars  included,  and  we  pro¬ 
ceed  by  remembering.  The  structure  of  mathematics,  because  of  this 
over-simplicity,  yet  structural  similarity  with  the  external  world,  makes 
it  possible  for  man  to  build  verbal  systems  of  remarkable  validity. 

Physical  or  daily-life  abstractions  differ  considerably  from  mathe¬ 
matical  abstractions.  Let  us  take  any  actual  object ;  for  instance,  what  we 
call  a  pencil.  Now,  we  may  describe  or  ‘define*  a  ‘pencil*  in  as  great 
detail  as  we  please,  yet  it  is  impossible  to  include  all  the  characteristics 
which  we  may  discover  in  this  actual  objective  pencil.  If  the  reader  will 
try  to  give  a  ‘complete*  description  or  a  ‘perfect’  definition  of  any  actual 
physical  object,  so  as  to  include  ‘all*  particulars,  he  will  be  convinced 
that  this  task  is  humanly  impossible.  These  would  have  to  describe, 
not  only  the  numerous  rough,  macroscopic  characteristics,  but  also  the 
microscopic  details,  the  chemical  composition  and  changes,  sub-micro¬ 
scopic  characteristics  and  the  endlessly  changing  relationship  of  this 
objective  something  which  we  have  called  pencil  to  the  rest  of  the  uni¬ 
verse.,  an  inexhaustible  array  of  characteristics  which  could  never  be 
terminated.  In  general,  physical  abstractions,  including  daily-life  abstrac¬ 
tions  are  such  that  particulars  are  left  out — we  proceed  by  a  process  of 
forgetting.  In  other  words,  no  description  or  ‘definition*  will  ever  include 
all  particulars. 

Linguistic  abstractions  from 
objective  levers,  particulars  left 
out.  Deductions  work  relatively, 
no  matter  how  correctly  made, 
x 

X 
X 

Particulars  left  out. 

Fig.  1. 

GENERAL  LINGUISTIC 

Only  and  exclusively  in  mathematics  does  deduction,  if  correct, 
work  absolutely,  for  no  particulars  are  left  out  which  may  later  be  discov¬ 
ered  and  force  us  to  modify  our  deductions. 

Not  so  in  abstracting  from  physical  objects.  Here,  particulars  are 
left  out ;  we  proceed  by  forgetting,  our  deductions  work  only  relatively, 
and  must  be  revised  continuously  whenever  new  particulars  are  discov¬ 
ered.  In  mathematics,  however,  we  build  for  ourselves  a  fictitious  and 
over-simplified  verbal  world,  with  abstractions  which  have  all  particulars 
included.  If  we  compare  mathematics,  taken  as  a  language,  with  our 
daily  language,  we  see  readily  that  in  both  verbal  activities  we  are  build¬ 
ing  for  ourselves  forms  of  representation  for  this  something-going-on, 
which  is  not  words. 

Considered  as  a  language,  mathematics  appears  as  a  language  of  the 
highest  perfection,  but  at  its  lowest  development.  Perfect,  because  the 
structure  of  mathematics  makes  it  possible  to  be  so  (all  characteristics 
included,  and  no  physical  content),  and  because  it  is  a  language  of 
relations  which  are  also  found  in  this  world.  At  the  lowest  development, 
because  we  can  speak  in  it  as  yet  about  very  little  and  that  in  a  very  nar¬ 
row,  restricted  field,  and  with  limited  aspects. 

Our  other  languages  would  appear,  then,  as  the  other  extreme,  as 
the  highest  mathematics,  but  also  at  their  lowest  development— highest 
mathematics,  because  in  them  we  can  speak  about  everything ;  at  their 
lowest  development  because  they  are  still  A  and  not  based  on  asymmet¬ 
rical  relations.  Between  the  two  languages  there  exists  as  yet  a  large 
unbridged  structural  gap.  The  bridging  of  this  gap  is  the  problem  of  the 
workers  of  the  future.  Some  will  work  in  the  direction  of  inventing  new 
mathematical  methods  and  systems,  bringing  mathematics  closer  in  scope 
and  adaptability  to  ordinary  language  (for  instance,  the  tensor  calculus, 
the  theory  of  groups,  the  theory  of  sets,  the  algebra  of  states  and  observ¬ 
ables,.).  Others  will  undertake  linguistic  researches  designed  to  bring 
ordinary  language  closer  to  mathematics  (  for  instance,  the  present  work) . 
When  the  two  forms  of  representation  meet  on  relational  grounds,  we 
shall  probably  have  a  simple  language  of  mathematical  structure,  and 
mathematics,  as  such,  might  then  even  become  obsolete. 

It  is  not  desirable  that  the  reader  should  be  under  the  impression 
that  all  mathematical  ‘thinking'  is  low-grade  ‘thinking'.  The  mathema¬ 
ticians  who  discover  or  invent  new  methods  for  relating  and  structures 
are  the  biggest  ‘mental'  giants  we  have  had,  or  ever  shall  have.  Only 
the  technical  interplay  of  symbols,  to  find  out  some  new  possible  combina¬ 
tion,  can  be  considered  as  low-grade  ‘thinking'. 

II.  GENERAL  ON  STRUCTURE 

From  what  has  now  been  said,  it  is  probably  already  obvious  that  if 
any  one  wants  to  work  scientifically  on  problems  of  such  enormous  com¬ 
plexity  that  they  have  so  far  defied  analysis,  he  would  be  helped  enor¬ 
mously  if  he  would  train  his  s.r  in  the  simplest  forms  of  correct 
'thinking' ;  that  is,  become  acquainted  with  mathematical  methods.  The 
continued  application  of  this  relational  method  should  finally  throw  some 
light  on  the  greatest  complexities,  such  as  life  and  man.  In  contrast  to 
enormous  advances  in  all  technical  fields,  our  knowledge  of  'human 
nature’  has  advanced  very  little  beyond  what  primitives  knew  about  them¬ 
selves.  We  have  tried  to  analyse  the  most  baffling  phenomena  while  dis¬ 
regarding  structural  peculiarities  of  languages  and  thus  failing  to  provide 
sufficient  fundamental  training  in  new  s.r .  In  practically  all  universities 
at  present,  the  mathematical  requirements,  even  for  scientists,  are 
extremely  low,  much  lower,  indeed,  than  is  necessary  for  the  progress  of 
these  scientists  themselves.  Only  those  who  specialize  in  mathematics 
receive  an  advanced  training,  but,  even  with  them,  little  attention  is 
devoted  to  method  and  structure  of  languages  as  such.  Until  lately, 
mathematicians  themselves  were  not  without  responsibility  for  this.  They 
treated  mathematics  as  some  kind  of  'eternal  verity’,  and  made  a  sort  of 
religion  out  of  it ;  forgetting,  o*  not  knowing,  that  these  'eternal  verities’ 
last  only  so  long  as  the  nervous  systems  of  Smiths  and  Browns  are  not 
altered.  Besides,  many,  even  now,  disclaim  any  possible  connection 
between  mathematics  and  human  affairs.  Some  of  them  seem,  indeed,  in 
their  religious  zeal,  to  try  to  make  their  subjects  as  difficult,  unattractive, 
and  mysterious  as  possible,  to  overawe  the  student.  Fortunately,  a  strong 
reaction  against  such  an  attitude  is  beginning  to  take  place  among  the 
members  of  the  younger  mathematical  generation.  This  is  a  very  hopeful 
sign,  as  there  is  little  doubt  that,  without  the  help  of  professional  mathe¬ 
maticians  who  will  understand  the  general  importance  of  structure  and 
mathematical  methods ,  we  shall  not  be  able  to  solve  our  human  problems 
in  time  to  prevent  quite  serious  break-downs,  since  these  solutions  ulti¬ 
mately  depend  on  structural  and  semantic  considerations. 

The  moment  we  abandon  the  older  theological  attitude  toward  mathe¬ 
matics,  and  summon  the  courage  to  consider  it  as  a  form  of  human 
behaviour  and  the  expression  of  generalised  s.rt  some  quite  interesting 
problems  loom  up.  Terms  like  logic’  or  'psychology*  are  applied  in 
many  different  senses,  but,  among  others,  they  are  used  as  labels  for 
certain  disciplines  called  sciences.  'Logic’  is  defined  as  the  'science  of 
the  laws  of  thought’.  Obviously,  then,  to  produce  'logic’  we  should  have 
to  study  all  forms  of  human  behaviour  connected  directly  with  menta¬ 
tion  ;  we  should  have  to  study  not  only  the  mentations  in  the  daily  life  of 

GENERAL  LINGUISTIC 

the  average  Smiths,  Browns . ,  but  we  should  have  to  study  the  menta¬ 
tions  of  Joneses  and  Whites  when  they  use  their  ‘mind’  at  its  best  ; 
namely,  when  they  mathematize,  scientize . ,  and  we  should  also  have  to 
study  the  mentations  of  those  whom  we  call  ‘insane’,  when  they  use  their 
‘mind’  at  its  worst.  It  is  not  our  aim  to  give  a  detailed  list  of  these  forms 
of  human  behaviour  which  we  should  study,  since  all  should  be  studied. 
It  is  enough  for  our  purpose  to  emphasize  the  two  main  omissions ; 
namely,  the  study  of  mathematics  and  the  study  of  ‘insanity’. 

As  a  similar  reasoning  applies  to  ‘psychology’,  we  must  sadly  admit 
that  we  have  as  yet  no  general  theory  which  deserves  the  name  of  ‘logic’ 
or  psycho-logics.  What  has  passed  under  the  name  of  ‘logic’,  for  instance, 
is  not  ‘logic’  according  to  its  own  definition,  but  represents  a  philosoph¬ 
ical  grammar  of  a  primitive-made  language,  of  a  structure  different  from 
the  structure  of  the  world,  unfit  for  serious  use.  If  we  try  to  apply  the 
rules  of  the  old  ‘logic’,  we  find  ourselves  blocked  by  ridiculous  impasses. 
So,  naturally,  we  discover  that  we  have  no  use  for  such  a  ‘logic’. 

It  follows  also  that  any  one  who  has  any  serious  intention  of  becom¬ 
ing  a  ‘logician*  or  a  psycho-logician  must,  first  of  all,  be  a  thorough 
mathematician  and  must  also  study  ‘insanity’.  Only  with  such  prepara¬ 
tion  is  there  any  possibility  of  becoming  a  psycho-logician  or  semantician. 
Sometimes  it  is  useful  to  stop  deceiving  ourselves ;  and  it  is  deceiving 
ourselves  if  we  claim  to  be  studying  human  psycho-logics,  or  human 
‘logic’,  when  we  are  generalizing  only  from  those  forms  of  human 
behaviour  which  we  have  in  common  with  the  animals  and  neglect  other 
forms,  especially  the  most  characteristic  forms  of  human  behaviour,  such 
as  mathematics,  science,  and  ‘insanity’.  If,  as  psycho-logicians,  we  want 
to  be  ‘behaviourists’,  it  is  clear  that  we  must  study  all  known  forms  of 
human  behaviour.  But  it  seems  never  to  have  occurred  to  the  ‘behaviour¬ 
ists’  that  mathematics  and  ‘insanity’  are  very  characteristic  forms  of 
human  behaviour. 

Some  readers  may  be  puzzled  by  my  calling  the  daily  forms  of  rep¬ 
resentation  we  use  ‘primitive-made’.  Let  me  illustrate  what  I  mean  by  a 
classical  example.  For  more  than  two  thousand  years  the  famous  para¬ 
dox  of  Zeno  has  puzzled  ‘philosophers’,  without  any  solution,  and  only  in 
our  own  day  has  it  been  solved  by  mathematicians.  The  paradox  reads : 
Achilles  was  supposed  to  be  a  very  swift  runner,  and  in  a  race  with  a 
tortoise,  which  was  given  the  benefit  of  starting  first,  Achilles  could 
never  overtake  his  slow  competitor,  because,  the  argument  runs,  before 
he  could  overtake  the  tortoise  he  would  have  to  halve  the  distance  between 
them,  and  again  halve  the  remaining  half,  and  so  on.  No  matter  how 
long  this  might  last,  there  still  would  be  some  distance  to  halve,  and  so 

II.  GENERAL  ON  STRUCTURE 

it  was  concluded  he  could  never  pass  the  tortoise.  Now  any  child  knows 
that  this  conclusion  is  not  true ;  yet  the  verbal  argument  for  the  untrue 
conclusion  remained,  in  the  hands  of  'philosophers’  and  'logicians’,  per¬ 
fectly  valid  for  more  than  two  thousand  years.  This  instance  throws 
light  on  the  stage  of  development  which  we  have  reached  and  of  which 
we  often  boast. 

Having,  then,  no  scientific  general  theory  of  'logic’  and  psycho-logics 
to  guide  us,  the  task  of  an  enquiry  like  the  present  is  very  much  handi¬ 
capped.  We  must  merely  go  ahead  groping  and  pioneering;  and  this  is 
always  a  difficult,  blundering  task. 

It  is  indeed  very  important  that  not  only  the  scientists  but  also  the 
intelligent  public,  as  a  whole,  should  understand  that  at  present  we  have 
no  general  theory  which  may  be  called  'logic’  or  psycho-logics.  Perhaps 
an  illustration  will  help  to  bring  home  this  really  shocking  state  of  affairs. 
Imagine,  for  example,  that  we  should  try  to  study  dinosaurs  exhaus¬ 
tively.  The  standard  methods  of  study  would  centre  about  the  actual 
fossil  remains  when  such  are  available ;  but,  in  the  case  of  those  extinct 
forms  of  which  the  fossil  remains  are  very  meagre,  or  entirely  lacking, 
much  information  is  obtained  from  the  study  of  the  tracks  which  have 
been  left  on  the  mud  flats  that  have  become  rocks.  It  seems  undeniable 
that  such  a  study  of  fossil  tracks  would  contribute  a  large  share  to  the 
formulation  of  any  'general  theory’  of  the  characteristics  of  dinosaurs. 
We  could  go  further  and  say  that  no  ‘general  theory’  could  be  complete 
if  such  study  were  entirely  neglected. 

Now,  that  is  precisely  the  situation  in  which  ‘psychologists’  and 
‘logicians’  find  themselves ;  they  have  made  many  studies,  and  gathered 
some  facts,  but  they  have  entirely  disregarded  as  yet  these  unique  and 
peculiar  black  tracks  which  the  mathematicians  and  others  have  left  on 
white  paper  when  they  mathematized  or  scientized.  The  old  ‘psychologi¬ 
cal’  generalizations  were  made  from  insufficient  data,  in  spite  of  the  fact 
that  sufficient  data ;  namely,  these  black  marks  on  white  paper,  exist,  and 
have  existed  for  a  long  time.  But  these  marks  the  ‘psychologists’  and 
‘logicians’  were  not  able  properly  to  read,  analyse,  and  interpret. 

Under  such  circumstances,  it  should  not  be  surprising  to  find  that, 
in  the  study  of  animals,  we  have  vitiated  our  researches  by  reading  into 
the  animals  our  own  activities,  and  that  we  have  vitiated  our  own  under¬ 
standing  of  ourselves  by  faulty  generalizations  from  a  few  data  taken 
mostly  from  those  activities  which  we  have  in  common  with  animals. 
Thus  we  measure  ourselves  by  animalistic  standards.  This  error  is  mainly 
due  to  the  ignorance  of  mathematical  method  and  the  disregard  of  struc¬ 
tural  problems  by  those  who  deal  with  human  affairs.  Indeed,  as  I  have 

GENERAL  LINGUISTIC 

already  shown  in  my  Manhood  of  Humanity ,  what  we  call  ‘civilization’ 
rests  upon  faulty  generalizations  taken  from  the  lives  of  cows,  horses, 
cats,  dogs,  pigs . ,  and  self-imposed  upon  Smith  and  Brown. 

The  main  thesis  of  this  ^-system  is  that  as  yet  we  all  ( with  ex¬ 
tremely  few  exceptions )  copy  animals  in  our  nervous  processes ,  and  that 
practically  all  human  difficulties,  ‘mental*  ills  of  all  degrees  included, 
have  this  characteristic  as  a  component.  I  am  glad  to  be  able  to  report 
that  a  number  of  experiments  undertaken  with  ‘mentally*  or  nervously 
ill  individuals  have  shown  decided  benefit  in  cases  where  it  proved  possi¬ 
ble  to  re-educate  them  to  appropriate  human  s.r . 

Here,  perhaps,  it  may  be  advisable  to  interpolate  a  short  explanation. 
When  we  deal  with  human  affairs  and  man,  we  sometimes  use  the  term 
‘ought’,  which  is  very  often  used  arbitrarily,  dogmatically,  and  absolutis- 
tically,  and  so  its  use  has  become  discredited.  In  many  quarters,  this 
term  is  very  unpopular,  and,  it  must  be  admitted,  justly  so.  My  use  of 
it  is  that  of  the  engineer,  who  undertakes  to  study  a  machine  entirely 
unknown  to  him — let  us  say,  a  motorcycle.  He  would  study  and  analyse 
its  structure,  and,  finally,  would  give  a  verdict  that  with  such  a  structure, 
under  certain  circumstances,  this  machine  ought  to  work  in  a  particular 
way. 

In  the  present  volume,  this  engineering  attitude  is  preserved.  We 
shall  investigate  the  structure  of  human  knowledge,  and  we  shall  con¬ 
clude  that  with  such  a  structure  it  should  work  in  this  particular  way.  In 
the  motorcycle  example,  the  proof  of  the  correctness  of  the  reasoning  of 
the  engineer  would  be  to  fill  the  tank  with  gasoline  and  make  the  motor¬ 
cycle  go.  In  our  analogous  task,  we  have  to  apply  the  information  we  get 
and  see  if  it  works.  In  the  experiments  mentioned  above,  the  ^-system 
actually  has  worked,  and  so  there  is  some  hope  that  it  is  correct.  Further 
investigations  will,  of  course,  add  to,  or  modify,  the  details,  but  this  is 
true  of  all  theories. 

Another  reason  why  a  non-mathematician  cannot  study  psycho¬ 
logical  phenomena  adequately  is  that  mathematics  is  the  only  science 
which  has  no  physical  content  and,  therefore,  when  we  study  the  per¬ 
formances  of  Smiths  and  Browns  when  they  mathematize,  we  study  the 
only  available  working  of  ‘pure  mind*.  Moreover,  mathematics  is  the 
only  language  which  at  present  has  a  structure  similar  to  that  of  the 
world  and  the  nervous  system.  It  must  be  obvious  that  from  such  a 
study  we  should  learn  more  than  by  the  study  of  any  other  ‘mental 
activity.  In  some  quarters  it  is  believed,  I  think  erroneously,  that  ‘psy¬ 
chology’  and  ‘logic*  have  no  ‘physical  content*.  ‘Psychology*  and  ‘logic* 
have  a  very  definite  content — Smith,  Brown  . , — and  we  should  treat  these 

II.  GENERAL  ON  STRUCTURE 

disciplines  in  relation  to  the  living  organism.  Quite  probably,  when  the 
above  issues  are  fully  realized,  these  specialists,  future  psycho-logicians 
and  semanticians,  will  begin  to  study  mathematical  methods  and  pay 
attention  to  structure,  and  a  number  of  mathematicians,  in  their  turn, 
will  become  psycho-logicians,  psychiatrists,  semanticians,.  When  this 
happens,  we  may  expect  marked  advance  in  these  lines  of  endeavour.* 

In  the  course  of  this  book,  it  will  be  shown  that  the  structure  of 
human  knowledge  precludes  any  serious  study  of  ‘mental*  problems  with¬ 
out  a  thorough  mathematical  training.  We  shall  take  for  granted  all  the 
partial  light  thrown  on  man  by  existing  disciplines  and  shall  make  some 
observations  from  the  study  of  the  neglected  forms  of  human  behaviour, 
such  as  mathematics,  exact  sciences,  and  ‘insanity*,  and  with  these  new 
data  re- formulate,  in  the  rough,  all  available  data  at  hand  in  1933. 

At  the  present  early  stage  of  our  enquiry,  we  must,  of  necessity,  be 
often  vague.  Before  we  give  the  new  data,  it  is  impossible  to  speak  in  a 
more  definite  way.  Besides,  in  such  a  general  survey,  we  shall  have  to 
use  what  I  call  multiordinal  terms.  At  present,  all  the  most  humanly 
important  and  interesting  terms  are  multiordinal,  and  no  one  can  evade 
the  use  of  such  terms.  Multiordinality  is  inherent  in  the  structure  of 
‘human  knowledge*.  This  multiordinal  mechanism  gives  the  key  to  many 
seemingly  insoluble  contradictions,  and  explains  why  we  have  scarcely 
progressed  at  all  in  the  solution  of  many  human  affairs. 

The  main  characteristic  of  these  multiordinal  terms  is  found  in  that 
they  have  different  meanings  in  general,  depending  on  the  order  of 
abstractions.  Without  the  level  of  abstraction  being  specified,  a  m.o  term 
is  only  ambiguous;  its  use  involves  shifting  meanings,  variables,  and 
therefore  generates,  not  propositions,  but  propositional  functions.  It  may 
not  be  an  exaggeration  to  say  that  the  larger  number  of  human  tragedies, 
private,  social,  racial . ,  are  intimately  connected  with  the  non-realization 
of  this  multiordinality  of  the  most  important  terms  we  use. 

A  similar  confusion  between  orders  of  abstractions  is  to  be  found 
in  all  forms  of  ‘insanity*,  from  the  mildest,  which  afflicts  practically 

♦There  are  already  signs  that  the  more  serious  workers,  as,  for  instance,  the 
Gestalt  ‘psychologists’,  begin  to  feel  their  handicaps.  Others,  as  yet,  do  not  seem 
to  realize  the  hopelessness  of  their  endeavours — as  best  exemplified  by  the  Ameri¬ 
can  school  of  Behaviourists,  who  seem  to  think  that  the  splendid  name  they  have 
selected  will  solve  their  problems.  It  would  be  very  interesting  to  see  the  Behav¬ 
iourists  deny  that  the  writing  of  a  mathematical  treatise,  or  of  some  new  theory  of 
quantum  mechanics  represents  a  form  of  human  behaviour  which  they  should  study. 
Some  day  they  must  face  the  fact  that  they  have  neglected  to  consider  a  great 
many  forms  of  human  behaviour— -the  most  characteristic  forms  at  that— -and  that, 
therefore,  they  could  not  produce  an  adequate  theory  of  the  nature  of  the  ‘human 
mind. 

(iKNKRAL  LINGUISTIC 

every  one  of  us,  to  the  most  pronounced  and  violent.  Indeed,  the  discov¬ 
ery  of  this  mechanism  leads  conversely  to  a  theory  of  sanity.  Imperfect 
as  this  theory  of  sanity  probably  is,  it  opens  a  wide  field  of  possibilities 
which  I  myself,  at  this  stage,  am  unable  fully  to  appreciate. 

There  seems  one  thing  certain,  at  present;  namely,  that  the  old 
theories  and  methods  tended  strongly  to  produce  morons  and  ‘insane* 
persons,  while  ‘geniuses*  were  only  born  in  spite  of  these  handicaps. 
Perhaps  in  the  future  we  shall  be  able  to  produce  ‘geniuses*,  while 
morons  and  ‘insane*  persons  will  be  born  only  in  spite  of  our  precautions. 
If  this  should  actually  prove  to  be  true,  and  the  experimental  results 
seem  to  give  some  hope  in  this  direction,  this  world  would  then  become 
quite  a  different  place  in  which  to  live. 

CHAPTER  VI 

ON  SYMBOLISM 

Philosophers  have  worried  themselves  about  remote  consequences,  and 
the  inductive  formulations  of  science.  They  should  confine  attention  to 
the  rush  of  immediate  transition.  Their  explanations  would  then  be  seen 
in  their  native  absurdity.  (578)  a.  n.  whitehead 

It  is  often  said  experiments  must  be  made  without  a  preconceived  idea. 
That  is  impossible.  Not  only  would  it  make  all  experiment  barren,  but  that 
would  be  attempted  which  could  not  be  done.  Every  one  carries  in  his  mind 
his  own  conception  of  the  world,  of  which  he  can  not  so  easily  rid  himself. 
We  must,  for  instance,  use  language;  and  our  language  is  made  up  only  of 
preconceived  ideas  and  can  not  be  otherwise.  Only  these  are  unconscious 
preconceived  ideas,  a  thousand  times  more  dangerous  than  the  others. 

(417)  H.  POINCAR& 

.  .  .  the  patriotic  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  found  it  advisable — ’ ** 
“Found  what?”  said  the  Duck. 

“Found  it"  the  Mouse  replied,  rather  crossly:  “of  course  you  know 
what  ‘it’  means." 

know  what  *it’  means  well  enough,  when  I  find  a  thing,"  said  the 
Duck:  it  s  generally  a  frog,  or  a  worm."*  lewis  carroll 

...  psychiatry  works  specifically  on  the  social  organ  of  man  itself — 
the  person  s  assets  and  behavior,  that  which  we  must  adjust  before  we 
can  expect  the  individual  to  make  proper  use  of  most  of  our  help,** 

ADOLF  MEYER 

Perhaps,  as  has  often  been  said,  the  trouble  with  people  is  not  so  much 
with  their  ignorance  as  it  is  with  their  knowing  so  many  things  that  are 
n°j  ??*:*•  S°  that  it  is  always  important  to  find  out  about  these  fears, 
and  if  they  are  based  upon  the  knowledge  of  something  that  is  not  so,  they 
may  perhaps  be  corrected.  (568>  william  a.  white 

The  affairs  of  man  are  conducted  by  our  own,  man-made  rules  and 
according  to  man-made  theories.  Man’s  achievements  rest  upon  the  use 
of  symbols.  For  this  reason,  we  must  consider  ourselves  as  a  symbolic, 
semantic  class  of  life,  and  those  who  rule  the  symbols,  rule  us.  Now, 
the  term  'symbol’  applies  to  a  variety  of  things,  words  and  money 
included.  A  piece  of  paper,  called  a  dollar  or  a  pound,  has  very  little 
value  if  the  other  fellow  refuses  to  take  it ;  so  we  see  that  money  must 
be  considered  as  a  symbol  for  human  agreement,  as  well  as  deeds  to 
property,  stocks,  bonds , .  The  reality  behind  the  money-symbol  is  doc¬ 
trinal,  'mental’,  and  one  of  the  most  precious  characteristics  of  mankind. 
But  it  must  be  used  properly ;  that  is,  with  the  proper  understanding  of 

*  Alice  in  Wonderland. 

♦♦Historical  Sketch  and  Outlook  of  Psychiatric  Social  Work.  Hosp.  Sac.  Serv.  V,  1922.  221. 

ON  SYMBOLISM 

its  structure  and  ways  of  functioning.  It  constitutes  a  grave  danger 
when  misused. 

When  we  say  ‘our  rulers*,  we  mean  those  who  are  engaged  in  the 
manipulation  of  symbols.  There  is  no  escape  from  the  fact  that  they  do, 
and  that  they  always  will,  rule  mankind,  because  we  constitute  a  sym¬ 
bolic  class  of  life,  and  we  cannot  cease  from  being  so,  except  by  regress¬ 
ing  to  the  animal  level. 

The  hope  for  the  future  consists  in  the  understanding  of  this  fact ; 
namely,  that  we  shall  always  be  ruled  by  those  who  rule  symbols,  which 
will  lead  to  scientific  researches  in  the  field  of  symbolism  and  s.r .  We 
would  then  demand  that  our  rulers  should  be  enlightened  and  carefully 
selected.  Paradoxical  as  it  may  seem,  such  researches  as  the  present 
work  attempts,  will  ultimately  do  more  for  the  stabilization  of  human 
affairs  than  legions  of  policemen  with  machine  guns,  and  bombs,  and 
jails,  and  asylums  for  the  maladjusted. 

A  complete  list  of  our  rulers  is  difficult  to  give ;  yet,  a  few  classes  of 
them  are  quite  obvious.  Bankers,  priests,  lawyers  and  politicians  consti¬ 
tute  one  class  and  work  together.  They  do  not  produce  any  values,  but 
manipulate  values  produced  by  others,  and  often  pass  signs  for  no  values 
at  all.  Scientists  and  teachers  also  comprise  a  ruling  class.  They  pro¬ 
duce  the  main  values  mankind  has,  but,  at  present,  they  do  not  realize 
this.  They  are,  in  the  main,  themselves  ruled  by  the  cunning  methods 
of  the  first  class. 

In  this  analysis  the  ‘philosophers*  have  been  omitted.  This  is  be¬ 
cause  they  require  a  special  treatment.  As  an  historical  fact,  many  ‘phil¬ 
osophers*  have  played  an  important  and,  to  be  frank,  sinister  role  in 
history.  At  the  bottom  of  any  historical  trend,  we  find  a  certain  ‘phil¬ 
osophy*,  a  structural  implication  cleverly  formulated  by  some  ‘philoso¬ 
pher*.  The  reader  of  this  work  will  later  find  that  most  ‘philosophers* 
gamble  on  multiordinal  and  el  terms,  which  have  no  definite  single  ( one- 
valued)  meaning ,  and  so,  by  cleverness  in  twisting,  can  be  made  to 
appear  to  mean  anything  desired.  It  is  now  no  mystery  that  some  quite 
influential  ‘philosophers*  were  ‘mentally*  ill.  Some  ‘mentally*  ill  persons 
are  tremendously  clever  in  the  manipulation  of  words  and  can  sometimes 
deceive  even  trained  specialists.  Among  the  clever  concoctions  which 
appear  in  history  as  ‘philosophic*  systems,  we  can  find  flatly  opposing 
doctrines.  Therefore,  it  has  not  been  difficult  at  any  period  for  the  rulers 
to  select  a  cleverly  constructed  doctrine  perfectly  fitting  the  ends  they 
desired. 

One  of  the  main  characteristics  of  such  ‘philosophers*  is  found  in 
the  delusion  of  grandeur,  the  ‘Jehovah  complex*.  Their  problems  have 

II.  GENERAL  ON  STRUCTURE 

appeared  to  them  to  be  above  criticism  or  assistance  by  other  human 
beings,  and  the  correct  procedure  known  only  to  super-men  like  them¬ 
selves.  So  quite  naturally  they  have  usually  refused  to  make  enquiries. 
They  have  refused  even  to  be  informed  about  scientific  researches  car¬ 
ried  on  outside  the  realms  of  their  ‘philosophy’.  Because  of  this  ignor¬ 
ance,  they  have,  in  the  main,  not  even  suspected  the  importance  of  the 
problems  of  structure. 

In  all  fairness,  it  must  be  said  that  not  all  so-called  'philosophy* 
represents  an  episode  of  semantic  illness,  and  that  a  few  'philosophers* 
really  do  important  work.  This  applies  to  the  so-called  'critical  phil¬ 
osophy*  and  to  the  theory  of  knowledge  or  epistemology .  This  class  of 
workers  I  call  epistemologists,  to  avoid  the  disagreeable  implications  of 
the  term  philosopher .  Unfortunately,  epistemological  researches  are 
most  difficult,  owing  mainly  to  the  lack  of  scientific  psycho-logics,  general 
semantics,  and  investigations  of  structure  and  s,r .  We  find  only  a  very 
few  men  doing  this  work,  which,  in  the  main,  is  still  little  known  and 
unapplied.  It  must  be  granted  that  their  works  do  not  make  easy  read¬ 
ing.  They  do  not  command  headlines;  nor  are  they  aided  and  stimu¬ 
lated  by  public  interest  and  help. 

It  must  be  emphasized  again  that  as  long  as  we  remain  humans 
(which  means  a  symbolic  class  of  life),  the  rulers  of  symbols  will  rule 
us,  and  that  no  amount  of  revolution  will  ever  change  this.  But  what 
mankind  has  a  right  to  ask — and  the  sooner  the  better — is  that  our  rulers 
should  not  be  so  shamelessly  ignorant  and,  therefore,  pathological  in  their 
reactions.  If  a  psychiatrical  and  scientific  enquiry  were  to  be  made  upon 
our  rulers,  mankind  would  be  appalled  at  the  disclosures. 

We  have  been  speaking  about  ‘symbols*,  but  we  have  not  yet  dis¬ 
covered  any  general  theory  concerning  symbols  and  symbolism.  Usually, 
we  take  terms  lightly  and  never  'think*  what  kind  of  implication  and  s.r 
one  single  important  term  may  involve.  ‘Symbol*  is  one  of  those  impor¬ 
tant  terms,  weighty  in  meanings.  If  we  use  the  term  'food*,  for  instance, 
the  presupposition  is  that  we  take  for  granted  the  existence  of  living 
beings  able  to  eat ;  and,  similarly,  the  term  ‘symbol*  implies  the  existence 
of  intelligent  beings.  The  solution  of  the  problem  of  symbolism,  there¬ 
fore,  presupposes  the  solution  of  the  problem  of  ‘intelligence*  and  struc¬ 
ture.  So,  we  see  that  the  issues  are  not  only  serious  and  difficult,  but, 
also,  that  we  must  investigate  a  semantic  field  in  which  very  little  has 
been  done. 

In  the  rough,  a  symbol  is  defined  as  a  sign  which  stands  for  some¬ 
thing.  Any  sign  is  not  necessarily  a  symbol.  If  it  stands  for  something, 
it  becomes  a  symbol  for  this  something.  If  it  does  not  stand  for  some- 

ON  SYMBOLISM 

thing,  then  it  becomes  not  a  symbol  but  a  meaningless  sign.  This  applies 
to  words  just  as  it  does  to  bank  cheques.  If  one  has  a  zero  balance  in 
the  bank,  but  still  has  a  cheque-book  and  issues  a  cheque,  he  issues  a 
sign  but  not  a  symbol,  because  it  does  not  stand  for  anything.  The 
penalty  for  such  use  of  these  particular  signs  as  symbols  is  usually  jail¬ 
ing.  This  analogy  applies  to  the  oral  noises  we  make,  which  occasion¬ 
ally  become  symbols  and  at  other  times  do  not;  as  yet,  no  penalty  is 
exacted  for  such  a  fraud. 

Before  a  noise . ,  may  become  a  symbol,  something  must  exist  for 
the  symbol  to  symbolize.  So  the  first  problem  of  symbolism  should  be 
to  investigate  the  problem  of  ‘existence’.  To  define  ‘existence’,  we  have 
to  state  the  standards  by  which  we  judge  existence.  At  present,  the  use 
of  this  term  is  not  uniform  and  is  largely  a  matter  of  convenience.  Of 
late,  mathematicians  have  discovered  a  great  deal  about  this  term.  For 
our  present  purposes,  we  may  accept  two  kinds  of  existence:  (1)  the 
physical  existence,  roughly  connected  with  our  ‘senses*  and  persistence, 
and  (2)  ‘logical*  existence.  The  new  researches  in  the  foundations  of 
mathematics,  originated  by  Brouwer  and  Weyl,  seem  to  lead  to  a  cur¬ 
tailment  of  the  meaning  of  ‘logical*  existence  in  quite  a  sound  direction ; 
but  we  may  provisionally  accept  the  most  general  meaning,  as  introduced 
by  Poincare.  He  defines  ‘logical*  existence  as  a  statement  free  from 
self-contradictions.  Thus,  we  may  say  that  a  ‘thought*  to  be  a  ‘thought* 
must  not  be  self -contradictory.  A  self-contradictory  statement  is  mean¬ 
ingless;  we  can  argue  either  way  without  reaching  any  valid  results. 
We  say,  then,  that  a  self -contradictory  statement  has  no  ‘logical*  exist¬ 
ence.  As  an  example,  let  us  take  a  statement  about  a  square  circle.  This 
is  called  a  contradiction  in  terms,  a  non-sense,  a  meaningless  statement, 
which  has  no  ‘logical’  existence.  Let  us  label  this  ‘word  salad’  by  a  spe¬ 
cial  noise — let  us  say,  ‘blah-blah*.  Will  such  a  noise  become  a  word,  a 
symbol  ?  Obviously  not — it  stands  for  nothing ;  it  remains  a  mere  noise . , 
no  matter  if  volumes  should  be  written  about  it. 

It  is  extremely  important,  semantically,  to  notice  that  not  all  the 
noises . ,  we  humans  make  should  be  considered  as  symbols  or  valid  words. 
Such  empty  noises . ,  can  occur  not  only  in  direct  ‘statements*,  but  also  in 
‘questions*.  Quite  obviously,  ‘questions*  which  employ  noises  . ,  instead 
of  words,  are  not  significant  questions.  They  ask  nothing,  and  cannot  be 
answered.  They  are,  perhaps,  best  treated  by  ‘mental*  pathologists  as 
symptoms  of  delusions,  illusions,  or  hallucinations.  In  asylums  the 
noises.,  patients  make  are  predominantly  meaningless,  as  far  as  the 
external  world  is  concerned,  but  become  symbols  in  the  illness  of  the 
patient. 

II.  GENERAL  ON  STRUCTURE 

A  complicated  and  difficult  problem  is  found  in  connection  with 
those  symbols  which  have  meaning  in  one  context  and  have  no  meaning 
in  another  context.  Here  we  approach  the  question  of  the  application 
of  'correct  symbolism  to  facts'.  We  will  not  now  enlarge  upon  this  sub¬ 
ject,  but  will  only  give,  in  a  different  wording,  an  illustration  borrowed 
from  Einstein.  Let  us  take  anything;  for  example,  a  pencil.  Let  us 
assume  that  this  physical  object  has  a  temperature  of  60  degrees.  Then 
the  'question'  may  be  asked :  'What  is  the  temperature  of  an  “electron” 
which  goes  to  make  up  this  pencil?'  Different  people,  many  scientists 
and  mathematicians  included,  would  say:  ‘60  degrees';  or  any  other 
number.  And,  finally,  some  would  say:  'I  do  not  know'.  All  these 
answers  have  one  common  characteristic;  namely,  that  they  are  sense¬ 
less  ;  for  they  try  to  answer  a  meaningless  question.  Even  the  answer, 
'I  do  not  know',  does  not  escape  this  classification,  as  there  is  nothing  to 
know  about  a  meaningless  question.  The  only  correct  answer  is  to  ex¬ 
plain  that  the  'question'  has  no  meaning.  This  is  an  example  of  a  symbol 
which  has  no  application  to  an  'electron'.  Temperature  by  definition  is 
the  vibration  of  molecules  (atoms  are  considered  as  mon-atomic  mole¬ 
cules)  ;  so  to  have  temperature  at  all,  we  must  have  at  least  two  mole¬ 
cules.  Thus,  when  we  take  one  molecule  and  split  it  into  atoms  and 
electrons,  the  term  'temperature'  does  not  apply  by  definition  to  an  elec¬ 
tron  at  all.  Although  the  term  'temperature'  represents  a  perfectly  good 
symbol  in  one  context,  it  becomes  a  meaningless  noise  in  another.  The 
reader  should  not  miss  the  plausibility  of  such  gambling  on  words,  for 
there  is  a  very  real  semantic  danger  in  it. 

In  the  study  of  symbolism,  it  is  unwise  to  disregard  the  knowledge 
we  gather  from  psychiatry.  The  so-called  'mentally'  ill  have  often  a  very 
obvious  and  well-known  semantic  mechanism  of  projection.  They  pro¬ 
ject  their  own  feelings,  moods,  and  other  structural  implications  on  the 
outside  world,  and  so  build  up  delusions,  illusions,  and  hallucinations, 
believing  that  what  is  going  on  in  them  is  going  on  outside  of  them. 
Usually,  it  is  impossible  to  convince  the  patient  of  this  error,  for  his 
whole  illness  is  found  in  the  semantic  disturbance  which  leads  to  such 
projections. 

In  daily  life  we  find  endless  examples  of  such  semantic  projections, 
of  differing  affective  intensity,  which  projections  invariably  lead  to  con¬ 
sequences  more  or  less  grave.  The  structure  of  such  affective  projections 
will  be  dealt  with  extensively  later  on.  Here  we  need  only  point  out 
that  the  problems  of  'existence'  are  serious,  and  that  any  one  who  claims 
that  something  'exists'  outside  of  his  skin  must  show  it.  Otherwise,  the 
'existence'  is  found  only  inside  of  his  skin— a  psycho-logical  state  of 

ON  SYMBOLISM 

affairs  which  becomes  pathological  the  moment  he  projects  it  on  the 
outside  world.  If  one  should  claim  that  the  term  ‘unicorn’  is  a  symbol, 
he  must  state  what  this  symbol  stands  for.  It  might  be  said  that  ‘uni¬ 
corn’,  as  a  symbol,  stands  for  a  fanciful  animal  in  heraldry,  a  statement 
which  happens  to  be  true.  In  such  a  sense  the  term  ‘unicorn’  becomes 
a  symbol  for  a  fancy,  and  rightly  belongs  to  psycho-logics,  which  deals 
with  human  fancies,  but  does  not  belong  to  zoology,  which  deals  with 
actual  animals.  But  if  one  should  believe  firmly  and  intensely  that  the 
‘unicorn’  represents  an  actual  animal  which  has  an  external  existence, 
he  would  be  either  mistaken  or  ignorant,  and  could  be  convinced  or 
enlightened ;  or,  if  not,  he  would  be  seriously  ill.  We  see  that  in  this  case, 
as  in  many  others,  all  depends  to  what  ‘ology’  our  semantic  impulses 
assign  some  ‘existence’.  If  we  assign  the  ‘unicorn’  to  psycho-logics,  or 
to  heraldry,  such  an  assignment  is  correct,  and  no  semantic  harm  is 
done ;  but  if  we  assign  a  ‘unicorn’  to  zoology ;  that  is  to  say,  if  we  believe 
that  a  ‘unicorn’  has  an  objective  and  not  a  fictitious  existence,  this  s.r 
might  be  either  a  mistake,  or  ignorance,  and,  in  such  a  case,  it  could  be 
corrected ;  otherwise,  it  becomes  a  semantic  illness.  If,  in  spite  of  all 
contrary  evidence,  or  of  the  lack  of  all  positive  evidence,  we  hold  per¬ 
sistently  to  the  belief,  then  the  affective  components  of  our  s.r  are  so 
strong  that  they  are  beyond  normal  control.  Usually  a  person  holding 
such  affective  beliefs  is  seriously  ill,  and,  therefore,  no  amount  of  evi¬ 
dence  can  convince  him. 

We  see,  then,  that  it  is  not  a  matter  of  indifference  to  what  ‘ology’ 
we  assign  terms,  and  some  assignments  may  be  of  a  pathological  char¬ 
acter,  if  they  identify  psycho-logical  entities  with  the  outside  world. 
Life  is  full  of  such  dramatic  identifications,  and  it  would  be  a  great  step 
forward  in  semantic  hygiene  if  some  ‘ologies’ — e.g.,  demonologies  of 
different  brands,  should  be  abolished  as  such,  and  their  subject-matter 
transferred  to  another  ‘ology* ;  namely,  to  psycho-logics,  where  it  belongs. 

The  projection  mechanism  is  one  fraught  with  serious  dangers,  and 
it  is  very  dangerous  to  develop  it.  The  danger  is  greatest  in  childhood, 
when  silly  teachings  help  to  develop  this  semantic  mechanism,  and  so  to 
affect,  in  a  pathological  way,  the  physically  undeveloped  nervous  system 
of  the  human  child.  Here  we  meet  an  important  fact  which  will  become 
prominent  later — that  ignorance,  identification,  and  pathological  delu¬ 
sions,  illusions,  and  hallucinations,  are  dangerously  akin,  and  differen¬ 
tiated  only  by  the  ‘emotional’  background  or  intensity. 

An  important  aspect  of  the  problem  of  existence  can  be  made  clear 
by  some  examples.  Let  us  recall  that  a  noise  or  written  sign,  to  become 
a  symbol,  must  stand  for  something .  Let  us  imagine  that  you,  my 

II.  GENERAL  ON  STRUCTURE 

reader,  and  myself  are  engaged  in  an  argument.  Before  us,  on  the  table, 
lies  something  which  we  usually  call  a  box  of  matches :  you  argue  that 
there  are  matches  in  this  box;  I  say  that  there  are  no  matches  in  it. 
Our  argument  can  be  settled.  We  open  the  box  and  look,  and  both 
become  convinced.  It  must  be  noticed  that  in  our  argument  we  used 
words ,  because  they  stood  for  something ;  so  when  we  began  to  argue, 
the  argument  could  be  solved  to  our  mutual  satisfaction,  since  there  was 
a  third  factor,  the  object,  which  corresponded  to  the  symbol  used,  and 
this  settled  the  dispute.  A  third  factor  was  present,  and  agreement  be¬ 
came  possible.  Let  us  take  another  example.  Let  us  try  to  settle  the 
problem :  Ts  blah-blah  a  case  of  tra-tra  ?’  Let  us  assume  that  you  say 
Ves ,  and  that  I  say  ‘no\  Can  we  reach  any  agreement  ?  It  is  a  real 
tragedy,  of  which  life  is  full,  that  such  an  argument  cannot  be  solved 
at  all.  We  used  noises,  not  words.  There  was  no  third  factor  for  which 
these  noises  stood  as  symbols,  and  so  we  could  argue  endlessly  without 
any  possibility  of  agreement.  That  the  noises  may  have  stood  for  some 
semantic  disturbance  is  quite  a  different  problem,  and  in  such  a  case  a 
psycho-pathologist  should  be  consulted,  but  arguments  should  stop.  The 
reader  will  have  no  difficulty  in  gathering  from  daily  life  other  examples, 
many  of  them  of  highly  tragic  character. 

We  see  that  we  can  reach,  even  here,  an  important  conclusion ; 
namely,  that,  first  of  all,  we  must  distinguish  between  words,  symbols 
which  symbolize  something,  and  noises,  not  symbols,  which  have  no 
meaning  (unless  with  a  pathological  meaning  for  the  physician)  ;  and, 
second,  that  if  we  use  words  (symbols  for  something),  all  disputes  can 
be  solved  sooner  or  later.  But,  in  cases  in  which  we  use  noises  as  if  they 
were  words,  such  disputes  can  never  be  settled.  Arguments  about  the 
truth  or  ‘falsehood’  of  statements  containing  noises  are  useless,  as  the 
terms  truth  or  falsehood’  do  not  apply  to  them.  There  is  one  charac¬ 
teristic  about  noises  which  is  very  hopeful.  If  we  use  words,  symbols, 
not-noises,  the  problems  may  be  complicated  and  difficult ;  we  may  have 
to  wait  for  a  long  time  for  a  solution;  but  we  know  that  a  solution  will 
be  forthcoming.  In  cases  where  we  make  noises,  and  treat  them  as 
words,  and  this  fact  is  exposed,  then  the  ‘problems’  are  correctly  recog¬ 
nized  at  once  as  ‘no-problems’,  and  such  solutions  remain  valid.  Thus, 
we  see  that  one  of  the  obvious  origins  of  human  disagreement  lies  in  the 
use  of  noises  for  words,  and  so,  after  all,  this  important  root  of  human 
dissension  might  be  abolished  by  proper  education  of  s.r  within  a  single 
generation.  Indeed,  researches  in  symbolism  and  s.r  hold  great  possi¬ 
bilities.  We  should  not  be  surprised  that  we  find  meaningless  noises  in 
the  foundation  of  many  old  ‘philosophies’,  and  that  from  them  arise 

ON  SYMBOLISM 

most  of  the  old  ‘philosophical’  fights  and  arguments.  Bitterness  and 
tragedies  follow,  because  many  ‘problems’  become  ‘no-problems’,  and 
the  discussion  leads  nowhere.  But,  as  material  for  psychiatrical  studies, 
these  old  debates  may  be  scientifically  considered,  to  the  great  benefit  of 
our  understanding. 

We  have  already  mentioned  the  analogy  between  the  noises  we  make 
when  these  noises  do  not  symbolize  anything  which  exists,  and  the 
worthless  ‘cheques’  we  give  when  our  bank  balance  is  zero.  This  analogy 
could  be  enlarged  and  compared  with  the  sale  of  gold  bricks,  or  any  other 
commercial  deal  in  which  we  try  to  make  the  other  fellow  accept  some¬ 
thing  by  a  representation  which  is  contrary  to  fact.  But  we  do  not  realize 
that  when  we  make  noises  which  are  not  words,  because  they  are  not 
symbols,  and  give  them  to  the  other  fellow  as  if  they  were  to  be  con¬ 
sidered  as  words  or  symbols,  we  commit  a  similar  kind  of  action.  In 
the  concise  Oxford  Dictionary  of  Current  English,  there  is  a  word, 
‘fraud’,  the  definition  of  which  it  will  be  useful  for  us  to  consider.  Its 
standard  definition  reads:  ‘Fraud,  n.  Deceitfulness  (rare),  criminal  de¬ 
ception,  use  of  false  representations,  (in  Law,  .  .  .)  ;  dishonest  artifice  or 
trick  ( pious  fraud,  deception  intended  to  benefit  deceived,  and  especially 
to  strengthen  religious  belief)  ;  person  or  thing  not  fulfilling  expectation 
or  description.’  *  Commercialism  has  taken  good  care  to  prevent  one  kind 
of  symbolic  fraud,  as  in  the  instances  of  spurious  cheques  and  selling 
gold  bricks  or  passing  counterfeit  money.  But,  as  yet,  we  have  not 
become  intelligent  enough  to  realize  that  another  most  important  and 
similar  kind  of  fraud  is  continually  going  on.  So,  up  to  the  present,  we 
have  done  nothing  about  it. 

No  reflecting  reader  can  deny  that  the  passing  off,  on  an  unsus¬ 
pecting  listener,  of  noises  for  words,  or  symbols,  must  be  classified  as 
a  fraud,  or  that  we  pass  to  the  other  fellow  contagious  semantic  dis¬ 
turbances.  This  brief  remark  shows,  at  once,  what  serious  ethical  and 
social  results  would  follow  from  investigation  of  correct  symbolism. 

On  one  side,  as  we  have  already  seen,  and  as  will  become  increas¬ 
ingly  evident  as  we  proceed,  our  sanity  is  connected  with  correct  sym¬ 
bolism.  And,  naturally,  with  the  increase  of  sanity,  our  ‘moral’  and 
‘ethical’  standards  would  rise.  It  seems  useless  to  preach  metaphysical 
‘ethics’  and  ‘morals’  if  we  have  no  standards  for  sanity.  A  fundamen¬ 
tally  tm-sound  person  cannot,  in  spite  of  any  amount  of  preaching,  be 
either  ‘moral’  or  ‘ethical’.  It  is  well  known  that  even  the  most  good- 
natured  person  becomes  grouchy  or  irritable  when  ill,  and  his  other 

♦The  first  italics  are  mine. — A.  K. 

II.  GENERAL  ON  STRUCTURE 

semantic  characteristics  change  in  a  similar  way.  The  abuse  of  symbol¬ 
ism  is  like  the  abuse  of  food  or  drink :  it  makes  people  ill,  and  so  their 
reactions  become  deranged. 

But,  besides  the  moral  and  ethical  gains  to  be  obtained  from  the  use 
of  correct  symbolism,  our  economic  system,  which  is  based  on  symbolism 
and  which,  with  ignorant  commercialism  ruling,  has  mostly  degenerated 
into  an  abuse  of  symbolism  (secrecy,  conspiracy,  advertisements,  bluff, 
'live-wire  agents’. ,) ,  would  also  gain  enormously  and  become  stable.  Such 
an  application  of  correct  symbolism  would  conserve  a  tremendous 
amount  of  nervous  energy  now  wasted  in  worries,  uncertainties . ,  which 
we  are  all  the  time  piling  upon  ourselves,  as  if  bent  upon  testing  our 
endurance.  We  ought  not  to  wonder  that  we  break  down  individually 
and  socially.  Indeed,  if  we  do  not  become  more  intelligent  in  this  field, 
we  shall  inevitably  break  down  racially. 

The  semantic  problems  of  correct  symbolism  underlie  all  human 
life.  Incorrect  symbolism,  similarly,  has  also  tremendous  semantic  rami¬ 
fications  and  is  bound  to  undermine  any  possibility  of  our  building  a 
structurally  human  civilization.  Bridges  cannot  be  built  and  be  expected 
to  endure  if  the  cubic  masses  of  their  anchorages  and  abutments  are 
built  according  to  formulae  applying  to  surfaces .  These  formulae  are 
structurally  different,  and  their  confusion  with  the  formulae  of  volumes 
must  lead  to  disasters.  Similarly,  we  cannot  apply  generalizations  taken 
from  cows,  dogs,  and  other  animals  to  man,  and  expect  the  resultant 
social  structures  to  endure. 

Of  late,  the  problems  of  meaninglessness  are  beginning  to  intrigue 
a  number  of  writers,  who,  however,  treat  the  subject  without  the  realiza¬ 
tion  of  the  multiordinal,  oo-valued,  and  non-el  character  of  meanings. 
They  assume  that  'meaningless’  has  or  may  have  a  definite  general  con¬ 
tent  or  unique,  one-valued  'meaning’.  What  has  been  already  said  on 
non-el  meanings,  and  the  example  of  the  unicorn  given  above,  establish 
a  most  important  semantic  issue ;  namely,  that  what  is  ‘meaningless’  in 
a  given  context  on  one  level  of  analysis,  may  become  full  of  sinister 
meanings  on  another  level  when  it  becomes  a  symbol  for  a  semantic  dis¬ 
turbance.  This  realization,  in  itself,  is  a  most  fundamental  semantic 
factor  of  our  reactions,  without  which  the  solution  of  the  problems  of 
sanity  becomes  extremely  difficult,  if  at  all  possible. 

CHAPTER  VII 

LINGUISTIC  REVISION 

This  would  appear  to  put  at  least  part  of  the  Theory  of  Demonstration 
in  a  category  with  the  efforts  of  beginners  in  Geometry:  To  prove  that  A 
equals  B:  let  A  equal  B;  therefore  A  equals  B.  (22)  e.  t.  bell 

To  what  final  conclusions  are  we  then  led  respecting  the  nature  and 
extent  of  the  scholastic  logic?  I  think  to  the  following:  that  it  is  not  a 
science,  but  a  collection  of  scientific  truths,  too  incomplete  to  form  a  sys¬ 
tem  of  themselves,  and  not  sufficiently  fundamental  to  serve  as  the  founda¬ 
tion  upon  which  a  perfect  system  may  rest.  (44)  george  boole 

.  .  .  the  subject-predicate  habits  of  thought  .  .  .  had  been  impressed  on 
the  European  mind  by  the  overemphasis  on  Aristotle’s  logic  during  the 
long  mediaeval  period.  In  reference  to  this  twist  of  mind,  probably  Aris¬ 
totle  was  not  an  Aristotelian.  (578)  a.  n.  whitehead 

The  Euclidean  space  alone  is  one  which  at  the  same  time  is  free  of  elec¬ 
tricity  and  of  gravitation.  (55 1)  Hermann  weyl 

To  imagine  that  Newton’s  great  scientific  reputation  is  tossing  up  and 
down  in  these  latter-day  revolutions  is  to  confuse  science  with  omnisci¬ 
ence.  (149)  A.  S.  EDDINGTON 

This  latter  objection  was  sanctioned  by  Newton,  who  was  not  a  strict 
Newtonian.  (457)  bertrand  russell 

The  evil  produced  by  the  Aristotelian  ‘primary  substance’  is  exactly 
rfiis  habit  of  metaphysical  emphasis  upon  the  ‘subject-predicate’  form  of 
proposition.  (578)  a.  n.  whitehead 

The  belief  or  unconscious  conviction  that  all  propositions  are  of  the 
subject-predicate  form — in  other  words,  that  every  fact  consists  in  some 
thing  having  some  quality — has  rendered  most  philosophers  incapable  of 
giving  any  account  of  the  world  of  science  and  daily  life.  (453) 

BERTRAND  RUSSELL 

The  alternative  philosophic  position  must  commence  with  denouncing 
the  whole  idea  of  ‘Subject  qualified  by  predicate’  as  a  trap  set  for  philos¬ 
ophers  by  the  syntax  of  language.  (574)  A.  *n.  whitehead 

And  a  well-made  language  is  no  indifferent  thing;  not  to  go  beyond 
physics,  the  unknown  man  who  invented  the  word  heat  devoted  many 
generations  to  error.  Heat  has  been  treated  as  a  substance,  simply  be¬ 
cause  it  was  designated  by  a  substantive,  and  it  has  been  thought  inde¬ 
structible.  (417)  H.  POINCAR& 

Aristotle  was  almost  entirely  concerned  with  establishing  what  had  been 
conceived  already  or  of  refuting  error,  but  not  with  solving  the  problem 
of  the  discovery  of  truth.  Now  and  then,  in  reading  his  organon,  one  feels 
that  he  has  almost  sensed  the  nature  of  this  problem,  only  to  find^  that  he 
lapses  immediately  into  a  discussion  of  the  logic  of  demonstration.  He 
thinks  of  confirming  truth  rather  than  of  finding  it.  (82)  r.  d.  Carmichael 

II.  GENERAL  ON  STRUCTURE 

It  is  necessary  here  to  give  a  short  account  of  the  great  scientific 
revolution  which  started  some  years  ago,  but  which  is  still  going  on 
with  very  beneficial  results.  This  scientific  revolution  started  in  geometry, 
and,  in  a  deeper  sense,  is  carried  on  by  geometry.  Until  the  work  of 
Gauss,  Lobatchevski,  Bolyai,  Riemann . ,  the  E  geometry,  being  unique , 
was  believed  to  be  the  geometry  of  the  ‘space'.  The  moment  a  second 
geometry  was  produced,  just  as  good,  self-consistent,  yet  contradictory 
to  the  old  one,  the  geometry  became  a  geometry.  None  was  unique.  One 
absolute  was  dead.  Until  Einstein  (roughly),  the  universe  of  Newton 
was,  for  us,  the  universe.  With  Einstein,  it  became  a  universe.  Some¬ 
thing  similar  happened  to  man.*  A  new  ‘man*  was  produced,  just  as 
good,  certainly  contradictory  to  the  old  one.  The  man  became  a  man, 
otherwise  a  ‘conceptual  construction',  one  among  the  infinity  of  possible 
ones. 

It  is  not  difficult  to  see  that  in  all  these  advances  there  is  a  common 
characteristic,  which  can  be  put  simply  in  that  it  consists  in  a  little  change 
from  a  ‘the'  into  an  ‘a'.  Some  people  insist  upon  sentences  in  one- 
syllable  words;  here  we  could  indeed  satisfy  them!  The  change,  no 
doubt,  can  be  expressed  by  the  exchange  of  one  syllable  for  another.  But 
the  problems,  in  spite  of  this  apparent  simplicity,  are  quite  important ; 
and  the  rest  of  this  volume  will  be  devoted  to  the  examination  of  this 
change  and  of  what  it  structurally  involves. 

In  mentioning  the  above  names,  a  very  important  one  was  omitted, 
that  of  Aristotle.  I  merely  mentioned  these  names  as  representative  of 
certain  trends.  Otherwise,  of  course,  it  would  have  been  necessary  to 
mention  additional  names,  including  sometimes  those  of  their  predeces¬ 
sors  and  the  followers  who  have  carried  their  work  further.  It  would 
have  been  particularly  necessary  in  the  case  of  Aristotle,  who  was  not 
only  a  most  gifted  man,  but  who,  also,  because  of  the  character  of  his 
work,  has  semantically  affected  perhaps  the  largest  number  of  people 
ever  influenced  by  a  single  man ;  and  so  his  work  has  undergone  a  most 
marked  elaboration.  Because  of  this,  his  name,  in  this  book,  will  usually 
stand  for  the  body  of  doctrines  known  as  aristotelianism.  It  is  important 
to  keep  this  in  consideration,  because  it  is  becoming  more  and  more  evi¬ 
dent  that  the  work  of  Aristotle  and  his  followers  has  had  an  unprece¬ 
dented  influence  upon  the  development  of  the  Aryan  race,  and  so  the 
study  of  aristotelianism  may  help  us  to  understand  ourselves.  In  using 
the  name  of  the  founder  of  the  school  as  a  synonym  for  the  school  itself, 

♦See  my  Manhood  of  Humanity ,  The  Science  and  Art  of  Human  Engineering. 

LINGUISTIC  REVISION 

we  make  our  statements  less  cumbersome.  Some  of  the  statements  may 
not  be  true  about  the  founder  of  the  school ;  yet  they  remain  true  about 
the  school. 

Aristotle  (384-322  b.c.)  was  born  in  Stagira,  Greece.  He  was  the 
son  of  a  physician  and  had  marked  predilection  for  natural  history  and  a 
distinct  dislike  for  mathematics.  Plato,  who  is  considered  the  father  of 
mathematicians’,  was  his  teacher.  Early  in  his  career  Aristotle  reacted 
strongly  against  the  mathematical  philosophy  of  his  teacher,  and  began 
to  build  up  his  own  system,  which  had  a  strongly  biological  bias  and 
character.  Psycho-logically,  Aristotle  was  a  typical  extrovert,  who  proj  ects 
all  his  internal  processes  on  the  outside  world  and  objectifies  them,  so 
his  reaction  against  Plato,  the  typical  introvert,  for  whom  ‘reality’  was 
all  inside,  was  a  natural  and  rather  an  inevitable  consequence.  The  strug¬ 
gle  between  these  two  giants  was  typical  of  the  two  extreme  tendencies 
which  we  find  in  practically  all  of  us,  as  they  represent  two  most  diverse, 
and  yet  fundamental  psycho-logical  tendencies.  In  1933  we  know  that 
either  of  these  extremes  in  our  make-up  is  undesirable  and  un-sound,  in 
science  as  well  as  in  life.  In  science,  the  extreme  extroverts  have  intro¬ 
duced  what  might  be  called  gross  empiricism,  which,  as  such,  is  a  mere  el 
fiction — practically  a  delusion.  For  no  ‘facts  are  ever  free  from  doc¬ 
trines’  :  so  whoever  fancies  he  can  free  himself  from  ‘doctrines  ,  as 
expressed  in  the  structure  of  the  language  he  uses . ,  simply  cherishes  a 
delusion,  usually  with  strong  affective  components.  The  extreme  intro¬ 
verts,  on  the  other  hand,  originated  what  might  be  called  the  idealistic 
philosophies’,  which  in  their  turn  become  el  delusions.  We  should  not 
overlook  the  fact  that  both  these  tendencies  are  el  and  structurally  falla¬ 
cious.  Belief  in  the  separate  existence  of  el,  and,  therefore,  fictitious, 
entities  must  be  considered  as  a  structurally  un-sound  s.r  and  accounts  in 
a  large  degree  for  many  bitter  fights  in  science  and  life. 

In  asylums,  these  two  tendencies  are  sometimes  very  obvious.  The 
extreme  extrovert  is  found  mostly  among  the  paranoiacs ;  the  extreme 
introvert  among  cases  of  schizophrenia  (dementia  praecox).  Between 
the  two  extremes  we  find  all  possible  shades  and  degrees  represented  in 
daily  life  as  well  as  in  asylums.  Both  extreme  tendencies  involve  harm¬ 
ful  s.r ,  because  both  produce  delusions  of  some  elementalism  which,  as 
such,  is  always  fictitious  and  impossible.  ‘Mentally’  ill  are  often  charac¬ 
terized  by  s.r  involving  this  capacity  for  building  for  themselves  fictitious 
worlds  in  which  they  can  find  refuge  from  actual  life.  If  we,  who  live 
outside  of  asylums,  act  as  if  we  lived  in  a  fictitious  world — that  is  to  say, 
if  we  are  consistent  with  our  beliefs — we  cannot  adjust  ourselves  to 
actual  conditions,  and  so  fall  into  many  avoidable  semantic  difficulties. 

II.  GENERAL  ON  STRUCTURE 

But  the  so-called  normal  person  practically  never  abides  by  his  beliefs, 
and  when  his  beliefs  are  building  for  him  a  fictitious  world,  he  saves  his 
neck  by  not  abiding  by  them.  A  so-called  ‘insane*  person  acts  upon  his 
beliefs,  and  so  cannot  adjust  himself  to  a  world  which  is  quite  different 
from  his  fancy. 

Let  me  repeat  that  the  nervous  system  of  the  human  child  is  not 
physically  finished  at  birth:  and,  therefore,  it  is  easy  to  give  it  quite 
harmful  semantic  twists,  by  wrong  doctrines.  To  eliminate  the  vicious 
and  fictitious  el  outlook  and  s.r,  it  is  of  paramount  importance  to  try  to 
educate  a  child  to  be  neither  an  extreme  extrovert  nor  an  extreme  intro¬ 
vert,  but  a  balanced  extroverted-introvert. 

In  psychotherapy,  the  attempt  is  often  made  to  re-educate  these 
tendencies.  The  physician  usually  tries  to  make  an  extrovert  more  intro¬ 
verted,  and  an  introvert  more  extroverted.  In  case  of  success,  the  patient 
either  recovers  altogether  or  improves  considerably. 

In  practice  there  is  a  considerable  difference  between  the  re-education 
of  an  extrovert  to  an  introvert  and  that  of  an  introvert  to  an  extrovert. 
We  have  already  seen  that  the  balanced  person  should  be  both.  In  daily 
el  language,  the  introvert  is  ‘all  thought*  and  has  not  much  use  for  the 
external  world,  while  the  extrovert  is  ‘all  senses*  and  has  little  use  for 
‘thought*.  It  often  happens  that  it  is  easier  to  re-educate  an  introvert, 
because  at  least  he  ‘thinks*,  but  difficult  to  re-educate  an  extrovert,  as  he 
has  not  cultivated  his  capacity  to  ‘think*.  He  may  be  a  remarkable  player 
on  words,  but  all  his  verbal  plays,  though  clever,  are  shallow. 

Now  we  shall  be  able  to  understand  why  Aristotle,  the  extrovert, 
and  his  doctrines  have  appealed,  and  still  appeal,  to  those  who  can 
‘think*  but  feebly.  The  fact  that  the  fuller  linguistic  system  of  the  extro¬ 
vert  Aristotle  was  accepted  in  preference  to  the  work  of  the  introvert, 
Plato,  is  of  serious  semantic  consequence  to  us.  It  is  evident  that  man¬ 
kind,  in  its  evolution,  had  to  pass  through  a  low  period  of  development; 
but  this  fact  is  not  the  only  reason  why  the  A  doctrines  have  had  such  a 
tremendous  influence  upon  the  Aryan  race.  The  reason  is  much  more 
deeply  rooted  and  pernicious.  In  his  day,  over  two  thousand  years  ago, 
Aristotle  inherited  a  structurally  primitive-made  language .  He,  as  well  as 
the  enormous  majority  of  us  at  present,  never  realized  that  what  is  going 
on  outside  of  our  skins  is  certainly  not  words.  We  never  ‘think*  about  this 
distinction,  but  we  all  take  over  semantically  from  our  parents  and  asso¬ 
ciates  their  habitual  forms  of  representation  involving  structure  as  the 
language  in  which  to  talk  about  this  world,  not  knowing,  or  else  forget¬ 
ting,  that  a  language  to  be  fit  to  represent  this  world  should  at  least  have 
th t  structure  of  this  world. 

LINGUISTIC  REVISION 

Let  me  illustrate  this  by  a  structural  example:  let  us  take  a  man¬ 
made  green  leaf.  We  see  that  in  it  green  colour  was  added .  Now  let  us 
take  a  natural  green  leaf.  We  see  that  the  green  colour  was  not  added  to 
it,  but  that  the  natural  green  leaf  must  be  considered  a  process,  a  func¬ 
tional  affair  which  became  green  without  anybody’s  adding  green  colour. 
In  the  old  savage  mythologies,  there  were  always  demons  in  human 
shape,  who  actually  made  everything  with  their  hands .  This  primitive 
mythology  built  up  a  ‘plus’  or  additive  language  which  attributed  to  the 
world  an  anthropomorphic  structure.  This  false  notion  of  the  world’s 
structure  was,  in  turn,  reflected  in  the  language.  It  was  a  subject- 
predicate,  ‘plus’  language,  and  not  as  it  should  be,  to  fit  the  structure  of 
the  world,  a  functional  language. 

Here  we  come  across  a  tremendous  fact ;  namely,  that  a  language, 
any  language,  has  at  its  bottom  certain  metaphysics,  which  ascribe,  con¬ 
sciously  or  unconsciously,  some  sort  of  structure  to  this  world.  Our  old 
mythologies  ascribed  an  anthropomorphic  structure  to  the  world,  and, 
of  course,  under  such  a  delusion,  the  primitives  built  up  a  language  to 
picture  such  a  world  and  gave  it  a  subject-predicate  form.  This  subject- 
predicate  form  also  was  closely  related  to  our  ‘senses’,  taken  in  a  very  el , 
primitive  form. 

This  ‘plus’  tendency  not  only  shaped  our  language,  but  even  in 
mathematics  and  in  physics  we  are  still  much  more  at  home  with  linear 
(‘plus’)  equations.  Only  since  Einstein  have  we  begun  to  work  seriously 
at  new  forms  of  representation  which  are  no  longer  expressed  by  linear 
(or  ‘plus’)  equations.  At  present,  we  have  serious  difficulties  in  this  field. 
It  must  be  admitted  that  linear  equations  are  much  simpler  than  non¬ 
linear  equations.  I  will  explain  later  that  the  notion  of  two- valued  caus¬ 
ality  is  strictly  connected  with  this  linearity  or  additivity. 

Neither  Aristotle  nor  his  immediate  followers  realized  or  could 
realize  what  has  been  said  here.  They  took  the  structure  of  the  primitive- 
made  language  for  granted,  and  went  ahead  formulating  a  philosophical 
grammar  of  this  primitive  language,  which  grammar — to  our  great 
semantic  detriment — they  called  ‘logic’,  defining  it  as  the  ‘laws  of 
thought’.  Because  of  this  formulation  in  a  general  theory,  we  are  accus¬ 
tomed  even  today  to  inflict  this  ‘philosophical  grammar’  of  primitive 
language  upon  our  children,  and  so  from  childhood  up  imprison  them 
unconsciously  by  the  structure  of  the  language  and  the  so-called  ‘logic’, 
in  an  anthropomorphic,  structurally  primitive  universe. 

Investigation  shows  that  three  great  names  in  our  history  have  been 
very  closely  interconnected :  Aristotle,  who  formulated  a  general  theory 
of  a  primitive  language,  a  kind  of  ‘philosophical  grammar’  of  this  lan- 

II.  GENERAL  ON  STRUCTURE 

guage,  and  called  it  ‘logic' ;  Euclid,  who  built  the  first  nearly  autonomous 
logical  system,  which  we  call  ‘geometry* ;  and,  finally,  Newton,  who 
rounded  up  these  structural  systems  by  formulating  the  foundations  of 
macroscopic  mechanics.  These  three  systems  happen  to  have  one  under¬ 
lying  structural  metaphysics,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  Newton  corrected 
some  of  the  most  glaring  errors  of  Aristotle.  Such  first  systems  are 
never  structurally  satisfactory,  and,  in  time,  it  was  found  that  these  sys¬ 
tems  contained  unjustified  structural  assumptions  which  their  followers 
tried  to  evade.  It  was  natural  that  the  innovators  should  meet  with  a 
strong  resistance,  as  these  old  systems  had  become  so  elaborated  as  to 
impress  the  ‘thoughtless*  with  their  finality.  So  the  revisions  went  very 
slowly  and  very  shyly.  In  the  case  of  Aristotle,  revision  was  still  more 
difficult  because  the  current  religious  ‘philosophies*  of  the  Western  world 
were  inextricably  bound  up  with  the  ^-system.  The  religious  leaders 
took  a  strong  stand,  and  as  late  as  the  seventeenth  century  threatened 
death  to  the  critics  of  Aristotle. 

Even  today  a  revision  of  Aristotle  is  extremely  difficult,  for  these 
three  systems  have  a  tremendous  semantic  hold  upon  us.  Many  semantic 
factors  have  contributed  to  this  hold.  First,  they  were  established  by 
men  who  were  really  very  gifted.  Second,  they  were  not  wise  epigrams 
but  were  genuine  systems  with  definite  structure,  and,  as  such,  extremely 
difficult  to  replace.  Obviously,  it  was  not  enough  to  pick  some  weak  spot 
in  one  of  these  systems ;  the  new  system-builder  would  have  to  replace 
the  old  structure  by  an  equally  full-fledged  structure,  and  this  was  a  very 
laborious  and  difficult  task.  Third,  these  systems  were  strictly  united 
by  one  structural  metaphysics  and  s.r;  they  collaborated  with  each  other, 
and  gave  each  other  assistance.  Finally,  the  inter  dependence  of  these 
systems  rested  to  a  large  degree  on  the  structure  of  the  primitive  lan- 
guage,  upon  which  Aristotle  had  legislated,  and  which  was  accepted  by 
practically  all  Aryans,  and  so  was  inherently  bound  up  with  our  daily 
habits  of  speech  and  s.r .  Together,  these  four  factors  constituted  a  tre¬ 
mendous  power,  working  against  any  attempts  at  revision. 

We  do  not  realize  what  tremendous  power  the  structure  of  an 
habitual  language  has.  It  is  not  an  exaggeration  to  say  that  it  enslaves 
us  through  the  mechanism  of  s.r  and  that  the  structure  which  a  language 
exhibits,  and  impresses  upon  us  unconsciously,  is  automatically  projected 
upon  the  world  around  us.  This  semantic  power  is  indeed  so  unbeliev¬ 
able  that  I  do  not  know  any  one,  even  among  well-trained  scientists,  who, 
after  having  admitted  some  argument  as  correct,  does  not  the  next  min¬ 
ute  deny  or  disregard  (usually  unconsciously)  practically  every  word  he 

LINGUISTIC  REVISION 

had  admitted,  being  carried  away  again  by  the  structural  implications  of 
the  old  language  and  his  s.r . 

This  linguistic  slavery  makes  criticism  very  difficult,  for  the  major¬ 
ity  of  critics  with  their  s.r  defend  unconsciously  structural  and  linguis¬ 
tic  implications,  instead  of  analysing  open-mindedly  the  structure  of  the 
facts  at  hand.  All  our  advances  are  going  very  slowly,  very  painfully 
and  haltingly,  because  the  new  work  in  science,  the  Einstein  and  the 
new  quantum  theories  included,  is  all  of  a  non-el  structure,  while  our 
daily  languages  are  el  and  absolutistic  and  twist  pathologically  our  habits 
of  ‘thought'  and  s.r.  No  help  is  forthcoming  from  the  so-called  ‘psychol¬ 
ogists'.  Not  to  keep  the  reader  guessing  too  long,  let  me  say  here — 
although  this  will  be  explained  at  length  later  on — that  the  main  achieve¬ 
ment  of  Einstein  was  precisely  in  the  fact  that  he  refused  to  divide 
verbally  ‘space'  and  ‘time*,  which  experimentally  cannot  be  so  divided. 
This  was  accomplished  by  the  help  of  the  mathematician  Minkowski, 
who  invented  a  language  of  new  structure ;  namely,  the  four-dimensional 
‘space-time',  in  which  to  talk  about  events.  This  device  made  the  Einstein 
General  Theory  possible,  and  affected  the  new  quantum  theories.  In  the 
present  work,  in  order  to  be  able  to  talk  about  the  organism-as-a-whole, 
we  must  introduce  this  non-el  principle  as  fundamental  and  apply  it. 

The  first  science  to  break  the  traditional  structural  ring  was  geom¬ 
etry.  Full-fledged  E  systems  were  built.  Following  these  E  systems. 
N  systems  were  built  (Einstein,  quantum),  and  the  ‘time'  is  ripe  to  build 
a  ^-system,  which  the  present  writer  originated  in  his  Manhood  of 
Humanity ,  and  which  is  formulated  as  a  structural  outline  of  a  general 
theory  in  the  present  volume. 

As  soon  as  this  new  ^-system  was  definitely  formulated,  a  most 
curious,  natural,  and  yet  unexpected  result  became  apparent ;  namely, 
that  the  three  new  systems,  the  A,  E,  and  the  R  have  also  one  under¬ 
lying  structure  and  metaphysics.  This  fact  adds  to  the  importance  of 
the  situation.  All  these  three  new  systems  have  been  produced  inde¬ 
pendently.  They  express  between  them  the  structural  and  semantic  urge 
and  longing  of  all  modern  science.  Their  mutual  interdependence,  mutual 
structure,  mutual  metaphysics,  mutual  method  are  helpful,  for  when  the 
vital  nature  of  the  issues  at  hand  is  clearly  seen,  it  will  be  found  expe¬ 
dient  to  start  from  this  interdependence  as  a  basis,  although,  historically 
speaking,  it  was  not  a  factor  in  the  production  of  these  systems. 

This  does  not  seem  to  be  clearly  understood  by  all  scientists.  I 
have  read,  for  instance,  scientific  papers  in  which  Einstein  is  reproached 
that  he  did  not  start  with  E  geometries,  but  only  at  a  later  stage  incor¬ 
porated  them  into  his  system.  This  argument,  of  course,  is  not  against 

II.  GENERAL  ON  STRUCTURE 

Einstein  but  for  Einstein.  Similar  remarks  could  be  made  about  this 
present  work;  and  again  this  would  not  be  an  argument  against  this 
work,  but  for  it.  All  these  new  systems  represent  methodological  and 
structural  advances,  and  will  have  played  their  semantic  roles  even  if 
some  day  they  should  be  dismissed  and  systems  of  different  structure 
take  their  place. 

Historically,  attempts  in  the  direction  of  a  A  discipline  have  been 
very  numerous.  Indeed,  the  invention  of  any  new  important  term  of  a 
non-subject-predicate  character,  or  of  a  functional  character,  was,  in 
itself,  an  attempt  in  the  A  direction.  All  sciences  have  had  to  abandon 
the  common  vocabularies  and  build  their  own  terminologies,  many  of 
which  are  also  A.  Although  all  these  attempts  have  been  made,  and 
have  quite  often  been  successful  in  their  fields,  to  the  best  of  my  knowl¬ 
edge,  they  were  not  made  consciously.  The  term  accepted  here ;  namely, 
‘non-aristotelian’  is  very  useful,  not  only  because  it  is  appropriate  and 
illustrates  very  well  what  we  have  to  contend  with,  but  also  because  it 
places  the  emphasis  properly  and  makes  us  conscious  of  the  structural 
issues.  The  fact  that  the  three  new  non-systems  have  as  much  in  common 
as  the  older  three  had,  recommends  and  justifies  the  use  of  the  term. 
The  new  problem  which  looms  up ;  namely,  the  validity  or  non-validity  of 
the  A  law  of  the  excluded  third,  leads  automatically  to  the  non-chrysip- 
pian  and  A  oo-valued  ‘logics’,  which  merge  with  the  theory  of  probabil¬ 
ity.1  According  to  the  accepted  use,  it  is  enough  to  build  a  system 
differing  from  an  older  system  by  one  single  postulate,  to  justify  (for 
instance)  the  name  ‘non-euclidean’. 

The  scope  of  this  particular  chapter  does  not  permit  me  to  enlarge 
upon  this  difficult  and  important  problem  as  to  the  differences  between 
the  A  and  A  systems,  but  for  orientation,  a  short  list  of  structural  differ¬ 
ences  is  given  here ;  all  of  which  involves  new  semantic  factors. 

The  primitive  form  of  representation  which  Aristotle  inherited, 
together  with  its  structural  implications  and  his  ‘philosophical  grammar*, 
which  was  called  ‘logic’,  are  strictly  interconnected,  so  much  so  that  one 
leads  to  the  other. 

In  the  present  ^-system,  I  reject  Aristotle’s  assumed  structure, 
usually  called  ‘metaphysics’  ( circa  350  B.c.),  and  accept  modern  science 
(1933)  as  my  ‘metaphysics’. 

I  reject  the  following  structurally  and  semantically  important  aspects 
of  the  ^-system,  which  I  shall  call  postulates,  and  which  underlie  the 
A -system-  function : 

1)  The  postulate  of  uniqueness  of  subject-predicate  representation 

LIN( lUISTK'  REVISION 

2)  The  two-valued  el  ‘logic’,  as  expressed  in  the  law  of  ‘excluded 
third*. 

3)  The  necessary  confusion  through  the  lack  of  discrimination 
between  the  ‘is’  of  identity,  which  I  reject  completely,  and  the  ‘is’  of 
predication,  the  ‘is’  of  existence,  and  the  ‘is’  used  as  an  auxiliary  verb. 

4)  The  elementalism,  as  exemplified  by  the  assumed  sharp  division 
of  ‘senses’  and  ‘mind’,  ‘percept’  and  ‘concept’,  ‘emotions’  and  ‘intellect’, . 

5)  The  el  theory  of  ‘meaning’. 

6)  The  el  postulate  of  two-valued  ‘cause-effect’. 

7)  The  el  theory  of  definitions,  which  disregards  the  undefined  terms. 

8)  The  three-dimensional  theory  of  propositions  and  language. 

9)  The  assumption  of  the  cosmic  validity  of  grammar. 

10)  The  preference  for  intensional  methods. 

11)  The  additive  and  el  definition  of  ‘man’. 

This  list  is  not  complete  but  sufficient  for  my  purpose  and  for 
orientation. 

I  reject  the  use  of  the  ‘is’  of  identity  entirely,  because  identity  is 
never  found  in  this  world,  and  devise  methods  to  make  such  a  rejection 
possible. 

I  base  the  ^-system-function  and  system  all  through  on  negative 
‘is  not*,  premises  which  cannot  be  denied  without  the  production  of 
impossible  data,  and  so  accept  ‘difference’,  ‘differentiation’. ,  as  funda¬ 
mental. 

I  accept  relations,  structure,  and  order  as  fundamental. 

I  accept  the  many-valued,  more  general,  structurally  more  correct 
‘logic  of  probability’  of  Lukasiewicz  and  Tarski,  which  in  my  non-el 
system  becomes  infinite- valued  (oo-valued)  semantics.* 

I  accept  functional  representation  whenever  possible. 

I  introduce  the  principle  of  non-elementalism  and  apply  it  all 
through,  which  leads  to:  (a)  A  non-el  theory  of  meanings;  ( b )  A 
non-el  theory  of  definitions  based  on  undefined  terms;  (c)  A  psycho- 
physiological  theory  of  semantic  reactions . 

I  accept  the  absolute  individuality  of  events  on  the  un-speakable 
objective  levels,  which  necessitates  the  conclusion  that  all  statements 
about  them  are  only  probable  in  various  degrees,  introducing  a  general 
principle  of  uncertainty  in  all  statements. 

I  accept  ‘logical  existence’  as  fundamental. 

I  introduce  differential  and  four-dimensional  methods. 

*1  use  the  term  infinite-,  or  oo-valued  in  the  sense  of  Cantor  as  a  variable 
finite . 

II.  GENERAL  ON  STRUCTURE 

I  accept  the  propositional  function  of  Russell. 

I  accept  the  doctrinal  function  of  Keyser,  and  generalize  the  system 
function  of  Sheffer. 

I  introduce  the  four-dimensional  theory  of  propositions  and  lan¬ 
guage. 

I  establish  the  multiordinality  of  terms. 

I  introduce  and  apply  psychophysiological  considerations  of  non-el 
orders  of  abstractions. 

I  expand  the  two-term  ‘cause-effect’  relation  into  an  oo-valued 
causality. 

I  accept  the  oo-valued  determinism  of  maximum  probability  instead 
of  the  less  general  two-valued  one. 

I  base  the  ^-system  on  extensional  methods,  which  necessitates  the 
introduction  of  a  new  punctuation  indicating  the  ‘etc.’  in  a  great  many 
statements. 

I  define  ‘man’  in  non-el  and  functional  terms. 

This  list  is  also  not  complete  and  is  given  for  orientation  and 
justification  of  the  name  of  a  non~aristotelian  system . 

In  the  rough,  all  science  is  developing  in  the  A  direction.  The  more 
it  succeeds  in  overcoming  the  old  structural  implications  of  speech,  and 
the  more  successful  it  is  in  building  new  vocabularies,  the  further  and 
more  rapidly  it  will  progress. 

Our  human  relations  at  present  are  still  mostly  based  on  the 
A -system- function.  The  issues  are  definite.  Either  we  shall  have  a 
science  of  man,  and,  therefore,  have  to  part  company  with  the  structural 
implications  of  our  old  language  and  corresponding  s.r — and  this  means 
we  shall  have  to  build  up  a  new  terminology,  which  is  A  in  structure,  and 
use  different  methods ; — or  we  shall  remain  in  A  semantic  clutches,  use 
A  language  and  methods,  involving  older  s.r,  and  have  no  science  of  man. 
As  I  am  engaged  in  building  up  a  science  of  man,  all  departures  I  am 
forced  to  make  from  accepted  methods  are  necessary  semantic  prelim¬ 
inaries  to  the  building  of  my  system  and  need  no  apology. 

It  is  no  exaggeration  to  say  that  the  A,  E,  and  N  systems  have  one 
most  interesting  structural  and  semantic  characteristic  in  common; 
namely,  that  they  have  a  few  unjustified  ‘infinities’  too  many.  The  mod¬ 
ern  E ,  N,  and,  finally,  A  systems,  after  analysis,  eliminate  these  unjusti¬ 
fied  notions.  New  systems  arise,  quite  different  from  the  old  ones,  which 
again  have  this  structural  characteristic  in  common,  that  they  have  a  few 
‘infinities’  less — an  important  semantic  factor,  especially  in  the  ^-system, 
as  it  helps  to  eliminate  our  older  delusional  mythologies.  In  the  mathe¬ 
matical  reconstruction  of  Brouwer,  Weyl,  and  the  Polish  School,  a  similar 

LINGUISTIC  RL  VIS  ION 

tendency  is  apparent,  leading  to  revision  of  the  mathematical  notions  of 
infinity.  For  instance,  the  E-system  involves  several  structural  ‘infinity’ 
assumptions.  In  it,  a  line  has  infinite  length ;  the  space  constant  is  infinite ; 
and  the  natural  unit  of  length  is  also  infinite.  In  the  jV-system,  the 
velocity  of  light  is  assumed  unconsciously  to  be  infinite,  a  structural 
assumption  false  to  facts.  The  ,4 -system  involves  also  false  to  facts 
infinity  assumptions,  explained  later.  It  is  extremely  interesting  to  note 
that  in  any  system  a  similar  result  follows  from  the  introduction  of  these 
different  ‘infinities’ ;  namely,  when  such  an  ‘infinity’  is  introduced  in  the 
denominator,  it  makes  the  whole  expression  vanish.  When,  in  the  observa¬ 
tion  of  actual  facts,  we  miss  some  characteristic  entirely;  for  instance, 
order,  it  leads  to  the  introduction  of  some  ‘infinity’  somewhere.  In  other 
words,  faulty,  insufficient  observation  leads  to  the  introduction  some¬ 
where  in  our  systems  of  some  fanciful  ‘infinities’. 

I  must  emphasize  again  the  semantic  difficulties  which  beset  us,  in 
the  formation  of  a  new  and  ^-system,  mainly  because  of  the  lack  of 
scientific  non-el  psycho-logics  and  general  semantics.  Having  no  general 
theories  to  guide  us  in  our  researches,  we  must  select  some  other  devices. 
We  can  survey  those  achievements  of  mankind  which  have  proved  to 
be  the  most  beneficial  and  of  most  lasting  value,  study  their  structure 
and  try  to  train  ourselves,  and  our  s.r,  in  repeating  the  psycho-logical 
processes  and  methods  which  have  made  them.  In  this  way,  we  are  led 
to  the  study  of  the  structure  of  mathematics  and  science,  and  acquire 
the  habit  of  rigorous  and  critical  ‘thought’  and  acquire  new  s.r.  Naturally, 
such  a  method  is  wasteful ;  it  would  be  simpler  to  have  general  non-el 
theories,  which  I  have  proposed  to  call  general  semantics  and  psycho¬ 
logies,  replacing  the  older  el  ‘logic’  and  ‘psychology’,  and  study  these 
short,  structurally  correct,  ready-made  formulations  to  train  our  s.r 
rather  than  to  study  the  actual  performance  of  scientists  and  mathema¬ 
ticians,  and  formulate  these  generalizations  for  ourselves.  But,  until  the 
present  work,  this  could  not  be  done. 

For  these  reasons,  we  shall  have  to  make,  in  the  following  chapters, 
a  short  survey  of  different  scientific  achievements  without  going  into 
technical  details,  but  giving  enough  of  these  details  to  indicate  structure 
and  its  bearing  on  s.r .  Every  thing  given  will  be  strictly  of  an  elementary 
character,  and  the  intelligent  reader  will  find  no  special  difficulties  in 
following  the  survey. 

The  selection  of  suitable  material  presented  a  very  serious  problem. 
I  consulted  with  many  friends  and  used  my  best  judgement,  backed  by 
some  experience.  An  important  factor  was  the  class  of  readers  for  whom 
this  book  is  written.  Sooner  or  later  a  new  branch  of  science  must  be — 

II.  GENERAL  ON  STRUCTURE 

and  will  be — established  for  the  pursuit  of  this  A  enquiry ;  so  the  future 
student  and  teacher  must  have  at  least  an  outline  of  the  main  problems. 
It  seemed  more  advisable  to  outline  main  issues  relevant  to  the  subject, 
than  to  work  out  some  of  them  in  more  detail.  A  great  deal  of  new  scien¬ 
tific  literature  on  structure  and  s.r  must  be  produced  by  mathematicians, 
psychiatrists,  linguists,  psychophysiologists , .  In  this  field,  experience  has 
taught  me  that  very  little  has  been  done  and  that  much  of  what  has  been 
done  cannot  be  accepted  without  a  non-el  revision.  It  seems  to  be  more 
convenient  that  the  reader  shall  not  be  referred  to  too  many  books,  and 
more  expedient  that  the  writer  should  not  take  too  much  for  granted ;  so 
most  of  the  structural  and  semantic  informations  which  are  necessary  for 
an  intelligent  reading  are  given,  together  with  additional  references  for 
students  who  wish  to  go  deeper  into  the  subject. 

The  reader  will  find  that  the  non-el  principle  has  been  emphasized. 
In  the  meantime,  in  the  writing  I  have  had  to  use  some  el  terms.  In 
such  cases,  I  used  the  old  terms  in  quotation  marks.  The  reason  for  this 
is  that  before  the  full  general  theory  is  developed,  it  is  impossible  to  do 
otherwise.  Besides,  even  if  organism-as-a- whole  terms  were  used  from 
the  beginning,  this  also  would  not  be  entirely  adequate ;  for  the  organism- 
as-a-whole  cannot  and  should  not  be  structurally  separated  from  its 
environment ;  and  so  the  terms  should  be  enlarged  to  cover,  by  implica¬ 
tion,  the  environment. 

Later  we  shall  see  that  all  languages  have  some  characteristics  simi¬ 
lar  to  mathematical  languages.  For  instance,  the  A  word,  ‘apple’,  as  it 
has  no  individual  subscripts  or  date,  is  not  a  name  for  a  definite  object 
or  stage  of  a  process  which  are  all  different ,  but  a  name  for  a  definition , 
which,  in  principle,  is  one-valued,  while  the  objective  processes  are 
oo-valued.  If  this  mechanism  is  not  clearly  understood,  we  are  bound  in 
dealing  with  actual  oo-valued  stages  of  processes,  to  identify  the  oo  values 
into  one  or  a  few  values.  The  above  considerations  necessitate  a  non-el 
new  theory  of  meanings  in  accordance  with  the  structure  of  the  world 
and  our  nervous  system. 

The  distinction  between  mathematical  and  physical  languages  is 
structurally  most  important,  although  once  identification  is  entirely  elim¬ 
inated,  we  discover  that  all  possible  characteristics  found  in  this  world 
are  due  to  structuret  and  so  can  be  expressed  in  terms  of  structure,  rela¬ 
tions,  and  multi-dimensional  order. 

Several  similar  difficulties  will  appear  later  on,  all  having  a  similar 
general  characteristic ;  namely,  that  we  seem  to  reach  an  impasse,  from 
which  there  is  no  way  out.  Yet  escape  can  be  found,  not  by  solution  in 
the  old  way,  but  by  reformulating  the  problem  so  as  to  make  a  solution 

LINGUISTIC  REVISION 

possible.  This  method  is  of  extreme  usefulness  in  mathematics,  and 
seemingly  can  be  applied  to  life  also. 

If  we  compare  the  three  systems  of  Aristotle,  Euclid,  and  Newton, 
designated,  A ,  E,  N,  respectively,  in  Fig.  1,  with  the  non-aristotelian, 
non-euclidean  and  non-newtonian  systems,  designated  A,  E,  N,  a  very 
important  fact  should  be  noticed ;  namely,  that 
the  AEN  trilogy  is  more  general  than  AEN . 

This  fact  has  far-reaching  semantic  and  prac¬ 
tical  consequences  and  perhaps  can  be  best 
explained  by  the  aid  of  a  diagram.  We  see 
that  the  AEN  trilogy  includes  the  AEN 
trilogy  as  a  particular  case,  from  which  it 
follows  that  all  those  readers  who  are  already 
re-educated  to  the  new  AEN  s.r ,  have  less 
difficulty  in  understanding  the  older  AENt 
simply  because  the  older  systems  are  only 
particular  cases  of  the  new  AEN .  But  this  is  not  so  with  those  readers 
who  still  have  the  old  AEN  s.r ;  they  have  to  enlarge  their  limited  point 
of  view,  grasp  more  than  they  knew  before,  and  so  will  have  serious 
semantic  difficulties  for  a  while,  and,  perhaps,  become  impatient  or  even 
angry.  With  the  understanding  of  this  larger  generality  of  the  new 
AEN ,  perhaps  a  great  deal  of  this  semantic  futile  unpleasantness  can 
be  eliminated, 

I  know  of  no  better  example  to  illustrate  this  than  to  refer  the 
reader  to  a  little  elementary  book,  Debate  on  the  Theory  of  Relativity , 
published  by  the  Open  Court  Co.,  Chicago.2  It  is  really  interesting  to 
watch  how  good-natured  the  einsteinists  are  as  compared  with  the  new- 
tonians.  This  book  is  suggested  because  it  is  elementary,  extremely 
instructive,  and  very  well  worth  reading.  But  the  whole  literature  of 
euclideanism,  non-euclideanism,  newtonianism  and  non-newtonianism 
gives  ample  proof  of  the  above  statements.  What  kind  of  verbal  flowers 
the  aristotelians  will  throw  to  the  non-aristotelians  remains  to  be  seen ; 
but  some  verbal  and  semantic  uproar  can  be  expected. 

It  should  be  expected  that  this  widening  of  horizons  can  only  be 
attained,  after  all,  with  difficulty,  because  it  requires  an  alteration  of 
habitual  reactions,  from  one-,  two-,  and  three- valued  to  oo-valued  new 
s.r — usually  not  easy  to  achieve.  But  there  seems  little  doubt  that  the 
future  depends  on  it,  and  so  we  shall  not  be  able  to  escape  it  indefinitely. 

As  we  usually  fail  to  make  allowances  for  the  ‘emotional'  aspects  of 
‘intellectual'  pursuits,  let  me  once  more  point  to  the  fact  that  even  purely 
‘intellectual'  achievements  have  their  ‘emotional'  components  and  these 

II.  GENERAL  ON  STRUCTURE 

are  included  in  the  non-el  s.r  It  seems  that  broader  oo -valued  under¬ 
standing  has  beneficial  effect  on  our  s.r,  a  result  which  should  be  expected, 
if,  as  at  present,  we  have  no  reason  to  doubt  that  the  organism-as-a- 
whole  is  a  dependable  structural  non-el  generalization. 

PART  III 

NON-ELEMENT ALISTIC  STRUCTURES 

The  history  of  human  thought  may  be  roughly  divided  into  three  periods, 
each  period  has  gradually  evolved  from  its  predecessor.  The  beginning 
of  one  period  overlaps  the  other.  As  a  base  for  my  classification  I  shall 
take  the  relationship  between  the  observer  and  the  observed.  .  .  . 

The  first  period  may  be  called  the  Greek,  or  Metaphysical,  or  Pre- 
Scientific  Period.  In  this  period  the  observer  was  everything,  the  observed 
did  not  matter. 

The  second  period  may  be  called  the  Classical  or  Semi-Scientific — still 
reigning  in  most  fields — where  the  observer  was  almost  nothing  and  the 
only  thing  that  mattered  was  the  observed.  This  tendency  gave  rise  to 
that  which  we  may  call  gross  empiricism  and  gross  materialism.  . 

The  third  period  may  be  called  the  Mathematical,  or  Scientific  Period. 
...  In  this  period  mankind  will  understand  {some  understand  it  already) 
that  all  that  man  can  know  is  a  joint  phenomenon  of  the  observer  and  the  ob¬ 
served.  ... 

Someone  may  ask,  How  about  “intuitions,"  “emotions,"  etc.?  The 
answer  is  simple  and  positive.  It  is  a  fallacy  of  the  old  schools  to  divide 
man  into  parcels,  elements;  all  human  faculties  consist  of  an  inter-con¬ 
nected  whole  .  .  .  (280)  A.  K. 

The  organism  is  inexplicable  without  environment.  Every  characteristic 
of  it  has  some  relation  to  environmental  factors.  And  particularly  the 
organism  as  a  whole,  i.  e.,  the  unity  and  order,  the  physiological  differences, 
relations  and  harmonies  between  its  parts,  are  entirely  meaningless  except 
in  relation  to  an  external  world,  my  Charles  m.  child 

In  reality  it  is  the  brain  as  a  whole  which  is  the  centre  of  association, 
and  the  association  is  the  very  raison  d’etre  of  the  nervous  system  as  a 
Whole.  (411)  HENRI  pi£ron 

The  views  of  space  and  time  which  I  wish  to  lay  before  you  have  sprung 
from  the  soil  of  experimental  physics,  and  therein  lies  their  strength.  They 
are  radical.  Henceforth  space  by  itself,  and  time  by  itself,  are  doomed  to 
fade  away  into  mere  shadows,  and  only  a  kind  of  union  of  the  two  will 
preserve  an  independent  reality,  (352)  H.  minkowski 

This  assumption  is  not  permissible  in  atomic  physics;  the  interaction 
between  observer  and  object  causes  uncontrollable  and  large  changes  in 
the  system  being  observed,  because  of  the  discontinuous  changes  charac¬ 
teristic  of  atomic  processes.  (2i5>  w.  Heisenberg 

Well,  this  is  one  of  the  characteristics  by  which  we  recognize  the  facts 
which  yield  great  results.  They  are  those  which  allow  of  these  happy  in¬ 
novations  of  language.  The  crude  fact  then  is  often  of  no  great  interest; 
we  may  point  it  out  many  times  without  having  rendered  great  services 
to  science.  It  takes  value  only  when  a  wiser  thinker  perceives  the  relation 
for  which  it  stands,  and  symbolizes  it  by  a  word.  (417)  h.  poincar£ 

CHAPTER  VIII 

GENERAL  EPISTEMOLOGICAL 

The  physiological  gradient  is  a  case  of  protoplasmic  memory  since  it 
represents  the  persistence  of  the  effects  of  environmental  action.  The 
establishment  of  a  gradient  in  a  protoplasm  may  be  regarded  as  a  process 
of  learning.  Charles  m.  child 

In  what  has  already  been  said,  we  have  emphasized  repeatedly  the 
‘organism-as-a- whole’  principle.  The  principle  is  structural,  involving 
most  important  semantic  factors  and  so  deserves  a  more  detailed  con¬ 
sideration. 

Since  the  days  of  Aristotle,  more  than  two  thousand  years  ago,  this 
principle  has  been  often  emphasized,  often  belittled,  but,  withal,  seldom 
applied.  That  all  we  know  about  life  and  organisms  seems  to  justify 
such  a  principle  seems  obvious. 

The  arguments  of  those  experimentalists  who  belittle  or  object  to 
such  a  principle  seem  to  be  all  of  a  similar  type,  and  are,  perhaps,  best 
expressed  by  Professor  H.  S.  Jennings,  who,  in  his  friendly  review  of 
Ritter’s  book  on  the  Organismal  Conception  of  Life ,  concludes  that 
such  an  ‘organismal  conception’  is  quite  justified,  but  is  entirely  sterile 
and  does  not  help  laboratory  workers. 

It  must  be  granted  that  at  the  date  when  the  book  of  Ritter  and 
the  review  of  Jennings  were  written  such  a  statement  was  seemingly 
justified.  The  principle  is  usually  treated  as  a  rough  generalization  from 
experience  and  is  not  analysed  further;  the  structural epistemological, 
psycho-logical  and  semantic  consequences  were  not  known,  and  so  the 
laboratory  workers  actually  did  not  realize  that  they  have  much  help. 

As  we  have  already  seen,  the  main  semantic  issues  were,  and  are, 
structural .  How  can  we  apply  the  organism-as-a-whole  principle  if  we 
insist  on  keeping  an  el  language  and  attitude?  Naturally,  if  the  principle 
is  not  applied,  it  is  futile  to  look  for  semantic  consequences  of  a  non- 
applied  principle.  But  once  the  principle  is  applied,  a  new  language  has 
to  be  built,  of  different  structure  and,  therefore ,  new  implications ,  which 
suggest  a  long  series  of  new  experiments. 

A  new  and  structurally  different  theory  may  be  summarized  in  a 
single  term — as,  for  instance,  ‘tropism’  or  ‘dynamic  gradient’,  a  fact 
which  not  only  revolutionizes  our  knowledge  but  which  leads  also  to 
entirely  new  experiments  and  further  knowledge.  Experiments,  as  such, 

111.  NON-ELEMENTAL1ST1C  STRUCTURES 

always  give  relational,  structural  data,  that,  under  such  and  such  con¬ 
ditions,  such  and  such  results  follow.  The  non~el  attitude  and  language, 
as  opposed  to  the  old  elementalism,  is  a  part  of  a  broader  and  more 
fundamental  semantic  problem ;  namely,  similarity  of  structure  between 
language  and  the  external  world.  Such  similarity  leads  to  similarity  of 
‘logical*  relations,  predictability,  and  so  forth,  and,  in  general,  to  the 
understanding  of  the  structure  of  the  world  and  new  s.r. 

There  are  many  examples  of  such  organism-as-a-whole  terms,  but 
for  the  present  we  will  mention  only  the  terms  ‘tropism*  in  the  gen¬ 
eralized  sense  of  Loeb,  and  the  ‘dynamic  or  physiological  gradients*  of 
Professor  Child.  The  term  ‘tropism*  means  the  response  of  the  organ- 
ism-as-a- whole  to  special  external  stimuli.  For  instance,  the  term  ‘helio- 
tropism*  is  applied  in  cases  when  the  organism  responds  to  the  influence 
of  light;  ‘chemotropism*,  when  it  reacts  to  chemical  stimuli;  ‘galvano- 
tropism*,  when  the  organism  responds  to  galvanic  (electrical)  stimulation , . 

The  term  ‘dynamic  or  physiological  gradient*  is  the  foundation  of 
the  A  biological  system  of  Professor  Child.  Because  of  its  importance, 
I  shall  explain  the  meaning  of  this  term  in  some  detail.1 

All  protoplasm  exhibits  empirically  a  structural  characteristic  which 
may  be  called  ‘irritability*,  which  appears  as  a  reaction  of  living  proto¬ 
plasm  to  external  dynamic  influences.  That  ‘irritability*,  as  a  structural 
characteristic,  becomes  obvious  when  we  consider  that  structurally  dis¬ 
integrated  protoplasm  is  colloidally  inactive  and  becomes  ‘dead*.  Many 
of  the  most  important  characteristics  of  living  protoplasm  are  strictly 
bound  up  with  structural  integrity. 

This  ‘irritability*  occurs  in  a  structural  plenum  and  is  transmitted 
to  other  regions  of  the  protoplasm  with  differing  yet  Unite  velocities, 
and  not  in  ‘no  time’,  as  Alice  would  say.  Let  us  imagine  a  non-differen- 

tiated,  except  for  the  limiting  surface 

(A) ,  and  living  bit  of  protoplasm.  This 
limiting  surface  represents  that  part  of 
the  protoplasm  which  is  in  direct  con¬ 
tact  with  the  environment.  If  the  ex¬ 
ternal  dynamic  factor  (S)  excites  this 
living  bit  of  protoplasm  at  a  point  (B), 
this  stimulus  will  be  the  strongest  at 

(B) ,  and  it  will  spread  to  the  further 
removed  portions  of  (A)  in  a  dimin¬ 
ishing  gradient.  If  the  decrement  is 
not  too  sharp,  the  stimulus  will  reach 

the  furthest  regions  of  (A)  ;  namely,' (C),  (D),  (E),  (F),. 

GENERAL  EPISTEMOLOGICAL 

The  presence  or  absence  of  the  decrement  or  its  steepness  and  the 
intensity  of  the  excitation  during  transmission  depends  on  the  specific 
character  of  the  protoplasm,  and  varies  from  individual  to  individual, 
and  in  different  regions  and  under  different  conditions  varies  in  one 
individual. 

Thus,  we  see  that  a  living  cell  has  a  necessary  relationship  with  the 
environment  and  with  external  energies  because  of  its  limiting  surface. 
The  difference  between  the  ‘inside  of  the  skin*  and  the  ‘outside  of  the 
skin*  establishes  the  organism-as-a-whole.  The  interplay  between  the 
inside  and  the  outside  is  structural  and  supplies  the  energies  which 
activate  the  organism.  The  membrane  formation  is  mostly  not  dependent 
upon  the  constitution  of  any  particular  protoplasm,  but  is  rather  a  gen¬ 
eral  reaction  of  all  protoplasm  to  environmental  influences. 

The  evidence  we  have  seems  to  show  that  in  all  protoplasm  in  which 
we  find  no  specialized  conducting  paths  a  certain  decrement  appears, 
so  that  the  effectiveness  of  transmission  is  limited.  In  a  primitive  non- 
differentiated  protoplasm  different  points  further  removed  from  (B)  will 
show  different  degrees  of  excitatory  changes  decreasing  from  (B).  At 
a  certain  point  the  transmission  may  cease  altogether. 

The  result,  then,  becomes  an  excitation-transmission  gradient  of 
greater  or  lesser  length,  the  different  levels  of  which  represent  various 
degrees  or  intensities  of  excitation. 

The  primary  region  of  excitation  (B)  is  physiologically  more  affected 
and  dominant  over  the  other  regions  to  which  the  excitation  is  trans¬ 
mitted,  because  it  has  more  effect  upon  them  than  they  have  upon  it. 
The  effect  of  such  conditions  gives  rise  to  a  temporary  structural 
organismal  pattern.  The  region  of  primary  excitation  (B)  becomes  the 
dominant  region,  and  the  other  regions  become  subordinate  to  it. 

The  potentiality  for  the  excitation  and  the  transmission  was  struc¬ 
turally  present  in  the  protoplasm,  but  this  could  not  produce  the  pattern 
which  resulted  from  the  external  excitation.  We  see  that  the  action  of 
the  external  factor  was  necessary  for  the  realization  of  the  definite 
physiological  pattern  whose  potentialities  were  in  the  protoplasm. 

These  new  excitation-transmission  patterns  exhibit  all  the  charac¬ 
teristics  of  new  structural  patterns  in  the  protoplasmic  mass.  They  deter¬ 
mine  localized  differences  at  different  points,  (C),  (D),  (E),.  These 
differences  and  relations  with  the  dominant  region  (B)  constitute  a 
physiological  axis  with  (B)  at  one  pole.  This  new  pattern  constitutes  a 
new  structural  integration,  which  is  a  joint  phenomenon  of  the  poten¬ 
tialities  of  the  protoplasm  and  the  environmental  action.  This  relation 
is  of  a  functional  and  not  merely  of  a  ‘plus*  character.  Child  shows  that 

III.  NON-ELEMENT ALI STIC  STRUCTURES 

the  physiological  axes  in  their  simpler  forms  are  similar  to,  if  not  the 
result  of,  such  excitation-transmission  gradients. 

For  the  organism  to  work  as-a-whole,  some  sort  of  integrating  pat¬ 
tern  is  necessary.  The  behaviour  of  the  organism-as-a-whole  results, 
first,  from  patterns  already  present,  and,  second,  from  the  possibilities 
of  further  development  and  integration  in  response  to  particular  external 
factors.  The  physiological  gradients  give  such  means. 

The  development  of  our  nervous  system  is  strictly  connected  with 
the  above  principles  discovered  by  Child.2  In  axiate  animals  and  man 
the  chief  aggregation  of  nervous  tissues  is  localized  in  the  apical  (head) 
end,  which  region  is  characterized  primarily  by  a  higher  rate  of  meta¬ 
bolism  in  the  early  stages.  Physiological  gradients  originate  as  simple 
protoplasmic  reactions  to  external  stimuli,  and  so  the  nervous  system 
originates  in  protoplasmic  behaviour.  Nerves  then  become  simply  struc¬ 
turalized  and  permanent  physiological  gradients,  and  so  exert  a  physio¬ 
logical  dominance  over  other  tissues. 

From  an  epistemological  point  of  view,  we  should  notice  that  the 
gradients  are  primarily  quantitative  and  that  we  do  not  need  specific 
factors  to  determine  them.  Any  factor  that  will  determine  a  more  or  less 
persistent  quantitative  differential  in  the  protoplasm  ought  to  be  effective. 
The  above  theory  is  structurally  supported  by  a  large  number  of  experi¬ 
ments.  For  instance,  we  can  experimentally  obliterate  or  determine  new 
gradients.8  The  organism  appears  in  this  new  light  as  a  behaviour  re- 
action-pattern,  and  substantiates  the  old  saying  that  the  function  builds 
the  organ.  Not  only  should  the  organism  be  treated  as-a-whole,  but  it  is 
impossible  to  isolate  the  organism  from  its  environment.  A  functional 
interrelationship  is  established  between  the  two. 

This  theory  appears,  also,  to  be  fundamental  for  psychiatry  and 
for  psycho-logics,  for  it  establishes  the  head  as  a  dominant  region  on  the 
base  of  an  experimentally  proven  higher  rate  of  metabolism.  From 
Child’s  point  of  view,  as  suggested  by  D'r.  William  A.  White,  the  main 
dynamic  gradient,  the  central  nervous  axis,  gives  the  structuralized  evi¬ 
dence  of  the  degree  of  correlation  of  the  other  organs  and  of  the  degree 
that  the  body  is  under  the  control  of  the  head-end  of  this  gradient.  The 
failure  to  keep  in  touch  with  this  centre  of  control  leads  to  the  disinte¬ 
gration  of  the  individual4.  The  head-end  is  also  the  most  modifiable  point 
m  the  axis  of  control,  a  conclusion  which  is  of  the  utmost  significance 
in  psychotherapy.  It  is  known  that  the  metabolism  of  organs  can  be 
affected  by  ‘psychic’  stimuli,  and  it  is  only  one  step  further  to  under¬ 
stand,  as  White  says,  why  we  may  have  other  structuralized  functions, 
such  as  structuralized  anti-social  feelings,  structuralized  greed,  structur- 

GENERAL  EPISTEMOLOGICAL 

alized  hate.,  facts  which  are  observed  daily  in  ordinary  life  and  in 
asylums.  From  the  point  of  view  of  the  theory  of  Child,  the  nervous 
system  appears  not  only  as  a  structuralized  conducting  gradient,  but  it 
also  explains  how  specific  conducting  tissues  could  have  evolved  from 
non-specific  living  protoplasm.  It  is  important  to  notice  the  dominance 
which  the  primary  region  of  excitation  exerts  over  the  others,  since,  with 
the  great  complexities  of  the  human  brain,  we  understand  better  why 
so-called  'mental’  and  semantic  issues,  which  are  phylogenetically  the 
youngest,  are  of  such  importance. 

In  our  daily  life  we  deal  with  different  people,  some  of  whom  are 
seriously  ill  ‘mentally’  and  who,  under  favorable  conditions,  would  be 
under  medical  attendance.  The  majority  of  us — some  specialists  con¬ 
sider  it  to  run  even  as  high  as  ninety  per  cent  of  the  whole  population — 
would  be  better  off  if  taken  care  of  by  some  psychiatrist,  or,  at  least, 
if  under  consultation  from  time  to  time. 

Owing  to  old  religious  prejudices,  often  unconscious,  it  is  still 
believed  that  those  ‘mentally’  ill  are  either  obsessed  by  ‘demons’  or  are 
being  punished  for  some  ‘evil’, .  The  majority  even  of  enlightened 
people  have  a  kind  of  semantic  horror  or  fright  at  ‘mental’  ills,  not 
realizing  that  under  the  animalistic  conditions  which  prevail  at  present 
in  our  theories,  ‘ethical’,  social,  economic.,  those  only  with  the  least 
human  traits  are  favored,  while  those  most  human  cannot  stand  such 
animalistic  conditions  and  often  break  down.  It  is  not  a  novelty  that 
a  moron  cannot  be  ‘insane’.  A  moron  lacks  something;  only  the  more 
gifted  individuals,  the  more  human  (as  compared  with  animals),  break 
down.  I  know  of  many  psychiatrists  who  say  that  ‘it  takes  a  “good 
mind”  to  be  “insane” 

Now,  ‘mental’  and  semantic  excitation,  which  phylogenetically  ap¬ 
peared  so  recently,  naturally  plays,  in  many  instances,  a  dominant  part, 
a  fact  which  science,  until  very  lately,  has  completely  disregarded.  The 
present  theory  makes  it  quite  obvious  that  with  animalistic  theories  in 
existence,  and  un-sanity  (lack  of  consciousness  of  abstracting,  confusion 
of  orders  of  abstractions  resulting  from  identifications.,)  practically 
universally  operating  in  every  one  of  us,  a  seriously  unbalanced  race 
must  be  produced. 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  consistent  application  of  a  non-el 
language  in  the  analysis  of  animal  behaviour  has  suggested  new  experi¬ 
ments  and  that,  as  a  result,  the  use  of  such  terms  had  its  influence  on 
laboratory  workers.  It  does  not  matter  to  what  extent  these  terms,  or 
the  theories  which  they  represented,  were  ‘right’  or  ‘wrong’,  they  were 
terms  of  the  non-el  type,  and  they  expressed  in  one  term  entirely  struc- 

111.  NON-ELEMENTALIST1C  STRUCTURES 

turally  new  and  far-reaching  theories.  In  testing  these  theories,  new 
series  of  experiments  were  required.  Even  when  the  new  experiments 
were  devised  to  verify  the  older  experiments,  again  the  laboratory  workers 
got  direct  benefit  of  the  structurally  new  terms.  But  these  benefits  were 
largely  unconscious,  and  so  biologists  could  believe  in  the  older  days 
that  they  had  no  laboratory  benefits  from  the  use  of  such  terms;  how¬ 
ever,  this  belief  is  now  entirely  unjustified. 

Since  the  non-el  principle  is  not  only  a  structurally  justified  empiri¬ 
cal  generalization,  but  also  involves  for  its  application  the  structural 
rebuilding  of  our  language  and  old  theories,  the  semantic  issues  are  far- 
reaching  and  of  great  practical  value. 

The  application  of  the  principle  means  the  rejection  of  the  old 
elementalism  which  results  and  leads  to  identifications  and  to  blinding 
semantic  disturbances,  which,  in  turn,  prevent  clear  vision  and  unbiased 
creative  freedom. 

According  to  the  modern  theory  of  materials,  as  given  in  Part  X, 
the  mutual  interdependence,  the  mutual  action  and  reaction  of  every¬ 
thing  in  this  world  upon  everything  else  appears  as  a  structural  fact 
and  a  necessity,  and  so  el  languages  cannot  be  expected  to  lead  to  satis¬ 
factory  semantic  solutions.  We  should  not  be  surprised  to  find  that  the 
struggle  against  identification  and  elementalism  appears  at  some  stage 
in  every  science. 

Some  of  the  most  prominent  examples  of  this  tendency  outside  of 
biology,  psychiatry. ,  can  be  found  in  modern  physics.  From  a  structural 
point  of  view  the  whole  theory  of  Einstein  is  nothing  else  than  an 
attempt  to  reformulate  physics  on  a  structurally  new  non-el  and  A 
foundation — an  exact  structural  parallel  of  the  biological  organism-as-a- 
whole  principle. 

Einstein  realized  that  the  empirical  structure  of  ‘space*  and  ‘time* 
with  which  the  physicist  and  the  average  man  deals  is  such  that  it  can¬ 
not  be  empirically  divided,  and  that  we  actually  deal  with  a  blend  which 
we  have  split  only  elementalistically  and  verbally  into  these  fictitious 
entities.  He  decided  to  build  a  verbal  system  closer  in  structure  to  the 
facts  of  experience  and,  with  the  help  of  the  mathematician  Minkowski, 
he  formulated  a  system  of  new  structure  which  employed  a  non-el  lan¬ 
guage  of  space-time.  As  we  know  from  physics  and  astronomy,  this 
non-el  language  suggested  experiments ,  and  so  it  had  beneficial  labora¬ 
tory  application.  But,  in  fact,  the  influence  goes  still  deeper,  as  the  pres¬ 
ent  work  will  show,  for  such  structural  advances  carry  with  them 
profound  psycho-logical,  semantic  effects.  Although,  at  present,  these 

GliNKRAL  KIMSTKMOLOCilCAL 

beneficial  influences  operate  unconsciously,  they,  nevertheless,  tend  to 
counteract  the  el  and  absolutistic  semantic  effects  of  identification. 

It  is  interesting  to  note  that  the  Einstein  theory,  because  struc¬ 
tural,  has  had  the  effect  upon  the  younger  physicists  of  a  semantic 
release  from  the  old  structural  elementalism  and  has  prepared  the  seman¬ 
tic  ground  for  the  crop  of  young  geniuses  which  has  sprung  up  lately  in 
the  quantum  field.  It  was  found  that  the  el  ‘absolute’  division  of  the 
‘observer’  and  the  ‘observed’  was  false  to  facts,  because  every  observa¬ 
tion  in  this  field  disturbs  the  observed.  The  elimination  of  this  elemen¬ 
talism  in  the  quantum  field  led  to  the  most  revolutionary  restricted 
‘uncertainty  principle’  of  Heisenberg,  which,  without  abolishing  deter¬ 
minism,  requires  the  transforming  of  the  two-valued  A  ‘logic’  into  the 
oo -valued  semantics  of  probability.  Again,  this  advance  in  quantum 
formulations  has  suggested  new  experiments. 

The  y?-system,  as  originated  by  the  writer  in  his  Manhood  of 
Humanity  and  other  writings,  is  also  the  result  of  the  structurally  non-el 
tendency.  In  Manhood  of  Humanity ,  I  introduced  a  non-el  term,  ‘time¬ 
binding  ,  by  which  is  meant  all  the  factors  which  as-a-whole  make  man 
a  man,  and  which  differentiate  him  from  animals.  In  carrying  the  sys¬ 
tem  further  in  the  present  book,  I  reject  the  structurally  el  separation 
involved  in  such  terms  as  ‘senses’  and  ‘mind’. ,  and  introduce,  instead, 
non-el  terms,  such  as  ‘different  orders  of  abstractions’. ,  where  ‘mind* 
and  ‘senses’. ,  are  no  longer  divided.  Curiously  enough,  even  in  such  a 
field,  the  method  has  suggested  experiments,  and  so  again  the  new 
language  has  laboratory  importance. 

What  has  been  said  above  about  the  organism-as-a-whole,  and  illus¬ 
trated  by  particular  cases,  seems  to  show  a  general  characteristic  of  all 
our  abstracting  capacities.  We  usually  disregard,  or  fail  to  appreciate, 
the  fact  that  a  single  structurally  important  new  term  might  lead  to 
the  re-postulation  of  the  whole  structure  of  the  language  in  the  given 
field.  In  science  we  search  for  structure ;  so  any  structurally  new  term 
is  useful,  because,  when  tested,  it  always  gives  structural  information, 
whether  positive  or  negative.  In  our  human  affairs,  it  is  different.  All 
our  human  institutions  follow  the  structure  of  the  language  used ;  but 
we  never  ‘think’  of  that,  and,  when  the  silly  institutions  do  not  work, 
we  blame  it  all  on  ‘human  nature’,  without  any  scientific  justification. 

Poincare,  in  one  of  his  essays,  speaks  about  the  harmful  effect  which 
the  term  ‘heat’  had  on  physics.  Grammatically,  the  term  ‘heat’  is  classi¬ 
fied  as  a  substantive,  and  so  physics  was  labouring  for  centuries  looking 
for  some  ‘substance’  which  would  correspond  to  the  substantive  name 
‘heat’.  We  know  by  now  that  there  is  no  such  thing,  but  that  ‘heat’  must 

III.  NON-ELEMENTALISTIC  STRUCTURES 

be  considered  as  a  manifestation  of  ‘energy*.  If  we  choose  to  carry  this 
analysis  further,  we  should  find  that  ‘energy*  is  also  not  a  very  satis¬ 
factory  term,  but  that  ‘action*,  perhaps,  is  more  fundamental. 

In  dealing  with  ourselves  and  the  world  around  us,  we  must  take 
into  account  the  structural  fact  that  everything  in  this  world  is  strictly 
interrelated  with  everything  else,  and  so  we  must  make  efforts  to  dis¬ 
card  primitive  el  terms,  which  imply  structurally  a  non-existing  isolation. 

The  moment  this  is  realized,  we  shall  have  to  treat  the  non-el  prin¬ 
ciple  seriously.  As  the  new  terms  have,  also,  their  non-el  implications, 
such  terms  throw  new  light  on  old  problems. 

In  practice,  it  is  difficult,  at  first,  to  avoid  the  use  of  old  terms. 
When  we  want  to  digest  fully  a  new  and  important  work  based  on  new 
structural  terms  and  acquire  corresponding  s.r,  the  best  way  to  train 
oneself  in  the  use  of  the  new  terms  is  by  gradually  dropping  the  old 
terms.  If  we  have  to  use  the  old  terms,  then  we  should  train  ourselves 
to  be  aware  of  their  insufficiency  and  of  their  fallacious  structural  im¬ 
plications ,  and  so  be  free  from  the  old  s.r. 

The  use  of  the  new  terms  should  be  deliberate.  We  should  put  the 
problem  to  ourselves  somewhat  as  follows:  The  old  language  is  struc¬ 
turally,  and,  therefore,  by  implication,  semantically  unsatisfactory;  the 
new  terms  seem  to  correspond  closer  to  facts ;  let  us  test  the  new  terms. 
Are  the  new  terms  always  structurally  satisfactory?  Probably  not,  but 
in  science  experiments  check  predictions,  and  so  new  structural  issues 
become  clarified. 

We  have  been  speaking  about  new  and  old  terms  quite  simply,  yet 
the  issues  are  not  so  simple.  The  invention  of  a  single  structurally  new 
term  always  involves  new  structural  and  relational  notions,  which,  again, 
involve  s.r .  For  instance,  if  we  study  any  event,  and  in  that  study  use 
the  terms  ‘tropism*,  or  ‘dynamic  gradient*,  or  ‘time-binding*,  or  ‘order 
of  abstractions',  or  ‘space-time*,  or  ‘wave-packets*. ,  we  must  use  all 
structural  and  semantic  implications  the  terms  involve. 

Using  the  first  four  terms,  we  are  bound  to  treat  the  organism-as-a- 
whole,  for  the  terms  are  not  el.  They  are  not  based  on  the  notion  of,  nor 
do  they  postulate,  some  fictitious  ‘isolated’  elements.  In  using  space-time, 
we  introduce  the  individuality  of  events,  as  every  ‘point  of  space*  carries 
with  itself  a  date,  which,  by  necessity,  makes  every  ‘point*  in  space-time 
unique  and  individual.  In  using  the  term  ‘wave-packet*,  we  re-interpret 
the  older  objectified  and,  perhaps,  fictitious  ‘electron’, . 

The  consistent  and  permanent  use  of  such  terms  naturally  involves, 
structurally,  a  new  world-outlook,  new  s.r,  more  justified  by  our  scien¬ 
tific  and  daily  experience.  But  the  greatest  gain  is  usually  in  getting 

GENERAL  EPISTEMOLOGICAL 

away  from  primitive  structural  notions  and  metaphysics,  with  their 
vicious  semantic  disturbances.  In  creative  work,  semantic  Imitations 
hamper  a  dear  understanding,  and  prevent  scientists  from  inventing  or 
formulating  better,  simpler,  and  more  effective  theories  of  different 
structure. 

As  soon  as  we  possess  ‘knowledge’,  then  we  shall  ‘know’  all  that 
there  is  to  be  known.  By  definition,  there  cannot  be  any  unknowable . 
There  is  a  place  for  the  unknown  structure.  The  unknown  is  rather 
extensive,  partly  because  science  has  been,  and  still  is,  persecuted,  as 
has  already  been  pointed  out. 

The  so-called  ‘unknowable’  was  the  semantic  result  of  identifica¬ 
tion,  of  a  semantic  unbalance,  which  posits  for  knowledge  something 
‘beyond’  knowledge.  But  has  such  a  postulation  any  meanings  outside 
of  psychopathology?  Of  course  not,  as  it  starts  with  a  self -contradictory 
assumption,  which,  being  senseless,  must  lead  to  senseless  results. 

We  have  dwelt  on  the  problems  of  the  structure  of  terms  at  such 
length,  because  they  are  generally  disregarded,  but  they  are,  for  semantic 
purposes,  fundamental.  The  reader  will  get  the  main  benefit  of  this  book 
and  will  receive  help  in  understanding  modern  scientific  issues  if  he  be¬ 
comes  entirely  convinced  of  the  seriousness  of  structural  and  semantic 
problems. 

Terms  are  artifices  of  humans  which  are  necessary  to  economize 
effort  in  the  field  of  ‘experience’  and  experimentation.  They  are  useful  in 
reducing  the  actual  amount  of  experience  necessary,  by  allowing  verbal 
experimentation.  The  human  rate  of  progress  is  swifter  than  that  of 
the  animals,  and  this  is  due  mainly  to  the  fact  that  we  can  summarize 
and  transmit  past  experiences  to  the  young  generation  in  a  degree  far 
more  effective  than  that  of  the  animals.  We  have  also  extra-neural 
means  for  recording  experiences,  which  the  animals  lack  entirely. 

That  such  verbal  experimentation  is  possible  at  all  is  conditioned 
by  the  fact  that  languages  have  structure ,  and  that  our  knowledge  of  the 
world  is  structural  knowledge.  Let  us  repeat  once  more  that  if  two  rela¬ 
tions  have  similar  structure,  all  of  their  ‘logical’  characteristics  are  simi¬ 
lar;  therefore,  once  structure  is  discovered,  such  a  process  of  verbal 
experimentation  becomes  extremely  effective,  and  an  accelerating  cultural 
device.  The  use  of  an  antiquated  language  in  our  human  affairs,  in 
addition  to  other  drawbacks,  prevents  our  being  more  intelligent  in 
those  affairs. 

The  natural  order  of  investigation  is  indicated  thus:  (1)  Empirical 
search  for  structure  in  the  sciences;  (2)  Once  this  structure  is  dis¬ 
covered,  at  each  date,  the  structure  of  our  language  is  adjusted  to  it  and 

111.  NON-ELEMENTAL1ST1C  STRUCTURES 

our  new  s.r  trained.  Historically,  we  have  partially  followed  the  reversed, 
and  ultimately  pre-human,  and  so  pathological,  order.  Without  science, 
and  with  extremely  meagre  and  primitive  knowledge  of  the  structure  of 
the  world,  we  have  produced  grunts  and  languages  of  primitive  false 
structure,  reflecting,  of  necessity,  its  implications  as  to  the  assumed 
structure  of  the  world.  We  have  made  out  of  it  primitive  dogmas  which 
are  still  in  full  sway  and  embodied  in  the  structure  of  the  old  language. 
This  is  also  the  reason  why,  outside  of  technical  achievements,  we  are 
still  on  such  primitive  levels.  It  is  easy  to  understand  why  experimental 
science  is  of  such  importance  and  why  theoretical  (verbal)  predictions 
must  be  tested  experimentally.  The  above  also  gives  a  deeper  and  a  new 
justification  for  what  is  called  'pragmatism'. 

Experiments  constitute  a  search  for  relations  and  structure  in  the 
empirical  world.  Theories  produce  languages  of  some  structure.  If  the 
two  structures  are  similar,  the  'theories  work';  otherwise,  they  do  not, 
and  suggest  further  search  and  structural  adjustments. 

It  should  be  mentioned,  perhaps,  that  the  main  epistemological 
principle  which  has  led  to  the  writing  of  the  works  of  the  present  author 
was  a  definite  inclination  to  abandon  identification  and  the  resulting 
structurally  unsatisfactory  el  language  in  general  use,  and  to  produce  a 
non-el  system,  which,  in  structure,  would  be  similar  to  the  world  around 
us,  ourselves  and  our  nervous  system  included.  This  structural  novelty 
was  the  foundation  on  which  the  ^-system  has  been  gradually  built. 

CHAPTER  IX 

COLLOIDAL  BEHAVIOUR 

In  fact,  to-day  colloids  may  be  regarded  as  an  important,  perhaps  the 

most  important  connecting  link  between  the  organic  and  the  inorganic 

world.  (7)  WOLFGANG  PAULI 

In  our  researches,  let  us  follow  the  natural  order  and  give  a  brief 
structural  account  of  what  we  know,  empirically,  about  the  medium  in 
which  life  is  found;  namely,  about  the  colloids.  The  following  few 
elementary  particulars  show  the  empirical  importance  of  structure,  and  so 
are  fundamental  in  the  present  work. 

At  present,  physicians  are  usually  too  innocent  of  psychiatry,  and 
psychiatrists,  although  they  often  complain  about  this  innocence  of  their 
colleagues,  seldom,  if  ever,  themselves  pay  any  attention  to  the  colloidal 
structure  of  life;  and  their  arguments  about  the  ‘body-mind’  problem 
are  still  scientifically  incomplete  and  unconvincing,  though  the  ‘body- 
mind’  problem  has  been  present  with  us  for  thousands  of  years.  It  is  a 
very  important  semantic  problem,  and,  as  yet,  not  solved  scientifically, 
although  there  is  a  simple  solution  of  it  to  be  found  in  the  colloidal 
structure  of  life. 

The  reader  should  not  ascribe  any  uniqueness  of  the  ‘cause-effect’ 
character  to  the  statements  which  follow,  as  they  may  not  be  true  when 
generalized.  Colloidal  science  is  young  and  little  known.  Science  has 
accumulated  a  maze  of  facts,  but  we  do  not  have,  as  yet,  a  general  theory 
of  colloidal  behaviour.  Statements,  therefore,  should  not  be  unduly 
generalized. 

We  shall  only  indicate  a  few  structural  and  relational  connections 
important  for  our  purpose. 

When  we  take  a  piece  of  some  material  and  subdivide  it  into 
smaller  pieces,  we  cannot  carry  on  this  process  indefinitely.  At  some 
stage  of  this  process  the  bits  become  so  small  that  they  cannot  be  seen 
with  the  most  powerful  microscope.  At  a  further  stage,  we  should 
reach  a  limit  of  the  subdivision  that  the  particles  can  undergo  without 
losing  their  chemical  character.  Such  a  limit  is  called  the  molecule.*  The 
smallest  particle  visible  in  the  microscope  is  still  about  one  thousand 
times  larger  than  the  largest  molecule.  So  we  see  that  between  the 
molecule  and  the  smallest  visible  particle  there  is  a  wide  range  of  sizes. 

♦This  statement  is  only  approximate,  because  there  is  evidence  that  chemical 
characteristics  change  as  the  molecule  is  approached. 

Ill 

III.  NON-ELEMENT ALI STIC  STRUCTURES 

*  see  page  xii  Findlay  calls  these  the  ‘twilight  zone  of  matter* ;  and  it  was  Oswald,  I 

believe,  who  called  it  the  ‘world  of  neglected  dimensions'. 

This  ‘world  of  neglected  dimensions'  is  of  particular  interest  to  us, 
because  in  this  range  of  subdivision  or  smallness  we  find  very  peculiar 
forms  of  behaviour — life  included — which  are  called  ‘colloidal  behaviour'. 

The  term  ‘colloid'  was  proposed  in  1861  by  Thomas  Graham  to 
describe  the  distinction  between  the  behaviour  of  those  materials  which 
readily  crystallize  and  diffuse  through  animal  membranes  and  those 
which  form  ‘amorphous*  or  gelatinous  masses  and  do  not  diffuse  readily 
or  at  all  through  animal  membranes.  Graham  called  the  first  class  ‘crys¬ 
talloids*  and  the  second  ‘colloids’,  from  the  Greek  word  for  glue. 

In  the  beginning  colloids  were  regarded  as  special  ‘substances’,  but 
it  was  found  that  this  point  of  view  was  not  correct.  For  instance,  NaCl 
may  behave  in  solution  either  as  a  crystalloid  or  as  a  colloid;  so  we 
began  to  speak  about  the  colloidal  state .  Of  late,  even  this  term  became 
unsatisfactory  and  is  often  supplanted  by  the  term  ‘ colloidal  behaviour \ 

In  general,  a  colloid  may  be  described  as  a  ‘system*  consisting  of  two 
or  more  ‘phases*.  The  commonest  represent  emulsions  or  suspensions  of 
fine  particles  in  a  gaseous,  liquid,  or  other  medium,  the  size  of  the  par¬ 
ticles  grading  from  those  barely  visible  microscopically  to  those  of 
molecular  dimensions.  These  particles  may  be  either  homogeneous  solids, 
or  liquids,  or  solutions  themselves  of  a  small  percentage  of  the  medium 
in  an  otherwise  homogeneous  complex.  Such  solutions  have  one  charac¬ 
teristic  in  common;  namely,  that  the  suspended  materials  may  remain 
almost  indefinitely  in  suspension,  because  the  tendency  to  settle,  due  to 
gravity,  is  counteracted  by  some  other  factor  tending  to  keep  the  par¬ 
ticles  suspended.  In  the  main,  colloidal  behaviour  is  not  dependent  upon 
the  physical  state  or  chemistry  of  the  finely  subdivided  materials  or  of 
the  medium.  We  find  colloidal  behaviour  exhibited  not  only  by  colloidal 
suspensions  and  emulsions  where  solid  particles  or  liquid  droplets  are  in 
a  liquid  medium,  but  also  when  solid  particles  are  dispersed  in  gaseous 
medium  (smokes),  or  liquid  droplets  in  gaseous  media  (mists),. 

Materials  which  exhibit  this  special  colloidal  behaviour  are  always 
in  a  very  fine  state  of  subdivision,  so  that  the  ratio  of  surface  exposed 
to  volume  of  material  is  very  large.  A  sphere  containing  only  10  cubic 
centimetres,  if  composed  of  fine  particles  0.00000025  cm.  in  diameter, 
would  have  a  total  area  of  all  the  surfaces  of  the  particles  nearly  equal 

*  see  page  xii  to  half  an  acre.1  It  is  easy  to  understand  that  under  such  structural  con¬ 

ditions  the  surface  forces  become  important  and  play  a  prominent  role 
in  colloidal  behaviour. 

COLLOIDAL  BEHAVIOUR 

The  smaller  the  colloidal  particles,  the  closer  we  come  to  molecular 
and  atomic  sizes.  Since  we  know  atoms  represent  electrical  structures , 
we  should  not  be  surprised  to  find  that,  in  colloids,  surface  energies  and 
electrical  charges  become  of  fundamental  importance,  as  by  necessity  all 
surfaces  are  made  up  of  electrical  charges.  The  surface  energies  operat¬ 
ing  in  finely  grained  and  dispersed  systems  are  large,  and  in  their  ten¬ 
dency  for  a  minimum,  every  two  particles  or  drops  tend  to  become  one ; 
because,  while  the  mass  is  not  altered  by  this  change,  the  surface  of  one 
larger  particle  or  drop  is  less  than  the  surface  of  two  smaller  ones — an 
elementary  geometrical  fact.  Electrical  charges  have  the  well-known 
characteristic  that  like  repels  like  and  attracts  the  unlike.  In  colloids,  the 
effect  of  these  factors  is  of  a  fundamental,  yet  opposite,  character.  The 
surface  energies  tend  to  unite  the  particles,  to  coagulate,  flocculate  or 
precipitate  them.  In  the  meanwhile  the  electrical  charges  tend  to  pre¬ 
serve  the  state  of  suspension  by  repelling  the  particles  from  each  other. 
On  the  predominance  or  intensity  of  one  or  other  of  these  factors,  the 
instability  or  the  stability  of  a  suspension  depends. 

In  general,  if  'time'  limits  are  not  taken  into  consideration,  colloids 
are  unstable  complexes,  in  which  continuous  transformation  takes  place, 
which  is  induced  by  light,  heat,  electric  fields,  electronic  discharges,  and 
other  forms  of  energy.  These  transformations  result  in  a  great  variation 
of  the  characteristics  of  the  system.  The  dispersed  phase  alters  its 
characteristics  and  the  system  begins  to  coagulate,  reaching  a  stable  state 
when  the  coagulation  is  complete.  This  process  of  transformation  of  the 
characteristics  of  the  system  which  define  the  colloid,  and  which  ends  in 
coagulation,  is  called  the  ‘ageing*  of  the  colloid.  With  the  coagulation 
complete,  the  system  loses  its  colloidal  behaviour — it  is  ‘dead*.  Both  of 
these  terms  apply  to  inorganic  as  well  as  to  organic  systems. 

Some  of  the  coagulating  processes  are  partial  and  reversible,  and 
take  the  form  of  change  in  viscosity;  some  are  not.  Some  are  slow; 
some  extremely  rapid,  particularly  when  produced  by  external  agencies 
which  alter  the  colloidal  equilibrium. 

From  what  has  been  said  already,  it  is  obvious  that  colloids,  particu¬ 
larly  in  organisms,  are  extremely  sensitive  and  complex  structures  with 
enormous  possibilities  as  to  degree  of  stability,  reversibility . ,  and  allow  a 
wide  range  of  variation  of  behaviour.  When  we  speak  of  ‘chemistry*, 
we  are  concerned  with  a  science  which  deals  with  certain  materials  which 
preserve  or  alter  certain  of  their  characteristics.  In  ‘physics',  we  go 
beyond  the  obvious  characteristics  and  try  to  discover  the  structure 
underlying  these  characteristics.  Modern  researches  show  clearly  that 
atoms  have  a  very  complex  structure  and  that  the  macroscopic  character- 

III.  NON-ELEMENTAL1STIC  STRUCTURES 

istics  are  directly  connected  with  sub-microscopic  structure.  If  we  can 
alter  this  structure,  we  usually  can  alter  also  the  chemical  or  other  char¬ 
acteristics.  As  the  processes  in  colloids  are  largely  structural  and  phys¬ 
ical,  anything  which  tends  to  have  a  structural  effect  usually  also  disturbs 
the  colloidal  equilibrium,  and  then  different  macroscopic  effects  appear. 
As  these  changes  occur  as  series  of  interrelated  events,  the  best  way  is  to 
consider  colloidal  behaviour  as  a  physico-electro-chemical  occurrence.  But 
once  the  word  ‘physical*  enters,  structural  implications  are  involved.  This 
explains  also  why  all  known  forms  of  radiant  energy,  being  structures, 
can  affect  or  alter  colloidal  structures,  and  so  have  marked  effect  on 
colloids. 

As  all  life  is  found  in  the  colloidal  form  and  has  many  characteris¬ 
tics  found  also  in  inorganic  colloids,  it  appears  that  colloids  supply  us 
with  the  most  important  known  link  between  the  inorganic  and  the 
organic.  This  fact  also  suggests  entirely  new  fields  for  the  study  of  the 
living  cells  and  of  the  optimum  conditions  for  their  development ,  sanity 
included . 

Many  writers  are  not  agreed  as  to  the  use  of  the  terms  ‘film*, 
‘membrane*,  and  the  like.  Empirically  discovered  structure  shows  clearly, 
however,  that  we  deal  with  surfaces  and  surface  energies  and  that  a 
‘surface  tension  film’  behaves  as  a  membrane.  In  the  present  work,  we 
accept  the  obvious  fact  that  organized  systems  are  film-partitioned 
systems. 

One  of  the  most  baffling  problems  has  been  the  peculiar  periodicity 
or  rhythmicity  which  we  find  in  life.  Lately,  Lillie  and  others  have 
shown  that  this  rhythmicity  could  not  be  explained  by  purely  physical 
nor  purely  chemical  means,  but  that  it  is  satisfactorily  explained  when 
treated  as  a  physico-electro-chemical  structural  occurrence.  The  famous 
experiments  of  Lillie,  who  used  an  iron  wire  immersed  in  nitric  acid  and 
reproduced,  experimentally,  a  beautiful  periodicity  resembling  closely 
some  of  the  activities  of  protoplasm  and  the  nervous  system,  show  con¬ 
clusively  that  both  the  living  and  the  non-living  systems  depend  for  their 
rhythmic  behaviour  on  the  chemically  alterable  film,  which  divides  the 
electrically  conducting  phases.  In  the  iron  wire  and  nitric  acid  experi¬ 
ment,  the  metal  and  the  acid  represent  the  two  phases,  and  between  the 
two  there  is  found  a  thin  film  of  oxide.  In  protoplasmic  structures,  such 
as  a  nerve  fibre,  the  internal  protoplasm  and  the  surrounding  medium  are 
the  two  phases,  separated  by  a  surface  film  of  modified  plasm  membrane. 
In  both  systems,  the  electromotive  characteristics  of  the  surfaces  are 
determined  by  the  character  of  the  film.2 

COLLOIDAL  BEHAVIOUR 

That  living  organisms  are  film-bounded  and  partitioned  systems 
accounts  also  for  irritability.  It  appears  that  irritability  manifests  itself 
as  sensitiveness  to  electrical  currents.  These  currents  seem  to  depend  on 
polarizability  or  resistance  to  the  passage  of  ions,  owing  to  the  presence 
of  semi-permeable  boundary  films  or  surfaces  enclosing  or  partitioning 
the  system.  It  is  obvious  that  we  are  here  dealing  with  complex  struc¬ 
tures  which  are  intimately  connected  with  the  characteristics  of  life. 
Living  protoplasm  is  electrically  sensitive  only  as  long  as  its  structure  is 
intact.  With  death,  semi-permeability  and  polarizability  are  lost,  together 
with  electrical  sensitivity. 

One  of  the  baffling  peculiarities  of  organisms  is  the  rapidity  with 
which  the  chemical  and  metabolic  processes  spread.  Indeed,  it  is  impos¬ 
sible  to  explain  this  by  the  transportation  of  material.  All  evidence 
shows  that  electrical  and,  perhaps,  other  energy  factors  play  an  important 
role ;  and  that  this  activity  again  depends  on  the  presence  of  surfaces  of 
protoplasmic  structures  with  electrode-like  characteristics  which  form 
circuits. 

The  great  importance  of  the  electrical  charges  of  the  colloidal  par¬ 
ticles  arises  out  of  the  fact  that  they  prevent  particles  from  coalescing; 
and  when  these  charges  are  neutralized,  the  particles  tend  to  form  larger 
aggregates  and  settle  out  of  the  solution.  Because  of  these  charges,  when 
an  electrical  current  is  sent  through  a  colloidal  solution,  the  differently 
charged  particles  wander  to  one  or  the  other  electrode.  This  process  is 
called  cataphoresis.  There  is  an  important  difference  in  behaviour  in 
inorganic  and  organic  colloids  under  the  influence  of  electrical  currents, 
and  this  is  due  to  the  difference  in  structure.  In  inorganic  colloids,  an 
electrical  current  does  not  coagulate  the  whole,  but  only  that  portion  of 
it  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the  electrodes.  Not  so  in  living  proto¬ 
plasm.  Even  a  weak  current  usually  coagulates  the  entire  protoplasm, 
because  the  inter-cellular  films  probably  play  the  role  of  electrodes  and 
so  the  entire  protoplasm  structurally  represents  the  ‘immediate  vicinity’ 
of  the  electrodes.'  Similarly,  structure  also  accounts  for  the  extremely 
rapid  spread  of  some  effects  upon  the  whole  of  the  organism. 

Electrical  phenomena  in  living  tissue  are  mainly  of  two  more  or  less 
distinct  characters.  The  first  include  electromotive  energy  which  pro¬ 
duces  electrical  currents  in  nerve  tissue,  the  membrane  potentials, .  The 
second  are  called,  by  Freundlich,  electrokinetic,  and  include  cataphoresis, 
agglutination , .  There  is  much  evidence  that  the  mechanical  work  of  the 
muscles,  the  secretory  action  of  the  glands,  and  the  electrical  work  of 
the  nerve  cells  are  closely  connected  with  the  colloidal  structure  of  these 
tissues.  This  would  explain  why  any  factor  (semantic  reactions  included) 

111.  NON-ELEMENTALISTIC  STRUCTURES 

capable  of  altering  the  colloidal  structure  of  the  living  protoplasm  must 
have  a  marked  effect  on  the  behaviour  and  welfare  of  the  organism. 

Experiments  show  that  there  are  four  main  factors  which  are  able 
to  disturb  the  colloidal  equilibrium :  ( 1 )  Physical,  as,  for  instance, 
X-rays,  radium,  light,  ultra-violet  rays,  cathode  rays . ;  (2)  Mechanical, 
such  as  friction,  puncture . ;  (3)  Chemical,  such  as  tar,  paraffin,  arsenic . ; 
and,  finally,  (4)  Biological,  such  as  microbes,  parasites,  spermatozoa , . 
In  man,  another  (fifth)  potent  factor;  namely,  the  semantic  reactions, 
enters,  but  about  this  factor,  I  shall  speak  later. 

For  our  purpose,  the  effects  produced  by  the  physical  factors, 
because  obviously  structural,  are  of  main  interest,  and  we  shall,  there¬ 
fore,  summarize  some  of  the  experimental  structural  results.  Electrical 
currents  of  different  strength  and  duration,  as  well  as  acids  of  different 
concentration,  or  addition  of  metallic  salts,  which  produce  marked  acid¬ 
ity,  usually  coagulate  the  protoplasm,  these  effects  being  structurally 
interrelated.  Slow  coagulation  involves  changes  in  viscosity,  all  of  which, 
under  certain  conditions,  may  be  reversible.8  When  cells  are  active,  their 
fluidity  often  changes  in  a  sharp  and  rapid  manner.4 

Fat  solvents  are  called  surface-active  materials ;  when  diluted,  they 
decrease  protoplasmic  viscosity ;  but  more  concentrated  solutions  produce 
increased  viscosity  or  coagulation.6  The  anaesthetics,  which  always  are 
fat  solvents  and  surface-active  materials,  are  very  instructive  in  their 
action  for  our  purpose,  as  they  affect  very  diversified  types  of  protoplasm 
similarly,  this  similarity  of  action  being  due  to  the  similarity  of  colloidal 
structure.  Thus,  ether  of  equal  concentration  will  make  a  man  uncon¬ 
scious,  will  prevent  the  movement  of  a  fish  and  the  wriggling  of  a  worm, 
or  stop  the  activity  of  a  plant  cell,  without  permanently  injuring  the 
cells.6  In  fact,  the  action  of  all  drugs  is  based  on  their  effect  upon  the 
colloidal  equilibrium,  without  which  action  a  drug  would  not  be  effective. 
It  is  well  known  that  various  acids  or  alkalis  always  change  the  electrical 
resistance  of  the  protoplasm.7 

The  working  of  the  organism  involves  mostly  a  structural  and  very 
important  Vicious  circle’,  which  makes  the  character  of  colloidal  changes 
non-additive .  If,  for  instance,  the  heart,  for  any  reason,  slows  down  the 
circulation,  this  produces  an  accumulation  of  carbonic  acid  in  the  blood, 
which  again  increases  the  viscosity  of  the  blood  and  so  throws  more 
work  on  the  already  weakened  heart.8  Under  such  structural  conditions, 
the  results  may  accumulate  very  rapidly,  even  at  a  rate  which  can  be 
expressed  as  an  exponential  function  of  higher  degree. 

Different  regions  of  the  organism  have  different  charges;  but,  in 
the  main,  an  injured,  or  excited,  or  cooler  part  is  electro-negative  (which 

COLLOIDAL  BEHAVIOUR 

is  connected  with  acid  formation),  and  the  electro-positive  particles  rush 
to  those  parts  and  supply  the  material  for  whatever  physiological  need 
there  may  be.® 

The  effects  of  different  forms  of  radiant  energy  on  colloids  and 
protoplasm  are  being  extensively  studied,  and  the  results  are  very  start¬ 
ling.  The  different  forms  of  radiant  energy  differ  in  wave-length,  fre¬ 
quency., — that  is  to  say,  generally  in  structure, — and,  as  such,  may 
produce  structural  effects  on  colloids  and  organisms,  which  effects  may 
appear  on  the  gross  macroscopic  level  in  many  different  forms. 

Electrical  currents,  for  instance,  retard  reversibly  the  growth  of 
roots,  may  activate  some  eggs  into  larval  stages  without  fertilization . , 
which  makes  it  possible  to  understand  why,  in  some  cases,  a  mere  punc¬ 
turing  of  the  egg  may  disturb  the  equilibrium  and  produce  the  effects  of 
fertilization.10 

The  X-,  or  Rontgen-rays  have  been  shown  to  accelerate  150 
times  the  process  of  mutation.  Muller,  in  his  experiments  with  several 
thousand  cultures  of  the  fruit  fly,  has  established  the  above  ratio  of 
induced  mutations,  which  become  hereditary.11  ‘Cosmic  rays*  in  the 
form  of  radiation  from  the  earth,  in  tunnels,  for  instance,  show  similar 
results,  except  that  mutation  occurs  only  twice  as  often  as  under  the 
usual  laboratory  conditions.  Under  the  influence  of  X-rays,  mice  change 
their  colour  of  hair ;  gray  mice  become  white,  and  white  ones  darker. 
Sometimes  further  additional  bodily  changes  appear;  as,  for  instance, 
one  or  no  kidneys,  abnormal  eyes  or  legs,  occur  more  often  than  under 
ordinary  conditions.  Some  animals  lose  their  power  of  reproduction, 
although  the  body  is  not  obviously  changed.  Plants  respond  also  to  the 
X-ray  treatment.  They  grow  faster,  flower  more,  and  produce  new 
forms  more  readily.  In  humans  the  effect  of  X-ray  irradiation  has  often 
proven  disastrous  to  the  health  of  experimenters.  There  are  even  data 
that  the  irradiation  of  pregnant  mothers  may  result  in  deformation  of 
the  head  and  limbs  of  the  unborn  child  and,  in  one-third  of  the  cases, 
feeble-mindedness  of  the  children  has  resulted.12 

Ultra-violet  rays  also  show  a  marked  effect.  In  some  instances,  they 
slow  down  or  stop  the  streaming  of  protoplasm,  because  of  increased 
viscosity  or  coagulation ;  plants  grow  slowly  or  rapidly ;  certain  valuable 
ingredients  in  plants  are  increased;  certain  animals,  as,  for  instance, 
small  Crustacea  or  bacteria  are  killed;  eggs  of  Nereis  (a  kind  of  sea 
worm),  which  usually  have  28  chromosomes,  after  irradiation  have  70; 
certain  bone  malformations  in  children  are  cured ;  the  toxin  in  the  blood 
serum  of  pernicious  anaemia  patients  is  destroyed ,  .18  In  this  respect,  we 
should  notice  again  that  ultra-violet  irradiation  produces  curative  effects 

III.  NON-ELEMENTALISTIC  STRUCTURES 

like  those  of  cod-liver  oil,  which  shows  that  the  effect  of  both  factors 
is  ultimately  colloidal  and  structural. 

Extensive  experimentation  with  cathode  rays  is  very  recent,  but 
already  we  have  a  most  astonishing  array  of  structural  facts.  Moist  air 
is  converted  into  nitric  acid,  synthetic  rubber  is  produced  rapidly,  the 
milk  from  rubber  trees  is  made  solid  and  insoluble  without  the  use  of 
sulphur,  liquid  forms  of  bakelite  are  solidified  without  heating,  linseed 
oil  becomes  dry  to  the  touch  in  three  hours  and  hard  in  six  hours,  certain 
materials,  like  cholesterol,  yeast,  starch,  cottonseed  oil,  after  exposure 
for  thirty  seconds,  heal  rickets,  and  similar  unexpected  results.  What  are 
usually  called  'vitamins’  do  not  only  represent  'special  substances’,  but 
become  structurally  active  factors;  and  this  is  why  ultra-violet  rays 
may  produce  results  like  those  of  some  'substance’.  It  seems  that  in  ‘vita¬ 
mins  the  surface  activities  are  important;  the  parallelism  shown  by 
von  Hahn  between  the  surface  activities  of  different  materials  and  the 
Funk  table  of  vitamin  content  is  quite  suggestive.  Some  data  seem  to 
show  that,  in  some  instances,  surface-active  materials,  such  as  coffee  or 
alcohol,  produce  beneficial  surface  activities  similar  to  the  'vitamins’.14 

The  above  short  list  gives  only  an  approximate  picture  of  the  over¬ 
whelming  importance  of  the  roles  which  structure  in  general,  and  col¬ 
loids  in  particular,  play  in  our  lives.  We  see  about  us  many  human  types. 
Some  are  delicate,  some  are  heavy-set,  some  flabby,  some  puffy,  all  of 
which  indicates  a  difference  in  their  colloidal  structure.  Paired  with  these 
physical  colloidal  states  are  also  nervous,  'mental*,  and  other  character¬ 
istics,  which  vary  from  weak  and  nervous  to  the  extreme  limitation  of 
nervous  activities,  as  in  idiocy,  which  is  a  negation  of  activity. 

It  is  curious  that  in  all  illnesses,  whether  'physical’  or  'mental’,  the 
symptoms  are  very  few,  and  fundamentally  of  a  standard  type.  In 
'physical’  illness  we  find  the  following  common  characteristics:  fever, 
chills,  headaches,  convulsions,  vomiting,  diarrhoea,.  In  'mental’  ills, 
identifications,  illusions,  delusions,  and  hallucinations — in  general,  the 
reversed  pathological  order— are  found.  It  is  not  difficult  to  understand 
the  reason.  Because  of  the  general  colloidal  background  of  life,  different 
disturbances  of  colloidal  equilibrium  should  produce  similar  symptoms. 
In  fact,  many  of  these  symptoms  have  been  reproduced  experimentally 
by  injecting  inert  precipitates  incapable  of  chemical  reactions,  which  have 
induced  artificial  colloidal  disturbances.  Thus,  if  the  serum  from  an  epi¬ 
leptic  patient  is  injected  into  a  guinea  pig,  it  results  in  an  attack  of  con¬ 
vulsions,  often  ending  in  death.  But,  if  the  guinea  pig  is  previously  made 
immune  by  an  injection  of  some  colloid  which  accustoms  the  nerve- 
endings  to  the  colloidal  flocculation,  then,  for  a  few  hours  following,  we 

COLLOIDAL  BEHAVIOUR 

can,  with  impunity,  introduce  into  the  circulation  otherwise  fatal  doses 
of  epileptic  serum.  Epileptic  serum  can  also  be  made  immune  by  filtra¬ 
tion,  or  by  strong  centrifugation,  or  by  long  standing,  which  frees  it 
from  colloidal  precipitates.15 

Death  through  blood  transfusion  or  the  injection  of  any  colloid  into 
the  circulation  has  also,  in  the  main,-  similar  symptoms,  regardless  of 
the  chemical  character  of  the  colloid,  indicating  once  more  the  importance 
and  fundamental  character  of  structure.16 

That  illnesses  are  somehow  connected  with  colloidal  disturbances 
(note  the  wording  of  this  statement)  becomes  quite  obvious  when  we 
consider  catarrhal  diseases,  inflammations,  swellings,  tumours,  cancer, 
blood  thrombi.,  which  involve  colloidal  injuries,  resulting  in  extreme 
cases  in  complete  coagulation  or  fluidification,  the  variation  between  ‘gel* 
and  ‘sol’  appearing  in  a  most  diversified  manner.17  Other  illnesses  are 
connected  with  precipitation  or  deposits  of  various  materials.  Gout,  for 
instance,  results  from  a  morbid  deposit  of  uric  acid,  and  different  con¬ 
cretions,  such  as  the  ‘stones’,  are  very  often  found  in  different  fluids  of 
the  organism.  We  have,  thus,  concretions  in  the  intestines,  the  bile,  the 
urine,  the  pancreas,  the  salivary  glands ;  lime  deposits  in  old  softened 
tissues,  ‘rice  bodies’  in  the  joints,  ‘brain  sand*,  .18 

In  bacterial  diseases,  the  micro-organisms  rapidly  produce  acids  and 
bases  which  tend  to  destroy  the  colloidal  equilibrium.  Lately,  it  has 
been  found  that  even  tuberculosis  is  more  than  a  mere  chapter  in  bac¬ 
teriology.  All  the  main  tubercular  symptoms  can  be  reproduced,  experi¬ 
mentally,  by  means  of  colloidal  disturbances  without  the  intervention  of 
a  single  bacterium.19  This  would  explain  also  why,  in  some  instances, 
psychotherapy  is  effective  in  diseases  with  tubercular  symptoms.20 

By  structural  necessity,  every  expression  of  cellular  activity  involves 
some  sort  of  colloidal  behaviour ;  and  any  factor  disturbing  the  colloidal 
structure  must  be  disturbing  to  the  welfare  of  the  organism.  Vice  versa, 
a  factor  which  is  beneficial  to  the  organism  must  reach  and  affect  the 
colloids. 

After  this  brief  account  of  the  structural  peculiarities  of  the  domain 
in  which  life  is  found,  we  can  understand  the  baffling  ‘body-mind’  prob¬ 
lem.  We  do  not  yet  know  as  many  details  as  we  could  wish,  but  these 
will  accumulate  the  moment  a  general  solution  is  clearly  formulated.  It 
is  a  well-established  experimental  fact  that  all  nervous  and  ‘mental* 
activities  are  connected  with,  or  actually  generate,  electrical  currents, 
which  of  late  are  scrupulously  studied  by  the  aid  of  an  instrument  called 
the  psychogalvanometer.81  It  is  not  suggested  that  electrical  currents  are 
the  only  ones  which  are  involved.  There  may  be  many  different  forms 

III.  NON-ELEMENT ALI STIC  STRUCTURES 

of  radiant  energy  produced  or  effective,  which  we  have  not  yet  the  instru¬ 
ments  to  record.  Experiments  suggest  such  a  possibility.  Thus,  for 
instance,  the  apex  of  a  certain  rapidly  growing  vegetable  or  animal  tissue 
emits  some  sort  of  invisible  radiation  which  stimulates  the  growth  of 
living  tissue  with  which  it  is  not  in  contact.  The  tip  of  a  turnip  or  onion 
root,  if  placed  at  right  angles  to  another  root,  at  a  distance  of  a  quarter 
of  an  inch,  so  stimulates  the  growth  of  the  latter  that  the  increase  of  the 
number  of  cells,  on  its  side  nearest  the  point  of  stimulation,  is  as  high  as 
seventy  per  cent.  These  radiations  accelerate  the  growth  of  some  bac¬ 
teria.  Other  examples  could  be  given.22 

A  classical  example  of  the  effect  left  on  protoplasm  by  energetic 
factors  is  given  by  Bovie.23 

As  yet,  we  have  not  assumed  that  the  protoplasm  of  plants  also 
shows  lasting  structural  and  functional  results  of  stimulation,  some  sort 
of  ‘learning’  or  ‘habit-formation’  characteristics.  But  such  is  the  case; 
and  further  experimentation  along  these  lines  will  help  greatly  to  under¬ 
stand  the  mechanism  of  ‘mental’  processes  in  ourselves. 

If  we  take  the  seed  of  a  plant,  for  instance,  of  a  squash,  and  keep 
it  in  a  moist  tropism  chamber  in  the  dark,  it  will  grow  a  root.  When  the 
root  is  about  one  inch  long,  we  begin  our  experiment.  Originally,  under 

the  influence  of  gravitation,  the  root  grows 
vertically  downwards  (A).  If  we  rotate  the 
tropism  chamber  90°  so  that  the  root  is  hori¬ 
zontal  (B),  the  root  will  soon  bend  down¬ 
wards  under  the  influence  of  positive  geotrop- 
ism.  But  the  bending  does  not  occur  at  once. 
There  is  a  latent  period — in  the  case  of  the 
squash  seed,  about  ten  minutes — after  which 
pause  the  root  is  bent  downwards.  When  we 
have  determined  this  latent  period  for  a  given 
seedling,  we  then  rotate  the  chamber  to  the 
positions  (B),  (C),  (A),  (B),  (C).,  just 
within  the  ‘time*  limit  before  the  bending 
would  occur.  We  repeat  such  procedure  sev¬ 
eral  times.  When  we  set  the  root  again  in  its  vertical  downward  position 
(A),  we  notice  that  the'  root,  without  any  more  changes  of  position,  will 
wag  backwards  and  forward  with  the  period  as  was  used  in  the  experi¬ 
ment.  This  unexpected  behaviour  will  last  for  several  days.  It  shows 
that  the  alternating  stimulus  of  gravitation,  as  applied  to  the  root,  has 
produced  some  structural  changes  in  the  protoplasm  which  persist  for  a 
comparatively  long  period  after  the  stimulus  has  ceased  to  act.  It  be- 

COLLOIDAL  BEHAVIOUR 

comes  obvious  that  teachability  and  the  structural  tendency  for  forming 
cngrams  is  a  general  characteristic  of  protoplasm. 

All  the  examples  given  above  show  clearly  that  structure  in  general, 
and  of  colloids  in  particular,  gives  us  a  satisfactory  basis  for  the  under¬ 
standing  of  the  equivalence  between  occurrences  which  belonged  for¬ 
merly  to  'chemistry*  and  those  classified  as  'physical*,  and  ultimately 
between  these  and  those  we  call  'mental*.  Structure,  and  structure  alone, 
gives  not  only  the  unique  content  of  what  we  call  'knowledge*,  but  also 
the  bridge  between  the  different  classes  of  occurrences — a  fact  which,  as 
yet,  has  not  been  fully  understood. 

To  sum  up:  It  is  known  that  colloidal  behaviour  is  exhibited  by 
materials  of  very  fine  subdivision,  the  ‘world  of  neglected  dimensions*, 
which  involves  surface  activities  and  electrical  characters  of  manifold 
and  complex  structure,  and  therefore  the  flexibility  of  gross  macroscopic 
characteristics.  It  is  well  known  that  all  life-processes,  'feelings*,  'emo¬ 
tions*,  'thought*,  semantic  reactions,  and  so  forth,  involve  at  least  elec¬ 
trical  currents.  As  electrical  currents  and  other  forms  of  energy  are  able 
to  affect  the  colloidal  structure  on  which  our  physical  characteristics 
depend,  obviously  'feelings*,  'emotions*,  'thought*. ;  in  general,  s.r,  which 
are  connected  with  manifestations  of  energy,  will  also  have  some  effect 
on  our  bodies,  and  vice  versa.  Colloidal  structure  supplies  us  with  an 
extremely  flexible  mechanism  with  endless  possibilities. 

When  we  analyse  the  known  empirical  facts  from  a  structural  point 
of  view,  we  find  not  only  the  equivalence  which  was  mentioned  before, 
but  we  must,  also,  legitimately  consider  the  so-called  ‘mental*,  ‘emotional*, 
and  other  semantic  and  nervous  occurrences  in  connection  with  manifes¬ 
tations  of  energy  which  have  a  powerful  influence  on  the  colloidal 
behaviour,  and  so  ultimately  on  the  behaviour  of  our  organisms  as-a- 
whole.  Under  such  environmental  conditions,  we  must  take  into  account 
all  energies  which  have 'been  discovered,  semantic  reactions  not  excluded , 
as  all  such  energies  have  structural  effect.  As  language  is  one  of  the 
expressions  of  one  of  these  energies,  we  ought  to  find  it  quite  natural 
that  the  structure  of  language  finds  its  reflection  in  the  structure  of  the 
environmental  conditions  which  are  dependent  on  it. 

Until  lately,  the  disregard  of  colloidal  science  and  of  structure  in 
general  has  greatly  retarded  advance  in  biology,  psychiatry,  and  other 
sciences.  Biology,  for  instance,  has  mostly  studied  ‘life’  where  none 
existed ;  namely,  in  death.  If  we  study  corpses,  we  study  death,  not  life, 
and  life  is  a  function  of  living  cells.  The  living  cell  is  semi-fluid,  and 
all  the  forces  which  act  in  colloidal  solutions  and  constitute  colloidal 

122  III.  NON-ELEMENTALISTIC  STRUCTURES 

behaviour  are  acting  because  they  can  aet,  while  a  dead  cell  is  coagulated 
and  so  a  different  set  of  energies  is  operating  there.24 

Should  we  wonder  that  life,  being  a  form  of  colloidal  behaviour  on 
microscopic  and  sub-microscopic  levels,  conditioned  by  little  colloidal 
‘wholes’,  and  structures  separated  from  their  environment  by  surfaces, 
preserves  a  similar  character  on  macroscopic  levels?  We  should,  instead, 
be  surprised  if  this  did  not  turn  out  to  be  the  raw, 

CHAPTER  X 

THE  ‘  ORGAN  ISM  -  AS- A- WHOLE* 

...  in  hypnotized  children  real  colours  and  suggested  colours  are  blended 
to  form  the  complementary  colour.  (189>  w.  horsley  gantt 

Section  A.  Illustrations  from  biology. 

Because  of  the  semantic  importance  of  the  structural  non-elemental- 
istic  principle,  and  the  weighty,  yet  in  the  beginning  odd,  consequences 
which  follow  the  consistent  application  of  this  principle  in  practice,  we 
will  give  a  short  account  of  some  other  experimental  structural  facts 
taken  from  widely  separated  fields. 

A  worm,  a  marine  planarian,  called  a  Thysanozoon  (Brochii),  is 
common  in  the  bay  of  Naples.  If  we  put  a  normal  Thysanozoon  on  its 
back,  it  soon  will  right  itself.  When  the  brain  of  the  worm  has  been 
removed,  under  similar  conditions  of  the  experiment,  the  worm  will  right 
itself,  but  more  slowly.  In  this  case,  we  see  a  general  tendency  of  the 
organism-as-a-whole;  the  nervous  system  only  facilitated  a  quicker 
action.  If  we  cut  the  worm  partly  in  two,  so  that  the  longitudinal  nerves 
are  severed,  but  a  thin  piece  of  tissue  keeps  the  two  parts  together,  the 
two  parts  move  in  a  co-ordinated  way,  as  if  not  cut.  The  organism  still 
works  as-a-whole,  although  the  conditions  seem  not  favourable.1 

If  we  cut  a  fresh-water  planarian  ( Planaria  torva)  in  two,  trans¬ 
versely,  the  posterior  part,  which  has  no  brain,  moves  about  as  well  as 
the  anterior  part,  which  has  the  brain.  If  we  try  to  find  the  effect  of  light 
on  the  part  devoid  of  brain  and  eyes,  we  see  that  the  effect  of  light  is 
not  changed,  and  that  the  posterior  part  crawls  away  from  light  into 
dark  corners  as  a  normal  animal  would,  except  that  the  action  takes  place 
at  a  slower  rate.  In  normal  animals,  the  reaction  usually  begins  in  about 
one  minute  after  the  exposure ;  in  the  brainless  part,  it  takes  nearly  five 
minutes  of  exposure.2 

How  chemical  conditions  affect  the  activities  of  the  organism-as-a- 
whole  can  be  well  illustrated  by  the  following  examples.  In  a  jellyfish, 
we  can  increase  or  decrease  the  locomotor  activities  by  simply  changing 
the  chemical  constitution  of  the  water.  If  we  increase  the  number  of 
Na  ions  in  the  sea-water,  the  rhythmical  contractions  increase  and  the 
animal  becomes  restless.  If  we  increase  the  number  of  Ca  ions,  the  con¬ 
tractions  decrease.  In  a  similar  way,  we  can  change  the  orientation 
toward  light  in  a  number  of  marine  animals  by  changing  the  constitution 

Ill.  N ON -ELEMEN TALI  STIC  STRUCTURES 

of  the  medium.  The  larvae  of  Polygordius ,  which  usually  go  away  from 
light  into  dark  corners,  can  be  compelled  to  go  toward  light  by  two 
methods :  either  by  lowering  the  temperature  of  the  sea-water,  or  else  by 
increasing  the  concentration  of  the  salts  in  the  sea- water.  This  behaviour 
can  be  reversed  by  raising  the  temperature  or  lowering  the  concentration 
of  the  salts.3 

An  extremely  instructive  group  of  experiments  has  been  performed 
in  artificial  fertilization  of  the  eggs  of  a  large  number  of  marine  animals, 
such  as  starfish,  molluscs,  and  others. 

Under  usual  conditions,  these  eggs  cannot  develop  unless  a  sperma¬ 
tozoon  enters  the  egg,  which  results  in  a  thickening  of  the  membrane  called 
the  ‘fertilization  membrane’.  Experiments  show  that  such  a  transforma¬ 
tion  can  be  produced  artificially  in  an  unfertilized  egg,  with  resulting 
‘fertilization’,  by  several  artificial  means,  as,  for  instance,  by  the  treat¬ 
ment  of  the  eggs  with  special  chemicals,  and,  in  some  instances,  by  merely 
puncturing  the  egg  with  a  needle.  The  late  Jacques  Loeb  succeeded  in 
producing  in  this  way  parthenogenetic  frogs,  which  lived  a  normal  life.4 

Under  normal  conditions,  the  eggs  of  different  sea  animals  can  be 
fertilized  only  by  their  proper  sperm.  But,  if  we  raise  the  alkalinity  of 
the  sea-water  slightly,  we  find  that  the  eggs  can  be  fertilized  by  different 
sperms,  often  of  widely  separated  kinds  of  animals.5  If  we  put  unfertil¬ 
ized  eggs  of  a  sea-urchin  into  sea-water  which  contains  a  trace  of  sapo¬ 
nin,  we  fihd  that  the  eggs  acquire  the  characteristic  ‘membrane  of 
fertilization’.  If  the  eggs  are  taken  out,  washed  carefully  and  put  back 
into  sea-water,  they  develop  into  larvae.6  The  change  in  the  chemical 
constitution  of  sea-water  will  also  often  produce  twins  from  one  egg 
Change  in  temperature  may  change  the  colour  of  butterflies ,  .7 

A  very  large  class  of  such  organism-as-a- whole  reactions  is  given 
in  the  works  of  Professor  C.  M.  Child  on  regeneration.  I  suggest  these 
works,  not  only  because  they  are  particularly  interesting,  even  to  the 
layman,  but  mainly  because  Professor  Child  has  formulated  a  A  biolog¬ 
ical  system,  the  importance  of  which  is  becoming  paramount,  and  is 
beginning  to  be  applied  even  in  psychiatry  by  Dr.  Wm.  A.  White  and 
others. 

We  find  the  characteristic  of  profiting  by  past  experiences  and 
acquiring  negative  reactions  very  low  in  the  scale  of  life.  Thus,  even 
infusoria,  which  ingest  a  grain  of  carmine,  soon  learn  to  refuse  it.8  Most 
interesting  experiments  were  performed  on  worms  by  Yerkes  in  1912 
and  verified  repeatedly.  Yerkes  built  a  T-shaped  maze.  In  one  arm  (C) 
he  placed  a  piece  of  sand-paper  (S),  beyond  which  there  was  an  elec- 

TI I E  'ORG A N I SM-A S- A- WHOLE’ 

trical  device  (E)  which  could  give  an  electrical  shock.  The  animal  used 
for  experimenting  was  an  earthworm.  The  worm  was  admitted  through 
the  entrance  (A).  If  he  selected  his 
way  through  (B),  he  got  out  without 
disagreeable  consequences.  If  he  se¬ 
lected  (C),  he  received,  first,  a  fair 
warning  through  the  sand-paper  (S) 
and,  if  this  was  not  enough,  he  received 
an  electrical  shock  at  (E).  After  a 
number  of  experiences,  the  worm 
learned  his  lesson  and  avoided  the  path 
(C).  After  this  habit  was  acquired, 
the  five  anterior  segments  of  the  worm 
were  cut  off.  The  beheaded  worm  re¬ 
tained  the  habit,  although  it  reacted 
more  slowly.  During  the  following  two  months,  the  worm  grew  a  new 
brain  and  the  habit  disappeared.  When  trained  again,  he  partially  re¬ 
acquired  the  above  habit.  Further  experiments  established  that  normal 
worms  acquire  the  avoiding  habit  in  approximately  two  hundred  trials ; 
and  when  the  electrical  device  was  put  in  the  other  arm,  the  worm 
learned  how  to  reverse  his  habit  in  about  sixty-five  trials.  Once  the  habit 
was  acquired,  the  removal  of  the  brain  did  not  alter  it.  Worms  with 
removed  brains  were  also  able  to  acquire  a  similar  habit.  Since  the  brain 
of  an  earthworm  is  a  very  small  part  of  his  whole  nervous  system,  it  has 
only  a  small  dominance,  and  the  neuro-muscular  habits  are  acquired  by 
the  whole  system  and  not  simply  by  the  brain.  But,  when  a  new  brain 
began  to  operate,  its  dominance  was  seemingly  sufficient  to  eliminate 
the  habit.® 

Experiments  of  McCracken  with  silkworm  moths  have  shown  that 
a  beheaded  moth  can  live  as  long  as  a  normal  one.  It  can  be  mated  and 
will  lay  the  normal  number  of  fertile  eggs  arranged  in  the  usual  way. 
But  it  will  not  lay  eggs  spontaneously,  and  cannot  select  the  proper  kind 
of  leaves  on  which  to  deposit  them.  If  the  head  and  the  thorax  were  cut 
off,  the  females  were  unable  to  mate  and  their  life  was  shortened  to 
about  five  days.  If  mated  before  the  operation,  they  would  still  lay  eggs 
when  stimulated. 

In  these  more  complicated  cases,  the  brain  is  necessary  for  the  more 
complicated  behaviour,  as,  for  instance,  the  selection  of  a  mulberry  leaf.10 
Although  the  organism  works  as-a-whole,  the  differentiation  and  relative 
importance  (domination)  of  different  organs  becomes  more  accentuated, 
the  higher  we  go  in  the  scale  of  life. 

A 

Fig.  1 

111.  NON-ELEMENTAL1STIC  STRUCTURES 

Section  B,  Illustrations  from  nutrition  experiments . 

We  find  striking  illustrations  of  the  non-el  principle  in  the  study  of 
‘vitamins’.  A  few  years  ago  it  was  discovered  that  certain  widely  spread 
and  pernicious  diseases  were  due  to  deficiencies  of  some  factors  in  diet. 
These  factors,  which  normally  are  present  in  very  minute  amounts,  were 
called  ‘vitamins’  by  the  Polish  biologist,  Funk.  The  most  important 
vitamin-deficiency  diseases  are  called  Rickets,  Scurvy,  Beri-Beri,  and 
Pellagra.  In  all  these  cases,  it  is  important  to  notice  that  the  lack  of  a 
minute  amount  of  some  factor  may  have  the  most  varied,  pronounced, 
and  seemingly  unrelated  consequences.  The  symptoms  can  now  be  pro¬ 
duced  deliberately  on  experimental  animals,  by  diets  free  from  the  par¬ 
ticular  ‘vitamins’  and  can  also  be  cured  at  will  by  feeding  them  with 
the  proper  ‘vitamins’.11 

Rickets  appears  essentially  as  a  disease  of  infancy  or  childhood.  In 
mild  cases,  the  disease  may  only  be  discovered  after  the  death  of  the 
adult.  In  these  cases,  the  lesions  have  not  become  pronounced  enough 
during  life  to  attract  attention. 

The  diagnosis  usually  depends  on  manifestations  in  the  bones,  but 
rickets  affects  the  whole  organism  and  not  merely  the  skeleton.  The 
children  are  nervous  and  irritable,  but  apathetic.  They  sleep  poorly  and 
perspire  excessively.  The  muscles  become  wasted  and  weak.  Often  a 
secondary  anaemia  occurs.  The  children  sit,  stand,  and  walk  later  than 
usual ;  the  teeth  appear  later  in  life  and  decay  sooner.  The  bones  usually 
become  much  affected.  Areas  of  softening  appear  in  the  long  bones, 
which  become  bent.  In  more  severe  cases,  the  bones  may  even  become 
fractured  and  the  head  of  the  bone  may  separate  from  the  shaft.  The 
general  resistance  of  the  children  to  other  diseases  is  lowered  and  mor¬ 
tality  increases. 

Cod  liver  oil  or  sunshine  usually  effects  a  cure.  We  should  notice 
the  little  word  ‘or’,  for  quite  different  ‘causes’  produce  similar  ‘effects’ — 
an  example  illustrating  that  in  life  ‘cause’  and  ‘effect*  do  not  correspond 
in  a  one-to-one  relation,  but  in  a  many-to-one  relation. 

Experiments  have  shown  that  not  less  than  three  primary  dietary 
factors  are  concerned  with  the  development  of  skeletal  tissue.  These  are 
phosphorus,  calcium,  and  at  least  one  organic  compound  which  is  known 
as  antirachitic  vitamin.  The  work  of  Professor  E.  V.  McCollum  and 
his  co-workers  seems  to  show  an  interesting  point;  namely,  that  the 
ratio  between  the  concentrations  of  calcium  and  of  phosphorus  in  the 
food  may  be  more  important  than  the  absolute  amounts  of  these 
substances. 

THE  'ORGAN  l  SM-AS-A- WHOLE’ 

Scurvy  develops  gradually.  The  patient  loses  weight,  appears  anae¬ 
mic,  pale,  weak,  and  short  of  breath.  The  gums  become  swollen,  bleed 
easily,  and  often  develop  ulcers.  The  teeth  loosen  and  may  fall  out. 
Hemorrhages  between  the  mucous  membranes  and  the  skin  often  occur. 
Blue-black  spots  in  the  skin  are  very  easily  produced,  or  even  occur 
spontaneously.  The  ankles  become  swollen,  and,  in  severe  cases,  the  skin 
becomes  hard.  Nervous  symptoms  of  a  varied  character  appear,  some  of 
which  are  due  to  the  rupture  of  blood  vessels.  In  later  stages  of  the  dis¬ 
ease,  delirium  and  convulsions  may  occur.  Autopsy  reveals  significant 
data ;  namely,  hemorrhages  and  fragility  of  the  bones.  Scurvy  appears 
also  as  a  deficiency  disease,  produced  mainly  by  the  lack  in  food  of  the 
so-called  ‘anti-scorbutic  vitamin’. 

Beri-Beri  labels  a  form  of  inflammation  of  the  peripheral  nerves, 
the  nerves  of  motion  and  sensation  being  equally  affected.  In  the  begin¬ 
ning  of  the  disease,  the  patient  feels  fatigue,  depression,  and  stiffness  of 
the  legs.  We  distinguish  two  forms,  the  wet  and  the  dry.  In  the  dry 
form,  wasting,  anaesthesia  and  paralysis  are  the  chief  manifestations. 
The  most  marked  manifestation  in  the  wet  form  is  the  accumulation  of 
serum  in  the  cellular  tissue  affecting  the  trunks,  limbs  and  extremities. 
Usually,  in  both  forms,  there  appear  tenderness  of  the  calf  muscles  and 
a  tingling  or  burning  in  the  feet,  legs,  and  arms.  The  mortality  is  high. 

Pellagra  involves  the  nervous  system,  the  digestive  tract,  and  skin. 
Normally,  one  of  the  first  symptoms  to  appear  is  soreness  and  inflamma¬ 
tion  of  the  mouth.  Symmetrical  redness  of  the  skin  occurs  on  parts  of 
the  body.  The  nervous  symptoms  become  more  pronounced  as  the  dis¬ 
ease  advances.  The  spinal  cord  is  particularly  involved,  but  the  central 
nervous  system  is  also  often  affected. 

Speaking  about  ‘vitamins’  and  how  their  absence  affects  the  organ- 
ism-as-a-whole,  we  should  mention  that  sterility  in  females  may  be  con¬ 
nected  with  lack  of  vitamins.  Astonishing  experiments  by  Professor 
McCollum  showed  that  such  diverse  phenomena  as  loss  of  weight,  pre¬ 
mature  old  age,  high  infant  mortality. ,  are  largely  due  to  diet,  and  that 
even  such  fundamental  instincts  as  the  motherly  instinct  are  also  affected. 
The  normally  nourished  rat  very  seldom  destroys  its  young  and,  as  a  rule, 
rats  are  good  mothers.  If  we  put  such  a  mother  rat  on  an  abundant  diet 
that  is  deficient  in  some  vitamins,  the  mother  reacts  quite  differently 
toward  her  young  and  destroys  them  soon  after  their  birth.  This  char¬ 
acteristic  has  been  controlled  experimentally,  and  reversed  at  will  by 
proper  diets.  Nervousness  and  irritability  in  rats  can  also  be  controlled 
experimentally  by  means  of  the  vitamins  they  receive,  or  lack  in  food. 

111.  NON-ELEMENTAL1STIC  STRUCTURES 

Section  C.  Illustrations  from  ‘ mental *  and  nervous  diseases . 

Simple  and  striking  examples  of  what  the  non-el  principle  means 
can  also  be  given  from  psychiatry. 

White  quotes  the  report  of  Prince  that  a  patient  was  subject  to 
severe  attacks  of  hay  fever  when  exposed  to  roses.  On  one  occasion,  a 
bunch  of  roses  was  unexpectedly  produced  from  behind  a  screen.  The 
patient  started  a  severe  attack  with  all  the  usual  symptoms,  lachryma- 
tion,  congestion  of  the  mucosa . ,  although  the  roses  were  made  of  paper. 
This  interesting  case  shows  clearly  how  ‘mental*  factors  (the  belief  that 
the  roses  were  genuine)  produce  a  series  of  reactions  involving  sensory, 
motor,  vasomotor  disturbances,  and  secretory  disturbances  of  a  definitely 
‘physical*  character.12 

Migraine  labels  a  disturbance  in  the  tension  of  blood  vessels 
(vasomotor),  which  is  due  to  a  great  variety  of  possible  stimuli  acting 
on  the  vegetative  nervous  system.  In  some  instances,  the  stimuli  may 
be  purely  physical,  as  severe  blows,  falls,  fast  movements,  sudden  altera¬ 
tion  in  temperature,  of  pressure . ;  or  they  may  be  chemical,  and  due  to 
nicotine,  alcohol,  morphine,  or  to  some  endocrinal  disturbances  (adrenals, 
thyroid) ,  toxins , .  They  may  be  of  a  purely  somatic  reflex  character,  due 
to  fatigue,  tumour  formations , .  They  may  also  be  of  a  semantic  charac¬ 
ter,  due  to  anger,  fear,  disappointment,  worry,  and  other  semantic  states, 
which  may  act  by  disturbing  the  metabolism. 

Migraine  appears  usually  as  a  periodical  abnormal  state,  in  which 
the  patient  suffers  from  an  oppressive  pain  in  the  head  which  gradually 
passes  from  heaviness  and  dullness  to  splitting  intensity.  Often  charac¬ 
teristic  visual  signs  also  appear.  The  patient  sees  dark  spots  in  the 
visual  field,  flying  specks,  and  may  become  even  partially  blind.  Chilli¬ 
ness,  depression,  sensory  disturbances,  particularly  in  the  stomach,  with 
vomiting,  are  often  present.  An  attack  may  last  a  few  hours  or  even 
several  days.13 

Cretinism  labels  a  physical  and  ‘mental*  disturbance  due  mainly  to 
the  loss  or  diminution  of  the  function  of  the  thyroid  gland.  The 
patient  (child)  falls  behind  in  his  physical  development,  which  often 
results  in  dwarfism,  except  for  the  skull,  which  grows  larger  in  propor¬ 
tion  to  the  rest  of  the  body.  The  bone  defects  give  rise  to  widely  sepa¬ 
rated  eyes,  pug  nose , .  The  bony  tissue  becomes  unusually  hard,  and 
there  is  also  a  marked  dental  deficiency.  The  neck  is  usually  thick  and 
short,  the  abdomen  puffy,  the  navel  sunken.  The  hair  line  begins  low  on 
the  forehead,  the  nose  is  sunken,  the  eyelids  swollen,  the  face  puffy,  the 
tongue  protruding.  The  liver  is  usually  enlarged,  respiration  is  slow,  and 

THE  ‘OKGANISM-AS-A-WIIOLE* 

changes  in  the  blood  can  be  detected.  The  nervous  system  is  affected: 
we  also  find  defects  in  sensory  and  motor  nerve  structure.  On  the 
‘mental’  level,  we  find  different  degrees  of  stupidity,  ‘mental’  weakness 
(morons),  imbecility,  and  even  idiocy.  Smell,  eyesight,  and  hearing  are 
often  poor,  speech  disturbed,  so  that  we  often  find  the  patients  deaf  and 
dumb.  The  patients  have  an  unsteady  gait,  with  wobbling  of  the  head. 
Over-activity  of  the  thyroid  gland  results  in  the  well-known  goitre. 

Hyperpituitarism  results  in  acromegaly,  characterized  by  the  grad¬ 
ual  enlargement  of  the  bones  of  the  nose,  jaw,  hands  and  feet,  gigantism, 
often  connected  with  profound  disturbances.  Hypopituitarism,  or  defi¬ 
ciency  of  the  pituitary  hormones,  gives  rise  to  a  group  of  diseases  char¬ 
acterized  by  a  progressive  accumulation  of  fat,  and  is  connected  with 
other  abnormalities  and  disturbances. 

From  the  field  of  the  psychoneuroses,  I  shall  mention  only  hysteria. 
It  is  very  interesting  to  note  that  the  many  and  various  physical  and 
somatic  symptoms  are  of  a  purely  semantic  origin.  The  symptoms  of 
hysteria  are  many  and  very  complex,  but  they  group  themselves  mainly 
in  disturbances  of  motion  and  ‘sensation*.  We  find  every  kind  of  paraly¬ 
sis  and  anaesthesia.  Paralysis  of  the  limbs  is  frequent ;  anaesthesia  may 
be  distributed  in  many  ways,  involving  the  superficies  or  the  various 
‘sense-organs’.  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  the  distribution  of  these 
symptoms  does  not  follow  the  anatomical  areas  of  nerve  distribution, 
but  shows  a  symbolic  (psycho-logical)  grouping.  The  disturbances  of 
motility  are  usually  in  the  form  of  paralysis.  Tremors,  muscular  debility, 
fatigability,  involuntary  muscular  twitching,  tics  and  spasms  are  often 
hysterical  in  origin.  Speech  is  often  involved;  sometimes  patients  can 
only  whisper,  although  their  vocal  organs  are  healthy.  Stuttering  is 
often  hysterical,  and  analysis  shows  that  the  words  which  give  difficul¬ 
ties  usually  have  special  semantic  significance  for  the  patient.  Respira¬ 
tory  disturbances  of  an  asthmatic  character  and  disturbances  of  the 
gastro-intestinal  tract  are  also  often  hysterical. 

It  should  be  emphasized  that  since  non-elementalism  has  a  physico¬ 
chemical  structural  base  in  colloidal  behaviour,  all  life  and  all  organisms 
give  ample  material  for  illustration.  We  have  given  here  only  a  very 
few  examples,  selected  mainly  because  of  their  simple  and  spectacular 
empirical  character,  but  not  generally  too  well  known.  Empirical  data 
show  clearly  that  the  most  diversified  factors,  acting  as  partial  stimuli, 
ultimately  affect  or  result  in  the  response  of  the  whole. 

The  handling  of  such  empirical,  structural,  fundamental  problems 
involves  serious  structural,  linguistic  and  semantic  difficulties  which  have 
to  be  solved  entirely  by  adjusting  the  structure  of  the  language  used.  But 

111.  NON-ELEMENTAL1STIC  STRUCTURES 

such  adjustment  requires  a  full  understanding  of  the  structural  issues 
at  hand  and  a  fundamental  structural  departure  from  A  methods  and 
means-  Thesf  structural  issues  and  means  of  departures  from  A  meth- 
°ds  are  explained  in  the  following  chapters. 

To  sum  up:  The  non-el  principle  formulates  a  structural  rWai-fr 
inherently  found  in  the  structure  of  the  world,  ourselves,  and  our  ner¬ 
vous  system  on  all  levels;  the  knowledge  and  application  of  which  is 
unconditionally  necessary  for  adjustment  on  all  levels,  and,  therefore,  in 
humans,  for  sanity . 

As  ‘knowledge’,  ‘understanding’,  and  such  functions  are  solely  rela¬ 
tional,  and,  therefore,  structural,  the  unconditional  and  inherent  condi¬ 
tion  for  adjustment  on  all  human  levels  depends  on  building  language 
of  similar  structure  to  the  experimental  facts.  Once  this  is  accomplished, 
all  the  former  desirable  semantic  consequences  follow  automatically. 

For  simplicity,  we  have  considered  only  examples  of  the  ‘organism- 
as-a-whole’,  but,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  such  a  detached  consideration  can¬ 
not  be  considered  entirely  satisfactory,  as,  structurally,  every  organism 
depends  on  its  environment;  and,  therefore,  in  building  our  languages, 
we  ought  to  coin  terms  which  also  involve  the  latter  by  implication! 
Fortunately,  this  condition  does  not  involve  us  in  serious  difficulties, 
when  once  identity  is  eliminated  and  the  fundamental  problems  of  struc¬ 
ture  are  grasped.  Indeed,  the  terms  which  we  have  already  used,  or 
which  will  be  used  as  we  proceed,  are  all  of  such  a  non-el  structure  as  to 
involve  the  environment  by  implication. 

In  dealing  with  Smith*,  the  difficulties  are  particularly  serious 
because  his  nervous  system  is  the  most  complex  known.  It  is  stratified 
four-dimensionally  (in  space-time),  and  the  dominance  of  some  centres 
introduces  prodigious  and  manifold  interrelations  non-existent  in  nervous 
systems  of  simpler  structure;  and  we  still  have  to  learn  how  to  handle 
the  former.  Fortunately,  mathematical  methods  and  psychiatry  explain 
a  good  deal  about  this  question,  and  give  us  the  desired  means  to  apply 
what  we  have  learned. 

Obviously,  to  ‘know*  something  is  quite  different  from  the  habitual 
application  of  what  we  have  learned.  This  semantic  difference  is  particu¬ 
larly  acute  in  the  case  of  language,  as  it  involves  structural  implications 
which  work  unconsciously .  It  is  not  enough  to  'understand*  and  'know* 
the  content  of  the  present  work;  one  must  train  oneself  in  the  use  of  the 
new  terms.  Then  only  can  he  expect  the  maximum  semantic  results. 

PART  IV 

STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  NON-ARISTOTELIAN 

languages 

Without  objects  conceived  as  unique  individuals,  we  can  have  no  Classes . 
Without  classes  we  can,  as  we  have  seen,  define  no  Relations ,  without  re¬ 
lations  we  can  have  no  Order,  But  to  be  reasonable  is  to  conceive  of  order - 
systems ,  real  or  ideal.  Therefore ,  we  have  an  absolute  logical  need  to  conceive 
of  individual  objects  as  the  elements  of  our  ideal  order  systems .  This  postulate 
is  the  condition  of  defining  clearly  any  theoretical  conception  whatever. 
The  further  metaphysical  aspects  of  the  concept  of  an  individual  we  may 
here  ignore.  To  conceive  of  individual  objects  is  a  necessary  presupposition 
of  all  orderly  activity.  (449)  josiah  royce 

The  connections  shown  by  these  particular  examples  hold  in  general: 
given  a  transformation,  you  have  a  function  and  a  relation;  given  a  func¬ 
tion,  you  have  a  relation  and  a  transformation;  given  a  relation,  you  have 
a  transformation  and  a  function:  one  thing — three  aspects;  and  the  fact  is 
exceedingly  interesting  and  weighty.  (264)  cassius  j.  keyser 

It  can,  you  see,  be  said,  with  the  same  approximation  to  truth,  that  the 
whole  of  science,  including  mathematics,  consists  in  the  study  of  trans¬ 
formations  or  in  the  study  of  relations.  (264)  cassius  j  .  keyser 

Science  is  never  merely  knowledge;  it  is  orderly  knowledge.  (449> 

JOSIAH  ROYCE 

Philosophers  have,  as  a  rule,  failed  to  notice  more  than  two  types  of 
sentence,  exemplified  by  the  two  statements  “this  is  yellow”  and  “butter¬ 
cups  are  yellow.”  They  mistakenly  suppose  that  these  two  were  one  and 
the  same  type,  and  also  that  all  propositions  were  of  this  type.  The  former 
error  was  exposed  by  Frege  and  Peano;  the  latter  was  found  to  make  the 
explanation  of  order  impossible.  Consequently  the  traditional  view  that 
all  propositions  ascribe  a  predicate  to  a  subject  collapsed,  and  with  it  the 
metaphysical  systems  which  were  based  upon  it,  consciously  or  uncon¬ 
sciously.  (457)  BERTRAND  RUSSELL 

Interesting  analyses  by  Van  Woerkom  have  shown  a  general  incapacity 
in  aphasics  Tor  grasping  relations,  realizing  ordered  syntheses,  etc. ;  all  of 
them  are  operations  which  are  based,  in  the  normal  individual,  on  the  use 
of  verbal  symbolization.  When  confronted  by  groups  of  figures  or  of  geo¬ 
metrical  forms,  the  aphasic,  even  though  he  may  perceive  them  correctly, 
is  unable  to  analyse  or  to  order  the  elements,  to  grasp  their  succession  .  .  . 
(4111  HENRI  pi£ron 

CHAPTER  XI 

ON  FUNCTION 

The  whole  science  of  mathematics  rests  upon  the  notion  of  function, 
that  is  to  say,  of  dependence  between  two  or  more  magnitudes,  whose 
study  constitutes  the  principal  object  of  analysis.  c.  E.  ficard 

Every  one  is  familiar  with  the  ordinary  notion  of  a  function — with  the 
notion,  that  is,  of  the  lawful  dependence  of  one  or  more  variable  things 
upon  other  variable  things,  as  the  area  of  a  rectangle  upon  the  lengths  of 
its  sides,  as  the  distance  traveled  upon  the  rate  of  going,  as  the  volume  of 
a  gas  upon  temperature  and  pressure,  as  the  prosperity  of  a  throat  specialist 
upon  the  moisture  of  the  climate,  as  the  attraction  of  material  particles  upon 
their  distance  asunder,  as  prohibitionary  zeal  upon  intellectual  distinction 
and  moral  elevation,  as  rate  of  chemical  change  upon  the  amount  or  the 
mass  of  the  substance  involved,  as  the  turbulence  of  labor  upon  the  lust 
of  capital,  and  so  on  and  on  without  end.  (264)  cassius  j.  keyser 

The  infinite  which  it  superficially  gets  rid  of  is  concealed  in  the  notion 
of  “any,”  which  is  but  one  of  the  protean  disguises  of  mathematical  gen¬ 
erality.  (22)  E.  T.  BELL 

The  famous  mathematician,  Heaviside,  mentions  the  definition  of 
quaternions  given  by  an  American  schoolgirl.  She  defined  quaternions 
as  ‘an  ancient  religious  ceremony*.  Unfortunately,  the  attitude  of  many 
mathematicians  justified  such  a  definition.  The  present  work  departs 
widely  from  this  religious  attitude  and  treats  mathematics  simply  as  a 
most  important  and  unique  form  of  human  behaviour.  There  is  nothing 
sacred  about  any  single  verbal  formulation,  and  even  those  that  now 
seem  most  fundamental  should  be  held  subject  to  structural  revision  if 
need  should  arise.  The  few  mathematicians  who  have  produced  epoch- 
making  innovations  in  mathematical  method  had  this  behaviouristic 
attitude  unconsciously ,  as  will  be  shown  later.  The  majority  of  mathema¬ 
ticians  take  mathematics  as  a  clear-cut  entity,  ‘by  itself*.  This  is  due, 
first,  to  a  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions  and  to  identification,  as 
will  be  explained  later ;  and,  second,  to  its  seeming  simplicity.  In  reality, 
such  an  attitude  introduces  quite  unexpected  complications,  leading  to 
mathematical  revolutions,  which  are  always  bewildering.  The  mathemat¬ 
ical  revolutions  occur  only  because  of  this  over-simplified,  and  thus 
fallacious,  attitude  of  the  mathematicians  toward  their  work.  Had  all 
mathematicians  the  semantic  freedom  of  those  who  make  the  mathemat¬ 
ical  ‘revolutions*,  there  would  be  no  mathematical  ‘revolutions*,  but  an 
extremely  swift  and  constructive  progress.  To  re-educate  the  s,r  of  such 
mathematicians,  the  problem  of  the  psycho-logics  of  mathematics  must 
receive  more  attention.  This  means  that  some  mathematicians  must 

134  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

become  psycho-logicians  also,  or  that  psycho-logicians  must  study 
mathematics. 

For,  let  us  take  a  formula  which  exemplifies  mathematics  at  its  best  * 
namely,  one  and  one  make  two  (1  +  1  -2).  We  see  clearly  that  this 
human  product  involves  a  threefold  relation:  between  the  man  who 
made  it, 

(A)  /l+l-2\ 

Brown  ■« - ►  Smith 

let  us  say,  Smith,  and  the  black-on-white  marks  (A),  between  these 
marks  and  Brown,  and  between  Brown  and  Smith.  This  last  relation¬ 
ship  is  the  only  important  one.  The  marks  (A)  are  only  auxiliary  and 
are  meaningless  by  'themselves’.  They  would  never  occur  if  there  were 
no  Smiths  to  make  them,  and  would  be  of  no  value  if  there  were  no 
understanding  Browns  to  use  and  to  appreciate  them.  It  is  true  that 
when  we  take  into  account  this  threefold  relation  the  analysis  becomes 
more  difficult  and  must  involve  a  revision  of  the  foundations  of  mathe¬ 
matics.  Although  it  is  impossible  to  attempt  in  this  book  a  deeper 
analysis  of  these  problems  in  a  general  way,  yet  this  behaviouristic  atti¬ 
tude  follows  the  rejection  of  the  ‘is’  of  identity,  and  is  applied  all 
through  this  work. 

The  notion  of  ‘function*  has  played  a  very  great  role  in  the  develop¬ 
ment  of  modern  science,  and  is  structurally  and  semantically  funda¬ 
mental.  Thxs  notion  was  apparently  first  introduced  into  mathematical 
literature  by  Descartes.  Leibnitz  introduced  the  term.  The  notion  of  a 
‘function*  is  based  on  that  of  a  variable .  In  mathematics,  a  variable  is 
used  as  an  oo-valued  symbol  that  can  represent  any  one  of  a  series  of 
numerical  elements. 

It  is  useful  to  enlarge  the  mathematical  meaning  of  a  variable  to 
include  any  oo-valued  symbol  of  which  the  value  is  not  determined. 
The  various  determinations  which  may  be  assigned  to  the  variable  we 
call  the  value  of  the  variable.  It  is  important  to  realize  that  a  mathe¬ 
matical  variable  does  not  vary  or  change  in  itself,  but  can  take  any  value 
within  its  range.  If  a  particular  value  is  selected  for  a  variable,  then 
this  value,  and,  therefore,  the  variable,  becomes  fixed — a  one-valued 
constant.  In  the  use  of  these  terms,  we  should  take  into  account  the 
behaviour  of  the  mathematizer.  His  V  is  like  a  container,  into  which  he 
may  poor  any  or  many  liquids ;  but  once  the  selection  has  been  made, 
the  content  of  the  container  is  one  or  a  constant.  So  ‘change*  is  not 
inherent  in  a  variable ;  it  is  due  only  to  the  volition  of  the  mathematizer, 
who  can  change  one  value  for  another.  Thus,  the  value  changes  by 
quanta,  in  definite  lots,  according  to  the  pleasure  of  the  operator.  This 

ON  FUNCTION 

quantum  character  of  the  variable  has  serious  structural  and  semantic 
consequences,  which  will  become  clearer  further  on.  It  allows  us,  with¬ 
out  stretching  our  definitions,  to  apply  the  new  vocabulary  to  any  problem 
whatsoever.  It  is  in  structural  accord  with  the  trend  of  the  quantum 
theory,  and,  therefore,  with  the  structure  of  this  world,  as  we  know  it 
at  present. 

The  notion  of  a  variable  originated  in  mathematics,  and,  in  the  be¬ 
ginning,  dealt  only  with  numbers.  Now  numbers,  when  given,  represent, 
structurally,  a  manifold  or  aggregate  which  is  not  supposed  to  change. 
So,  when  we  consider  a  variable,  we  should  ‘think’  not  of  a  changing 
entity,  but  of  any  element  we  choose  out  of  our  perfectly  constant  col¬ 
lection  (when  given).  Let  me  repeat  that  the  notion  of  change  enters 
in,  only  in  connection  with  the  volition  and  the  s.r  of  the  one  who 
operates  these  unchanging  entities.  The  notion  of  a  variable  is  taken 
always  in  an  extensional  oo -valued  sense,  to  be  explained  later,  as  it 
always  implies  structurally  a  collection  of  many  individuals,  out  of  which 
collection  a  selection  of  one  can  be  made.  The  notion  of  a  variable  is 
general  and,  in  principle,  oo- valued;  a  constant  is  a  special  one- valued 
case  of  a  variable  in  which  the  collection  contains  a  single  element, 
making  alternative  selection  impossible. 

Variables  are  usually  symbolized  by  the  end  letters  of  the  alphabet, 
x,  y,  z , .  The  supply  is  increased  as  desired  by  the  use  of  indices ;  for 
instance,  x\  /,  <er\ ;  xfft  z". ;  or  xlf  yu  zt . ;  x2,  y2,  z2 , .  This  gives  a 
flexible  means  of  denoting  numerous  individuals,  and  so  manufacturing 
them  indefinitely,  as  the  extensional  method  of  mathematics  requires. 
Another  method,  introduced  not  long  ago,  has  proven  useful  in  dealing 
with  a  definite  selection  of  variables  in  a  simplified  manner.  One  letter 
or  one  equation  can  be  used  instead  of  many.  The  variable  sign  x  is 
modified  by  another  letter  which  may  have  different  values,  in  a  given 
range ;  for  instance,  Xi ,  Xk , .  The  modifying  letter  i  or  k  can  take  the 
serial  values ;  let  us  say  i  or  k  —  1,  2,  3 , .  Since  the  one  symbol  stands 
for  the  array  of  many  different  variables  xXi  x2,  xs . ,  statements  can  be 
greatly  simplified,  and  yet  preserve  structurally  the  extensional  indi¬ 
viduality. 

It  is  important  that  the  non-mathematical  reader  should  become 
acquainted  with  the  above  methods  and  notations,  as  they  involve  a  pro¬ 
found  and  far-reaching  structural  and  psycho-logical  attitude,  useful  to 
everybody,  involving  most  fundamental  s.r. 

The  extensional  method  means  dealing  structurally  with  many 
definite  individuals ;  as,  for  instance,  with  1,  2,  3 . ,  a  series  in  which  each 
individual  has  a  special  and  unique  name  or  symbol.  This  extensional 

136  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

method  is  structurally  the  only  one  by  which  we  may  expect  to  acquire 
A  oo -valued  s.r.  In  a  strict  sense,  the  problems  in  life  and  the  sciences 
do  not  differ  structurally  from  this  mathematical  problem.  In  life  and 
science,  one  deals  with  many,  actual,  unique  individuals,  and  all  speak¬ 
ing  is  using  abstractions  of  a  very  high  order  (abstractions  from 
abstraction  from  abstraction,.).  So,  whenever  we  speak,  the  individual 
is  never  completely  covered,  and  some  characteristics  are  left  out. 

A  rough  definition  of  a  function  is  simple :  y  is  said  to  be  a  func¬ 
tion  of  x,  if,  when  x  is  given,  y  is  determined.  Let  us  start  with  a  simple 
mathematical  illustration ;  y  —  x  +  3.  If  we  select  the  value  1  for  x  our 
y**  1  +  3  —  4.  If  we  select  x  —  2,  then  y  =  2  +  3  —  5,.  Let  us  take 
a  more  complicated  example ;  for  instance :  y~=x*  —  x-\- 2.  We  see 
that  for  x=*  1,  y—  1  —  1  +  2  —  2;for^-=2,y««4— 2  +  2  —  4;  for 
x  =  3,  y  =“*  9 — 3  +  2  ■=*=  8 , . 

In  general,  y  is  determined  when  we  fulfill  all  the  indicated  opera¬ 
tions  upon  the  variable  x,  and  so  get  the  final  results  of  these  operations. 
In  symbols,  y^f(x)t  which  is  read,  y  equals  function  of  x,  or  y  equals 
f  of  x. 

In  our  example,  we  may  call  x  the  independent  variable,  meaning 
that  it  is  the  one  to  which  we  may  assign  any  value  at  our  pleasure,  if 
not  limited  by  the  conditions  of  our  problem,  and  y  would  then  be  the 
dependent  variable,  which  means  that  its  value  is  no  longer  dependent 
on  our  pleasure,  but  is  determined  by  the  selection  of  the  value  of  x. 
The  terms  dependent  and  independent  variables  are  not  absolute,  for 
the  dependence  is  mutual,  and  we  could  select  either  variable  as  the 
independent  one,  according  to  our  wishes. 

The  notion  of  a  ‘function'  has  been  generalized  by  Bertrand  Rus¬ 
sell  to  the  very  important  notion  of  a  ‘propositional  function'.1  For  my 
purpose,  a  rough  definition  will  be  sufficient.  By  a  propositional  func¬ 
tion,  I  mean  an  oo -valued  statement,  containing  one  or  more  variables, 
such  that  when  single  values  are  assigned  to  these  variables  the  expres¬ 
sion  becomes,  in  principle,  a  one-valued  proposition.  The  oo-valued 
character  of  propositional  functions  seems  essential,  because  we  may 
have  a  one-valued  descriptive  function  with  variables,  or  a  one-valued 
expression  formulating  a  semantic  relational  law  expressed  in  variable 
terms . ,  yet  these  would  be  propositions.  Thus,  the  oo -valued  statement, 
x  is  black',  would  exemplify  a  propositional  function ;  but  the  one-valued 
relation  ‘if  x  is  more  than  y,  and  y  is  more  than  z,  then  x  is  more  than 
z  exemplifies  a  proposition.  This  extended  m,o  notion  of  a  propositional 
function  becomes  of  crucial  importance  in  a  ^-system,  because  most  of 
our  speaking  is  conducted  in  oo-valued  languages  to  which  we  mostly 

ON  FUNCTION 

and  delusionally  ascribe  single  values,  entirely  preventing  proper 
evaluation. 

An  important  characteristic  of  a  propositional  function,  for  instance, 

- x  is  black',  is  that  such  a  statement  is  neither  true  nor  false,  but  am¬ 
biguous.  It  is  useless  to  discuss  the  truth  or  falsehood  of  propositional 
functions,  since  the  terms  true  or  false  cannot  be  applied  to  them.  But 
if  a  definite,  single  value  is  assigned  to  the  variable  xt  then  the  proposi¬ 
tional  function  becomes  a  proposition  which  may  be  true  or  false.  ^  For 
instance,  if  we  assign  to  x  the  value  ‘coal’,  and  say  ‘coal  is  black ,  the 
oo-valued  propositional  function  has  become  a  one-valued  true  proposi¬ 
tion.  If  we  should  assign  to  x  the  value  ‘milk',  and  say  milk  is  black , 
this  also  would  make  a  proposition,  but,  in  this  case,  false.  If  we  should 
assign  to  x  the  value  ‘blah-blah',  and  say  ‘blah-blah  is  black ,  such  a 
statement  may  be  considered  as  meaningless,  since  it  contains  sounds 
which  have  no  meaning ;  or  we  may  say,  ‘the  statement  blah-blah  is  not 
black  but  meaningless',  and,  therefore,  the  proposition  ‘blah-blah  is 

black1,  is  not  meaningless  but  false. 

We  should  notice— a  fact  disregarded  in  the  Principia  Mathematica 
—that  there  is  no  hard  and  fast  rule  by  which  we  can  distinguish 
between  meaningless  and  false  statements  in  general,  but  that  such  dis¬ 
crimination  depends  on  many  factors  in  each  specific  case.  A  proposi¬ 
tional  function,  *x  is  black’,  cannot  be  its  own  argument :  for  instance,  if 
we  substitute  the  whole  propositional  function,  *x  is  black’,  for  the  vari¬ 
able  x  in  the  original  propositional  function,  and  then  consider  the 
expression,  *x  is  black,  is  black’,  which  Whitehead  and  Russell  classify  as 
meaningless r  this  expression  is  not  necessarily  meaningless,  but  may  be 
considered  false .  For,  the  statement,  is  black’,  is  defined  as  a  proposi¬ 
tional  function ,  and,  therefore,  the  statement,  *x  is  black,  is  black’,  may 
be  considered  false . 

The  problems  of  ‘meaning’  and  ‘meaningless’  are  of  great  semantic 
importance  in  daily  life,  but,  as  yet,  little  has  been  done,  and  little  re¬ 
search  made,  to  establish  or  discover  valid  criteria.  To  prove  a  given 
statement  false  is  often  laborious,  and  sometimes  impossible  to  do  so, 
because  of  the  undeveloped  state  of  knowledge  in  that  field.  But  with 
meaningless  verbal  forms,  when  their  meaninglessness  is  exposed  in  a 
given  case,  the  non-sense  is  exploded  for  good. 

From  this  point  of  view,  it  is  desirable  to  investigate  more  fully  the 
mechanism  of  our  symbolism,  so  as  to  be  able  to  distinguish  between 
statements  which  are  false  and  verbal  forms  which  have  no  meanings. 
The  reader  should  recall  what  was  said  about  the  term  ‘unicorn’,  used  as 
a  symbol  in  heraldry  and,  eventually,  in  ‘psychology’,  since  it  stands  for 

138  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

a  human  fancy ,  but,  in  zoology,  it  becomes  a  noise  and  not  a  symbol, 
since  it  does  not  stand  for  any  actual  animal  whatsoever. 

A  very  curious  semantic  characteristic  is  shared  in  common  by  a 
propositional  function  and  a  statement  containing  meaningless  noises; 
namely,  that  neither  of  them  can  be  true  or  false.  In  the  old  A  way 
all  sounds  man  made,  which  could  be  written  down  and  looked  like 
words,  were  considered  words ;  and  so  every  ‘question*  was  expected  to 
have  an  answer.  When  spell-marks  (noises  which  can  be  spelled)  were 
put  together  in  a  specified  way,  each  combination  was  supposed  to  say 
something,  and  this  statement  was  supposed  to  be  true  or  false.  We  see 
clearly  that  this  view  is  not  correct,  that,  in  addition  to  words,  we  make 
noises  (spell-marks)  which  may  have  the  appearance  of  being  words, 
but  should  not  be  considered  as  words,  as  they  say  nothing  in  a  given 
context.  Propositional  functions,  also,  cannot  be  classified  under  the 
simple  two  opposites  of  true  and  false. 

The  above  facts  have  immense  semantic  importance,  as  they  are 
directly  connected  with  the  possibility  of  human  agreement  and  adjust¬ 
ment.  For  upon  statements  which  are  neither  true  nor  false  we  can 
always  disagree,  if  we  insist  in  applying  criteria  which  have  no  applica¬ 
tion  in  such  cases. 

In  human  life  the  semantic  problems  of  ‘meaninglessness*  are  fun¬ 
damental  for  sanity,  because  the  evaluation  of  noises,  which  do  not  con¬ 
stitute  symbols  in  a  given  context  as  symbols  in  that  context,  must,  of 
necessity,  involve  delusions  or  other  morbid  manifestations. 

The  solution  of  this  problem  is  simple.  Any  noises  or  signs,  when 
used  semantically  as  symbols,  always  represent  some  symbolism,  but  we 
must  find  out  to  what  field  the  given  symbolism  applies.  We  find  only 
three  possible  fields.  If  we  apply  a  symbol  belonging  to  one  field  to 
another  field,  it  has  very  often  no  meaning  in  this  latter.  In  the  follow¬ 
ing  considerations,  the  theory  of  errors  is  disregarded. 

A  symbol  may  stand  for:  (1)  Events  outside  our  skin,  or  inside 
our  skin  in  the  fields  belonging  to  physics,  chemistry,  physiology, .  (2) 
Psycho-logical  events  inside  our  skin,  or,  in  other  words,  for  s.r  which 
may  be  considered  sane*,  covering  a  field  belonging  to  psycho-logics. 
(3)  Semantic  disturbances  covering  a  pathological  field  belonging  to 
psychiatry. 

As  the  above  divisions,  together  with  their  interconnections,  cover 
the  field  of  human  symbolism,  which,  in  1933,  have  become,  or  are  rap¬ 
idly  becoming,  experimental  sciences,  it  appears  obvious  that  older  ‘meta¬ 
physics’  of  every  description  become  illegitimate,  affording  only  a  very 
fertile  field  for  study  in  psychiatry. 

ON  FUNCTION 

Because  of  structural  and  the  above  symbolic  considerations  based 
on  A  negative,  non-identity  premises,  these  conclusions  appear  as  final; 
and,  perhaps,  for  the  first  time  bring  to  a  focus  the  age-long  problem 
of  the  subject-matter,  character,  value,  and,  in  general,  the  status  of  the 
older  ‘metaphysics*  in  human  economy.  From  the  non-el,  structural,  and 
semantic  point  of  view,  the  problems  with  which  the  older  ‘metaphysics* 
and  ‘philosophy*  dealt,  should  be  divided  into  two  quite  definite  groups. 
One  would  include  ‘epistemology*,  or  the  theory  of  knowledge,  which 
would  ultimately  merge  with  scientific  and  non-el  psycho-logics,  based 
on  general  semantics,  structure,  relations,  multi-dimensional  order,  and 
the  quantum  mechanics  of  a  given  date;  and  the  rest  would  represent 
semantic  disturbances,  to  be  studied  by  a  generalized  up-to-date 
psychiatry. 

Obviously,  considerations  of  structure,  symbolism,  sanity . ,  involve 
the  solutions  of  such  weighty  problems  as  those  of  ‘fact*,  ‘reality*,  ‘true*, 
‘false*. ,  which  are  completely  solved  only  by  the  consciousness  of  ab¬ 
stracting,  the  multiordinality  of  terms . , — in  general,  a  ^-system. 

Let  me  repeat  the  rough  definition  of  a  propositional  function — 
as  an  oo-valued  statement  containing  variables  and  characterized  by  the 
fact  that  it  is  ambiguous,  neither  true  nor  false. 

How  about  the  terms  we  deal  with  in  life?  Are  they  all  used  as 
one-valued  terms  for  constants  of  some  sort,  or  do  we  have  terms  which 
are  inherently  oo-valued  or  variable?  How  about  terms  like  ‘mankind*, 
‘science*,  ‘mathematics*,  ‘man*,  ‘education*,  ‘ethics*,  ‘politics*,  ‘religion*, 
‘sanity*,  ‘insanity^,  ‘iron*,  ‘wood*,  ‘apple*,  ‘object*,  and  a  host  of  other 
terms  ?  Are  they  labels  for  one-valued  constants  or  labels  for  oo-valued 
stages  of  processes.  Fortunately,  here  we  have  no  doubt. 

We  see  that  a  large  majority  of  the  terms  we  use  are  names  for 
oo-valued  stages  of  processes  with  a  changing  content.  When  such  terms 
are  used,  they  generally  carry  different  or  many  contents.  The  terms 
represent  oo-valued  variables,  and  so  the  statements  represent  oo-valued 
propositional  functions,  not  one-valued  propositions,  and,  therefore,  in 
principle,  are  neither  true  nor  false,  but  ambiguous. 

Obviously,  before  such  propositional  functions  can  become  proposi¬ 
tions,  and  be  true  or  false,  single  values  must  be  assigned  to  the  vari¬ 
ables  by  some  method.  Here  we  must  select,  at  least,  the  use  of 
co-ordinates.  In  the  above  cases,  the  ‘time*  co-ordinate  is  sufficient. 
Obviously,  ‘science  1933*  is  quite  different  from  ‘science  1800*  or  ‘science 
300  b.c/. 

The  objection  may  be  made  that  it  would  be  difficult  to  establish 
means  by  which  the  use  of  co-ordinates  could  be  made  workable.  It 

140  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

seems  that  this  might  involve  us  in  complex  difficulties.  But,  no  matter 
how  simple  or  how  complex  the  means  we  devise,  the  details  are  vmmor 
tend,  and,  therefore,  we  can  accept  the  roughest  and  simplest;  let  us 
say,  the  year,  and  usually  no  spatial  co-ordinates.  The  invaluable  seman¬ 
tic  effect  of  such  an  innovation  is  structurd,  one-,  versus  oo-valued, 
psycho-logicd  and  methodological,  and  affects  deeply  our  s.r. 

From  time  immemorial,  some  men  were  supposed  to  deal  in  one¬ 
valued  ‘eternal  verities*.  We  called  such  men  ‘philosophers*  or  ‘meta¬ 
physicians*.  But  they  seldom  realized  that  all  their  ‘eternal  verities’ 
consisted  only  of  words,  and  words  which,  for  the  most  part,  belonged 
to  a  primitive  language,  reflecting  in  its  structure  the  assumed  structure 
of  the  world  of  remote  antiquity.  Besides,  they  did  not  realize  that 
these  ‘eternal  verities*  last  only  so  long  as  the  human  nervous  system  is 
not  altered.  Under  the  influence  of  these  ‘philosophers’,  two-valued 
‘logic’,  and  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions,  nearly  all  of  us  con¬ 
tracted  a  firmly  rooted  predilection  for  ‘general’  statements— ‘universals*, 
as  they  were  called — which,  in  most  cases,  inherently  involved  the  seman¬ 
tic  one-valued  conviction  of  validity  for  all  ‘time*  to  come. 

If  we  use  our  statements  with  a  date,  let  us  say  ‘science  1933*,  such 
statements  have  a  profoundly  modified  structural  and  psycho-logical 
character,  different  from  the  old  general  legislative  semantic  mood.  A 
statement  concerning  ‘science  1933’,  whether  correct  or  not,  has  no  ele¬ 
ment  of  semantic  conviction  concerning  1934. 

We  see,  further,  that  a  statement  about  ‘science  1933*  might  be 
quite  a  definite  statement,  and  that  if  the  person  is  properly  informed, 
it  probably  would  be  true.  Here  we  come  in  contact  with  the  structure 
of  one  of  those  human  semantic  impasses  which  we  have  pointed  out. 
We  humans,  through  old  habits,  and  because  of  the  inherent  structure 
of  human  knowledge,  have  a  tendency  to  make  static,  definite,  and,  in 
a  way,  absolutistic  one-valued  statements.  But  when  we  fight  absolutism, 
we  quite  often  establish,  instead,  some  other  dogma  equally  silly  and 
harmful.  For  instance,  an  active  atheist  is  psycho-logically  as  unsound 
as  a  rabid  theist. 

A  similar  remark  applies  to  practically  all  these  opposites  we  are 
constantly  establishing  or  fighting  for  or  against.  The  present  structure 
of  human  knowledge  is  such,  as  will  be  shown  later,  that  we  tend  to  make 
definite  statements,  static  and  one-valued  in  character,  which,  when  we 
take  into  account  the  present  pre-,  and  A  one-,  two-,  three- valued  affec¬ 
tive  components,  inevitably  become  absolutistic  and  dogmatic  and  ex¬ 
tremely  harmful. 

ON  FUNCTION 

It  is  a  genuine  and  fundamental  semantic  impasse.  These  static 
statements  are  very  harmful,  and  yet  they  cannot  be  abolished,  for  the 
present.  There  are  even  weighty  reasons  why,  without  the  formulation 
and  application  of  oo-valued  semantics,  it  is  not  possible  (1933)  to  abol¬ 
ish  them.  What  can  be  done  under  such  structural  circumstances  ?  Give 
up  hope,  or  endeavour  to  invent  methods  which  cover  the  discrepancy 
in  a  satisfactory  (1933)  way?  The  analysis  of  the  psycho-logics  of  the 
mathematical  propositional  function  and  A  semantics  gives  us  a  most 
satisfactory  structural  solution,  necessitating,  among  others,  a  four¬ 
dimensional  theory  of  propositions. 

We  see  (1933)  that  we  can  make  definite  and  static  statements, 
and  yet  make  them  semantically  harmless.  Here  we  have  an  example  of 
abolishing  one  of  the  old  A  tacitly-assumed  ‘infinities’.  The  old  ‘general’ 
statements  were  supposed  to  be  true  for  ‘all  time’ ;  in  quantitative  lan¬ 
guage  it  would  mean  for  ‘infinite  numbers  of  years’.  When  we  use  the 
date,  we  reject  the  fanciful  tacit  A  ‘infinity’  of  years  of  validity,  and 
limit  the  validity  of  our  statement  by  the  date  we  affix  to  it.  Any  reader 
who  becomes  accustomed  to  the  use  of  this  structural  device  will  see 
what  a  tremendous  semantic  difference  it  makes  psycho-logically. 

But  the  above  does  not  exhaust  the  question  structurally.  We  have 
seen  that  when  we  speak  about  oo-valued  processes,  and  stages  of 
processes,  we  use  variables  in  our  statements,  and  so  our  statements  are 
not  propositions  but  propositional  functions  which  are  not  true  or  false, 
but  are  ambiguous.  But,  by  assigning  single  values  to  the  variables,  we 
make  propositions,  which  might  be  true  or  false;  and  so  investigation 
and  agreement  become  possible,  as  we  then  have  something  definite  to 
talk  about. 

A  fundamental  structural  issue  arises  in  this  connection;  namely, 
that  in  doing  this  (assigning  single  values  to  the  variables),  our  attitude 
has  automatically  changed  to  an  extensional  one.  By  using  our  state¬ 
ments  with  a  date,  we  deal  with  definite  issues,  on  record,  which  we  can 
study,  analyse,  evaluate . ,  and  so  we  make  our  statements  of  an  exten- 
sional  character,  with  all  cards  on  the  table,  so  to  say,  at  a  given  date. 
Under  such  extensional  and  limited  conditions,  our  statements  then 
become,  eventually,  propositions,  and,  therefore,  true  or  false,  depending 
on  the  amount  of  information  the  maker  of  the  statements  possesses. 
We  see  that  this  criterion,  though  difficult,  is  feasible,  and  makes  agree¬ 
ment  possible. 

A  structural  remark  concerning  the  ^-system  may  not  be  amiss 
here.  In  the  -system  the  ‘universal’  proposition  (which  is  usually  a 
propositional  function)  always  implies  existence.  In  A  ‘logic’,  when  it  is 

142  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

said  that  ‘all  A*s  are  B*,  it  is  assumed  that  there  are  A*s.  It  is  obvious 
that  always  assuming  existence  leaves  no  place  for  non-existence;  and 
this  is  why  the  old  statements  were  supposed  to  be  true  or  false.  In 
practical  life,  collections  of  noises  (spell -marks)  which  look  like  words, 
but  which  are  not,  are  often  not  suspected  of  being  meaningless,  and 
action  based  on  them  may  consequently  entail  unexplicable  disaster.  In 
our  lives,  most  of  our  miseries  do  not  originate  in  the  field  where  the 
terms  ‘true*  and  ‘false*  apply,  but  in  the  field  where  they  do  not  apply; 
namely,  in  the  immense  region  of  propositional  functions  and  meaning¬ 
lessness,  where  agreement  must  fail. 

Besides,  this  sweeping  and  unjustified  structural  assumption  makes 
the  ^-system  less  general .  To  the  statement,  ‘all  A’s  are  B*,  the  mathe¬ 
matician  adds  ‘there  may  or  may  not  be  A’s\  This  is  obviously  more 
general .  The  old  pair  of  opposites,  true  and  false,  may  be  enlarged  to 
three  possibilities — statements  which  might  be  true,  or  false,  and  verbal 
forms  which  have  the  appearance  of  being  statements  and  yet  have  no 
meaning,  since  the  noises  used  were  spell-marks,  not  symbols  for  any¬ 
thing  with  actual  or  ‘logical*  existence. 

Again  a  ^-system  shares  with  the  E  and  R  systems  a  useful  and 
important  methodological  and  structural  innovation;  namely,  it  limits 
the  validity  of  its  statements,  with  weighty  semantic  beneficial  conse¬ 
quences,  as  it  tends  from  the  beginning  to  eliminate  undue,  and  often 
intense,  dogmatism,  categorism,  and  absolutism.  This,  on  a  printed  page, 
perhaps,  looks  rather  unimportant,  but  when  applied ,  it  leads  to  a  fun¬ 
damental  and  structurally  beneficial  alteration  in  our  semantic  attitudes 
and  behaviour. 

In  the  present  work,  each  statement  is  merely  the  best  the  author 
can  make  in  1933.  Each  statement  is  given  definitely,  but  with  the 
semantic  limitation  that  it  is  based  on  the  information  available  to  the 
author  in  1933.  The  author  has  spared  no  labour  in  endeavouring  to 
ascertain  the  state  of  knowledge  as  it  exists  in  the  fields  from  which  his 
material  is  drawn.  Some  of  this  information  may  be  incorrect,  or 
wrongly  interpreted.  Such  errors  will  come  to  light  and  be  corrected  as 
the  years  proceed. 

A  great  source  of  difficulty  and  of  possible  objections  is  that  science 
is,  at  present,  so  specialized  that  it  is  impossible  for  one  man  to  know  all 
fields,  and  that,  therefore,  the  use  of  a  term  such  as  ‘science  1933’*  might 
be  fundamentally  unsound.  This  objection  should  not  be  lightly  dis¬ 
missed,  as  it  is  serious.  Yet  it  can,  I  believe,  be  answered  satisfactorily. 
At  this  early  stage  of  our  enquiry,  a  large  number  of  the  facts  of  knowl¬ 
edge  does  not  affect  my  investigation ;  therefore,  it  has  not  proved  im- 

ON  FUNCTION 

possible  to  keep  sufficiently  well  informed  on  the  points  which  are 
covered.  Also,  the  further  scientific  theories  advance,  the  simpler  they 
become.  For  instance,  books  on  physics  are  simpler  and  less  voluminous 
now  than  twenty  years  ago.  Something  similar  could  be  said  about 
mathematics.  The  general  outlook  is  simpler. 

The  main  interest  of  the  author  at  this  stage  of  his  work  is  struc¬ 
tural  and  semantic,  rather  than  technical,  and  so  he  has  only  had  to  know 
enough  of  the  technique  of  different  sciences  to  be  able  to  understand 
sufficiently  their  structure  and  method.  Revolutionary  structural  and 
methodological  advances  are  few  in  the  history  of  mankind ;  and  so  it  is 
possible,  though  not  easy,  to  follow  them  up  in  1933. 

But  the  main  point  is  that  the  affixing  of  the  date  has  very  far- 
reaching  structural  methodological  and,  therefore,  psycho-logical  seman¬ 
tic  consequences.  For  instance,  it  changes  propositional  function  into 
propositions,  converts  semantically  one-valued  intensional  methods  into 
oo -valued  extensional  methods,  introduces  four-dimensional  methods . , 
and  so  the  ‘date’  method  is  to  be  recommended  on  these  structural  and 
semantic  grounds  alone .  As  it  is  beneficial  to  affix  the  date  in  1933,  we 
affix  the  date  1933,  not  to  give  the  impression  that  from  a  technical  point 
of  view  I  am  familiar  with  the  results  of  all  branches  of  science  at  that 
date,  but  to  indicate  that  no  advance  in  structure  and  method  of  1933 
has  been  disregarded.  It  will  become  obvious  later  in  this  book,  when 
additional  data  have  been  taken  into  consideration,  and  a  new  summary 
and  new  abstractions  made,  that  the  result  is  a  surprising  simplification, 
which  can  be  clearly  understood  by  laymen  as  well  as  by  scientists.  With 
the  help  of  the  generalizations  of  new  structure  and  oo-valued  semantics, 
it  will  be  easier  to  follow  the  advance  of  science,  because  we  shall  then 
have  a  better  outlook  on  the  psycho-logics  of  science  as-a-whole. 

It  will  become  clear,  too,  that  to  provide  for  a  further  elaboration 
of  this  work  in  the  future,  the  establishment  of  a  special  branch  of 
research  in  ^-systems  must  become  a  group  activity ;  for,  as  I  have  been 
painfully  aware,  the  production  of  even  this  outline  of  that  branch  of 
research  has  overstrained  the  powers  of  one  man. 

The  most  cheering  part  of  this  work  is,  perhaps,  the  practical 
results  which  this  investigation  has  accomplished,  combined  with  the 
simplicity  of  means  employed.  One  of  the  dangers  into  which  the  reader 
is  liable  to  fall  is  to  ascribe  too  much  generality  to  the  work,  to  forget 
the  limitations  and,  perhaps,  one-sidedness  which  underlie  it.  The  limita¬ 
tion  and  the  generality  of  this  theory  lie  in  the  fact  that  if  we  symbolize 
our  human  problems  (H  =  f(x i,  x2,  x3,  x4,  x5,  .  .  .  xnJ)  as  a  function  of 
an  enormous  number  of  variables,  the  present  theory  deals  only  with  a 

144  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

few  of  these  variables,  let  us  say  (say,  structure),  xt  (say,  evalua¬ 
tion)  . ,  but  these  variables  have  been  found,  up  to  the  present,  in  all  our 
experience  and  all  our  equations. 

A  most  important  extension  of  the  notion  of  ‘function*  and  ‘propo¬ 
sitional  function*  has  been  further  accomplished  by  Cassius  J.  Keyser, 
who,  in  1913,  in  his  discussion  of  the  multiple  interpretations  of  postu¬ 
late  systems,  introduced  the  notion  of  the  ‘doctrinal  function*.  Since, 
the  doctrinal  function  has  been  discussed  at  length  by  Keyser  in  his 
Mathematical  Philosophy  and  his  other  writings,  by  Carmichael2,  and 
others.  Let  us  recall  that  a  propositional  function  is  defined  as  an 
oo-valued  statement,  containing  one  or  more  variables,  such  that  when 
single  values  are  assigned  to  these  variables  the  expression  becomes  a 
one-valued  proposition.  A  manifold  of  interrelated  propositional  func¬ 
tions,  usually  called  postulates,  with  all  the  consequences  following  from 
them,  usually  called  theorems,  has  been  termed  by  Keyser  a  doctrinal 
function .  A  doctrinal  function,  thus,  has  no  specific  content,  as  it  deals 
with  variables,  but  establishes  definite  relations  between  these  variables. 
In  principle,  we  can  assign  many  single  values  to  the  variable  terms  and 
so  generate  many  doctrines  from  one  doctrinal  function.  In  an  oo-valued 
^-system  which  eliminates  identity  and  is  based  on  structure,  doctrinal 
functions  become  of  an  extraordinary  importance. 

In  an  oo-valued  world  of  absolute  individuals  on  objective  levels, 
our  statements  can  always  be  formulated  in  a  way  that  makes  obvious 
the  use  of  oo-valued  terms  (variables)  and  so  the  postulates  can  always 
be  expressed  by  propositional  function.  As  postulates  establish  relations 
or  multi-dimensional  order,  a  set  of  postulates  which  defines  a  doctrinal 
function  gives,  also  uniquely ,  the  linguistic  structure.  As  a  rule,  the 
builders  of  doctrines  do  not  start  with  sets  of  postulates  which  would 
explicitly  involve  variables,  but  they  build  their  doctrine  around  some 
specific  content  or  one  special  respective  value  for  the  variables,  and  so 
the  structure  of  a  doctrine,  outside  of  some  mathematical  disciplines,  has 
never  been  explicitly  given.  If  we  trace  a  given  doctrine  with  specific 
content  to  its  doctrinal  function  without  content ,  but  variable  terms,  then, 
only,  do  we  obtain  a  set  of  postulates  which  gives  us  the  linguistic  struc¬ 
ture.  Briefly,  to  find  the  structure  of  a  doctrine,  we  must  formulate  the 
doctrinal  function  of  which  the  given  doctrine  is  only  a  special  inter¬ 
pretation.  In  non-mathematical  disciplines,  where  doctrines  are  not 
traced  down  to  a  set  of  postulates,  we  have  no  means  of  knowing  their 
structure,  or  whether  two  different  doctrines  originated  from  one  doc¬ 
trinal  function,  or  from  two .  In  other  words,  we  have  no  simple  means 
of  ascertaining  whether  the  two  different  doctrines  have  similar  or  differ- 

UN  FUNCTION 

rut  structure.  Under  aristotelianism,  these  differentiations  were  impos¬ 
sible,  and  so  the  problems  of  linguistic  structure,  propositional  and 
doctrinal  functions . ,  were  neglected,  except  in  the  recent  work  of  mathe¬ 
maticians.  The  entirely  general  semantic  influence  of  these  structural 
conditions  becomes  obvious  when  we  realize  that,  no  matter  whether  or 
not  our  doctrines  are  traced  down  to  their  doctrinal  functions,  our 
semantic  processes  and  all  ‘thinking’  follow  automatically  and,  by  neces¬ 
sity,  the  conscious  or  unconscious  postulates,  assumptions.,  which  are 
given  (or  made  conscious)  exclusively  by  the  doctrinal  function. 

The  terms  ‘proposition’,  ‘function’,  ‘propositional  function’,  ‘doc¬ 
trinal  function’. ,  are  multiordinal,  allowing  many  orders,  and,  in  a  given 
analysis,  the  different  orders  should  be  denoted  by  subscripts  to  allow 
a  differentiation  between  them.  When  we  deal  with  more  complex 
doctrines,  we  find  that  in  structures  they  represent  higher  order  doc¬ 
trines,  or  a  higher  whole,  the  constituents  of  which  represent  lower  order 
doctrines.  Similarly,  with  doctrinal  functions,  if  we  take  any  system,  an 
analysis  will  discover  that  it  is  a  whole  of  related  doctrinal  functions. 
As  this  situation  is  the  most  frequent,  and  as  ‘thinking’,  in  general,  rep¬ 
resents  a  process  of  relating  into  higher  order  relational  entities  which 
are  later  treated  as  complex  wholes,  it  is  useful  to  have  a  term  which 
would  symbolize  doctrinal  functions  of  higher  order,  which  are  made 
up  of  doctrinal  functions  of  lower  orders.  We  could  preserve  the  ter¬ 
minology  of  ‘higher’  and  ‘lower’  order;  but  as  these  conditions  are 
always  found  in  all  systems,  it  seems  more  expedient  to  call  the  higher 
body  of  interrelated  doctrinal  functions,  which  ultimately  produce  a 
system — a  system- function.  At  present,  the  term  ‘system  function’  has 
been  already  coined  by  Doctor  H.  M.  Sheffer3 ;  but,  to  my  knowledge, 
Sheffer  uses  his  ‘system  function’  as  an  equivalent  for  the  ‘doctrinal 
function’  of  Keyser.  For  the  reasons  given  above,  it  seems  advisable  to 
limit  the  term  ‘doctrinal  function’  to  the  use  as  introduced  by  Keyser, 
and  to  enlarge  the  meaning  of  Sheffer’s  term  ‘system  function’  to  the 
use  suggested  in  the  present  work,  this  natural  and  wider  meaning  to 
be  indicated  by  the  insertion  of  a  hyphen. 

In  a  ^-system,  when  we  realize  that  we  live,  act.,  in  accordance 
with  non-el  s.r,  always  involving  integrated  ‘emotions’  and  ‘intellect*  and, 
therefore,  some  explicit  or  implicit  postulates  which,  by  structural  neces¬ 
sity,  utilize  variable,  multiordinal  and  oo-valued  terms,  we  must  recognize 
that  we  live  and  act  by  some  system-functions  which  consist  of  doctrinal 
functions.  The  above  issues  are  not  only  of  an  academic  interest,  as, 
without  mastering  all  the  issues  emphasized  in  the  present  work,  it  is 

146  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

impossible  to  analyse  the  extremely  complex  difficulties  in  which,  as  a 
matter  of  fact,  we  are  immersed. 

At  present,  the  doctrinal  functions  and  the  system-functions  have 
not  been  worked  out,  and  even  in  mathematics,  where  these  notions 
originated,  we  speak  too  little  about  them.  But  in  mathematics,  as  the 
general  tendency  is  to  bring  all  mathematical  disciplines  to  a  postulational 
base,  and  these  postulates  always  involve  multiordinal  and  oo-valued 
terms,  we  actually  produce  doctrinal  or  system-functions,  as  the  case 
may  be.  In  this  way,  we  find  the  structure  of  a  given  doctrine  or  sys¬ 
tem,  and  so  are  able  to  compare  the  structures  of  different,  and  some¬ 
times  very  complex,  verbal  schemes.  Similar  structure- finding  methods 
must  be  applied  some  day  to  all  other,  at  present,  non-mathematical 
disciplines.  The  main  difficulty,  in  the  search  for  structure,  was  the 
absence  of  a  clear  formulation  of  the  issues  involved  and  the  need  for 
a  ^-system,  so  as  to  be  able  to  compare  two  systems ,  the  comparison  of 
which  helps  further  structural  discovery.  It  is  not  claimed  that  either 
the  A  or  A  system- functions  have  been  formulated  here,  but  it  seems 
that,  in  the  presence  or  absence  of  identification,  we  find  a  fundamental 
postulate  which,  once  formulated,  suggests  a  comparison  with  experience. 
As  we  discover  that  ‘identity'  is  invariably  false  to  facts,  this  A  postu¬ 
late  must  be  rejected  from  any  future  ^-system. 

It  happens  that  any  new  and  revolutionary  doctrine  or  system  is 
always  based  on  a  new  doctrinal  or  system- function  which  establishes 
its  new  structure  with  a  new  set  of  relations.  Thus,  any  new  doctrine  or 
system,  when  traced  to  its  postulates,  allows  us  to  verify  and  scrutinize 
the  initial  postulates  and  to  find  out  if  they  correspond  to  experience , . 

A  few  examples  will  make  it  clearer.  Cartesian  analytical  geometry 
is  based  on  one  system-function,  having  one  system-structure,  although 
we  may  have  indefinitely  many  different  cartesian  co-ordinates.  The 
vector  and  the  tensor  systems  also  depend  on  two  different  system- 
functions,  different  from  the  cartesian ;  they  have  three  different  struc¬ 
tures.  Intertranslations  are  possible,  but  only  when  the  fundamental 
postulates  do  not  conflict.  Thus,  the  tensor  language  gives  us  invariant 
and  intrinsic  relations,  and  these  can  be  translated  into  the  cartesian  rela¬ 
tions.  It  seems  certain,  however,  although  I  am  not  aware  that  this  has 
been  done,  that  the  indefinitely  many  extrinsic  characteristics  which  we 
can  manufacture  in  the  cartesian  system,  cannot  be  translated  into  the 
tensor  language,  which  does  not  admit  extrinsic  characteristics. 

Similar  relations  are  found  between  other  doctrines  and  systems, 
once  their  respective  structural  characteristics  are  discovered  by  the 

ON  FUNCTION 

formulating  of  their  respective  functions,  which,  by  the  explicit  or  im¬ 
plicit  postulates,  determine  their  structure. 

Thus  all  existing  schools  of  psychotherapy,  prior  to  1933,  result 
from  one  system- function  which  underlies  implicitly  the  system  orig¬ 
inated  by  Freud.4  The  particular  freudian  doctrine  is  only  one  of  the 
indefinitely  many  variants  of  similar  system-structure ,  which  can  be 
manufactured  from  the  one  system-function  underlying  the  particular 
freudian  system.  In  other  words,  it  is  of  no  importance  what  ‘complex' 
we  emphasize  or  manufacture,  the  structural  principles  which  underlie 
this  new  freudian  and  revolutionary  system-function  remain  unchanged. 
From  this  point  of  view,  all  existing  schools  of  psychotherapy  could  be 
called  ‘cartesian1,  because,  although  they  all  have  one  general  system- 
structure,  yet  they  allow  indefinitely  many  particular  variations.  The 
present  ^-system  suggests  that  the  ‘cartesian'  school  of  psychotherapy  is 
still  largely  A ,  el  and  fundamentally  of  one  structure. 

The  present  system  involves  a  different  system- function  Of  different 
structure,  rejecting  identity,  discovering  the  ‘structural  unconscious', 
establishing  psychophysiology,.  The  mutual  translatability  follows  the 
rules  of  general  semantic  principles  or  conditions  which  apply  also  to 
mathematics ;  namely,  that  a  /4-system,  being  based  on  relations ;  on  the 
elimination  of  identity ;  on  structure . ,  gives  us  only  intrinsic  characteris¬ 
tics  and  might  be  called  the  ‘tensor'  school  of  psychotherapy.  This  sys¬ 
tem  allows  all  the  intrinsic  characteristics  discovered,  no  matter  by  whom, 
but  has  no  place  for  the  indefinitely  many,  quite  consistent,  yet  irrele¬ 
vant  metaphysical,  extrinsic  characteristics,  which  we  can  manufacture 
at  will. 

Without  the  realization  of  the  structural  foundations  emphasized  in 
the  present  system,  it  is  practically  impossible  not  to  confuse  linguistic 
structural  issues,  which  lead  inevitably  to  semantic  blockages.  When  we 
deal  with  doctrines  or  systems  of  different  structure,  each  of  which 
involves  different  doctrinal  or  system-functions,  it  is  of  the  utmost 
importance  to  keep  them  at  first  strictly  separated;  to  work  out  each  sys¬ 
tem  by  itself,  and  only  after  this  is  accomplished  can  we  carry  out  an 
independent  investigation  as  to  the  ways  they  mutually  intertranslate . 
Let  me  again  repeat,  that  the  mixing  of  different  languages  of  different 
structures  is  fatal  for  clear  ‘thinking'.  Only  when  a  system  is  traced  to 
its  system- function,  and  the  many  implications  worked  out  in  their 
un-mixed  form,  can  we  make  a  further  independent  investigation  of  the 
ways  in  which  the  different  systems  intertranslate.  As  a  general  rule, 
every  new  scientific  system  eliminates  a  great  deal  of  spurious  meta¬ 
physics  from  the  older  systems.  In  practice,  the  issues  are  extremely 

148  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

simple  if  one  decides  to  follow  the  general  rule;  namely,  either  com¬ 
pletely  to  reject  or  completely  to  accept  provisionally ,  at  a  given  date,  a 
new  system;  use  exclusively  the  structurally  new  terms;  perform  our 
semantic  operations  exclusively  in  these  terms ;  compare  the  conclusions 
with  experience  ;  perform  new  experiments  which  the  structurally  new 
terminology  suggests ;  and  only  then,  as  an  independent  enquiry,  investi¬ 
gate  how  one  system  translates  into  the  other.  In  those  translations, 
which  correspond  to  the  transformation  of  frames  of  reference  in  mathe¬ 
matics,  we  find  the  most  important  invariant  characteristics  or  relations 
which  survive  this  translation.  If  a  characteristic  appears  in  all  formu¬ 
lations,  it  is  a  sign  that  this  characteristic  is  intrinsic ,  belongs  to  the 
subject  of  our  analysis,  and  is  not  accidental  and  irrelevant,  belonging 
only  to  the  accidental  structure  of  the  language  we  use.  Once  these 
invariant,  intrinsic  characteristics  are  discovered,  and  there  is  no  way  to 
discover  them  except  by  reformulating  the  problems  in  different  lan¬ 
guages  (in  mathematics  we  speak  about  the  transformation  of  frames  of 
reference),  we  then  know  that  we  have  discovered  invariant  relations, 
which  survive  transformation  of  different  forms  of  representations,  and 
so  realize  that  we  are  dealing  with  something  genuinely  important,  inde¬ 
pendent  from  the  structure  of  the  language  we  use. 

History  shows  that  the  discovery  of  isolated,  though  interesting, 
facts  has  had  less  influence  on  the  progress  of  science  than  the  discovery 
of  new  system-functions  which  produce  new  linguistic  structures  and 
new  methods .  In  our  own  lifetime,  some  of  the  most  revolutionary  of 
these  advances  in  structural  adjustment  and  method  have  been  accom¬ 
plished.  The  work  of  Einstein,  the  revision  of  mathematical  founda¬ 
tions,  the  new  quantum  mechanics,  colloidal  science,  and  advances  in 
psychiatry,  are  perhaps  structurally  and  semantically  the  most  important. 
There  seems  no  escape  from  admitting  that  no  modern  man  can  be 
really  intelligent  in  1933  if  he  knows  nothing  about  these  structural 
scientific  revolutions.  It  is  true  that,  because  these  advances  are  so  recent, 
they  are  still  represented  in  very  technical  terms ;  their  system- functions 
have  not  been  formulated,  and  so  the  deeper  structural,  epistemological 
and  semantic  simple  aspects  have  not  been  worked  out.  These  aspects  are 
of  enormous  human  importance.  But  they  must  be  represented  without 
such  an  abundance  of  dry  technicalities,  which  are  only  a  means,  and  not 
an  end,  in  search  for  structure. 

A  scientist  may  be  very  much  up  to  date  in  his  line  of  work,  let  us 
say,  in  biology ;  but  his  physico-mathematical  structural  knowledge  may 
be  somewhere  in  the  eighteenth  or  nineteenth  century  and  his  epistem¬ 
ology,  metaphysics,  and  structure  of  language  of  300  b.c.  This  classifi- 

ON  FUNCTION 

cation  by  years  gives  a  fairly  good  picture  of  his  semantic  status.  Indeed, 
we  can  fortell  quite  often  what  kind  of  reaction  such  a  man  will  exhibit. 

This  functional,  propositional- function,  and  system- function  struc¬ 
tural  attitude  is  in  accord  with  the  methods  developed  by  psychiatry.  In 
psychiatry,  ‘mental’  phenomena  are  considered,  in  some  instances,  from 
the  point  of  view  of  arrested  development;  in  others,  as  regression  to 
older  and  more  primitive  levels.  With  this  attitude  and  understanding, 
we  cannot  ignore  this  peculiar  intermixing  of  different  personalities  in 
one  man  when  different  aspects  of  him  exhibit  s.r  of  different  ages  and 
epochs  of  the  development  of  mankind.  In  this  connection  should  be 
mentioned  the  problem  of  the  multiple  personalities  which  often  occur 
in  the  ‘mentally’  ill.  Such  splitting  of  personality  is  invariably  a  serious 
semantic  symptom,  and  a  person  who  exhibits  different  ages  in  his 
semantic  development,  as,  for  instance,  1933  in  some  respects,  sixteenth 
century  in  others,  and  300,  or  even  5000,  b.c.  in  still  others,  cannot  be  a 
well  co-ordinated  individual.  If  we  teach  our  children,  whose  nervous 
systems  are  not  physically  finished  at  birth,  doctrines  structurally  belong¬ 
ing  to  entirely  different  epochs  of  human  development,  we  ought  not  to 
wonder  that  semantic  harm  is  done.  Opr  efforts  should  be  to  co-ordinate 
and  integrate  the  individual,  help  the  nervous  system,  and  not  split  the 
individual  semantically  and  so  disorganize  the  nervous  system. 

It  is  necessary  to  remember  that  the  organism  works  as-a-whole. 
In  the  old  days  we  had  a  comforting  delusion  that  science  was  a  purely 
‘intellectual’  affair.  This  was  an  el  creed  which  was  structurally  false  to 
facts.  It  would  probably  be  below  the  dignity  of  an  older  mathematician 
to  analyse  the  ‘emotional’  values  of  some  piece  of  mathematical  work,  as, 
for  instance,  of  the  ‘propositional  function’.  But  such  a  mathematician 
probably  never  heard  of  psychogalvanic  experiments,  and  how  his 
‘emotional  curve’  becomes  expressive  when  he  is  solving  some  mathemat¬ 
ical  problem. 

In  1933,  we  are  not  allowed  to  follow  the  older,  seemingly  easier, 
and  simpler  paths.  In  our  discussion,  we  have  tried  to  analyse  the  prob¬ 
lems  at  hand  as  oo-valued  manifestations  of  human  behaviour.  We  were 
analysing  the  doings  of  Smith,  Brown . ,  and  the  semantic  components 
which  enter  into  these  forms  of  behaviour  must  be  especially  emphasized, 
emphasized  because  they  were  neglected.  In  well-balanced  persons,  all 
psycho-logical  aspects  should  be  represented  and  should  work  har¬ 
moniously.  In  a  theory  of  sanity,  this  semantic  balance  and  co-ordination 
should  be  our  first  aim,  and  we  should,  therefore,  take  particular  care 
of  the  neglected  aspects.  The  non-el  point  of  view  makes  us  postulate 
a  permanent  connection  and  interdependence  between  all  psycho-logical 

150  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

aspects.  Most  human  difficulties,  and  ‘mental’  ills,  are  of  non-el  affective 
origin,  extremely  difficult  to  control  or  regulate  by  el  means.  Yet,  we 
now  see  that  purely  technical  scientific  discoveries,  because  structural, 
have  unsuspected  and  far-reaching  beneficial  affective  semantic  compo¬ 
nents.  Perhaps,  instead  of  keeping  such  discoveries  for  the  few  ‘high¬ 
brows',  who  never  use  them  fully,  we  could  introduce  them  as  structural, 
semantic  and  linguistic  devices  into  elementary  schools,  with  highly  bene¬ 
ficial  psycho-logical  results.  There  is  really  no  difficulty  in  explaining 
what  has  been  said  here  about  structure  to  children  and  training  them 
in  appropriate  s.r .  The  effect  of  doing  so,  on  sanity,  would  be  profound 
and  lasting. 

CHAPTER  XII 

ON  ORDER 

The  fundamental  importance  of  the  subject  of  order  may  be  inferred 
from  the  fact  that  all  the  concepts  required  in  geometry  can  be  expressed 
in  terms  of  the  concept  of  order  alone.  (237)  e.  v.  Huntington 

Dimensions,  in  geometry,  are  a  development  of  order.  The  conception 
of  a  limit ,  which  underlies  all  higher  mathematics,  is  a  serial  conception. 
There  are  parts  of  mathematics  which  do  not  depend  upon  the  notion  of 
order  but  they  are  very  few  in  comparison  with  the  parts  in  which  this 
notion  is  involved.  (455,  j  f  ,  bertrand  russell 

The  notion  of  continuity  depends  upon  that  of  order ,  since  continuity  is 
merely  a  particular  type  of  order.  (454,  bertrand  russell 

Logistic  may  be  defined  as  the  science  which  deals  with  types  of  order  as 
SUch .  (300,  c*  l-  LEWIS 

The  branch  of  physics  which  is  called  Elementary  Geometry  was  long 
ago  delivered  into  the  hands  of  mathematicians  for  the  purposes  of  in¬ 
struction.  But,  while  mathematicians  are  often  quite  competent  m  their 
knowledge  of  the  abstract  structure  of  the  subject,  they  are  rarely  so  in 
their  grasp  of  its  physical  meaning.  (529)  Oswald  veblen 

We  often  think  that  when  we  have  completed  our  study  of  one  we  know 
all  about  two ,  because  41  two"  is  "one  and  one".  We  forget  that  we  have 
still  to  make  a  study  of  "and".  Secondary  physics  is  the  study  of  and  — 
that  is  to  say,  of  organisation.  (149,  A.  s.  bddington 

...  the  geometry  of  paths  can  be  regarded  as  a  generalization  both  of 
the  earliest  part  of  elementary  geometry  and  of  some  of  the  most  refined 
of  physical  theories.  The  study  of  the  projective,  the  affine  and  the  metric 
geometry  of  paths  ought  to  result  in  a  comprehensive  idea  of  what  types 
of  physical  tneory  it  is  possible  to  construct  along  the  lines  which  have 
been  successful  in  the  past.  (529,  .  Oswald  veblen 

What  I  wish  to  emphasize  now  is  the  need  of  logistic  studies  which  will 
make  it  possible  to  say  more  definitely  than  is  yet  possible  in  this  field 
what  is  assumed,  what  is  proved,  and  how  the  group  of  theorems  and 
definitions  hang  together.  (529,  Oswald  veblen 

Memory,  in  fact,  is  nothing  but  the  reinforcement  and  facilitation  of 
the  passage  of  the  nervous  impulse  along  certain  paths.  (4ii,  henri  pieron 
Butbefore  dealing  with  the  brain,  it  is  well  to  distinguish  a  second 
characteristic  of  nervous  organization  which  renders  it  an  organization  in 

levels.  (4ii,  HE.NRI  plfeRON 

This  affective  repercussion  seems  to  take  place  at  the  penultimate  stage 
of  the  nervous  system  and  governs  complicated  reflexes  or  instinctive  re¬ 
actions  (411,  HENRI  PIERON 

Furthermore,  there  are  even  symbols  of  symbols,  evocative  of  images 
onlv  in  the  second  degree,  by  means  of  primary  stations  of  the  co-ordination 
centres.  (411,  HENRI  pi6ron 

In  this  way  it  is  seen  that  the  order  in  which  a  given  group  of  stimuli 
taking  part  in  a  stimulatory  compound  are  arranged  and  the  pauses  be¬ 
tween  them  are  the  factors  which  determine  the  final  result  of  the  stimu- 

152  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

la t ion,  and  therefore  most  probably  the  form  of  the  reaction,  and  we  know 
already  that  different  intensities  of  the  same  stimulus  can  be  differentiated 
very  accurately,  one  definite  intensity  being  connected  with  excitation  and 
another  with  inhibition.  (394)  I.  p.  favlov 

Whoever  studies  Leibniz,  Lambert  and  Castillon  cannot  fail  to  be  con¬ 
vinced  that  a  consistent  calculus  of  concepts  in  intension  is  either  im¬ 
mensely  difficult  or,  as  Couturat  has  said,  impossible.  <30o>  C.  i.  lewis 
The  relation  between  intensions  and  extensions  is  unsymmetrical ,  not 
symmetrical  as  the  medieval  logicians  would  have  it.  (300)  C.  I.  lewis 

The  old  "law"  of ^  formal  jogic,  that  if  a  is  contained  in  &  in  extension, 
then  0  is  contained  in  a  in  intension,  and  vice  versa,  is  false .  The  connec¬ 
tion  between  extension  and  intension  is  by  no  means  so  simple  as  that. 
^  c.  I.  LEWIS 

I  do  not  suggest  explicit  confusions  of  this  sort,  but  only  that  traditional 
elementary  logic,  taught  in  youth,  is  an  almost  fatal  barrier  to  clear  think¬ 
ing  in  later  years,  unless  much  time  is  spent  in  acquiring  a  new  technique. 
<*57)  BERTRAND  RUSSELL 

Section  A .  Undefined  terms . 

We  can  now  introduce  a  structural  non-el  term  which  underlies  not 
only  all  existing  mathematics,  but  also  the  present  work.  This  bridging 
term  has  equal  importance  in  science  and  in  our  daily  life ;  and  applies 
equally  to  ‘senses'  and  ‘mind’.  The  term  in  question  is  ‘order’,  in  the 
sense  of  ‘betweenness’.  If  we  say  that  a,  b ,  and  c  are  in  the  order  a,  b ,  c, 
we  mean  that  b  is  between  a  and  c,  and  we  say,  further,  that  a,  b,  c ,  has 
a  different  order  from  c,  b,  a ,  or  b,  a,  c , .  .The  main  importance  of  num¬ 
bers  in  mathematics  is  in  the  fact  that  they  have  a  definite  order.  In 
mathematics,  we  are  much  concerned  with  the  fact  that  numbers  repre¬ 
sent  a  definite  ordered  series  or  progression,  1,  2,  3,  4 , . 

In  the  present  system,  the  term  ‘order*  is  accepted  as  undefined.  It 
is  clear  that  we  cannot  define  all  our  terms.  If  we  start  to  define  all  our 
terms,  we  must,  by  necessity,  soon  come  to  a  set  of  terms  which  we 
cannot  define  any  more  because  we  will  have  no  more  terms  with  which 
to  define  them.  We  see  that  the  structure  of  any  language,  mathematical 
or  daily,  is  such  that  we  must  start  implicitly  or  explicitly  with  undefined 
terms.  This  point  is  of  grave  consequence.  In  this  work,  following 
mathematics,  I  explicitly  start  with  undefined  important  terms. 

When  we  use  a  series  of  names  for  objects,  ‘Smith,  Brown,  Jones’. , 
we  say  nothing.  We  do  not  produce  a  proposition.  But  if  we  say  ‘Smith 
kicks  Brown',  we  have  introduced  the  term  ‘kicks’,  which  is  not  a  name 
for  an  object,  but  is  a  term  of  an  entirely  different  character.  Let  us 
call  it  a  ‘relation-word’.  If  we  analyse  this  term,  ‘kicks’,  further,  we  will 
find  that  we  can  define  it  by  considering  the  leg  (objective)  of  Smith 
(objective),  some  part  of  the  anatomy  of  Brown  (objective),  and, 

ON  ORDER 

finally,  Brown  (objective).  We  must  use  a  further  set  of  terms  that 
describes  how  the  leg  of  Smith  ‘moves’  through  an  ‘infinity*  of  ‘places  in 
an  ‘infinity*  of  ‘instants*  of  ‘time*,  ‘continuously*  until  it  reaches  Brown. 

When  a  donkey  kicks  a  donkey,  there  may  be  a  broken  leg;  but 
that  is,  practically,  the  only  consequence.  Not  so  when  Smith  kicks 
Brown.  Should  Brown  happen  to  be  a  royal  or  a  business  man  in  Nica¬ 
ragua  or  Mexico,  this  might  be  considered  ‘a  mortal  offense  of  a  great 
sovereign  nation  to  another  great  sovereign  nation’,  a  war  might  follow 
and  many  non-royals  or  non-business  men  might  die.  When  a  symbolic 
class  of  life  enters  the  arena,  semantic  complications  may  arise  not  exist¬ 
ing  with  animals. 

In  the  relation  terms,  the  statement,  ‘Smith  kicks  Brown*,  has 
introduced  still  further  symbolic  complications.  It  involves  a  full-fledged 
metaphysics,  as  expressed  in  the  terms  ‘moves*,  ‘infinity’,  ‘space*,  ‘time*, 
‘continuity*,  and  what  not.  It  must  be  emphasized  that  all  human  state¬ 
ments,  savage  or  not,  involve  a  structural  metaphysics. 

These  relational  terms  should  be  elucidated  to  the  utmost.  Until 
lately,  the  ‘philosophers*,  in  their  ‘Jehovah  complex’,  usually  said  to  the 
scientists :  ‘Hands  off ;  those  are  superior  problems  with  which  only  we 
chosen  ones  can  deal*.  As  a  matter  of  history,  ‘philosophers*  have  not 
produced  achievements  of  any  value  in  the  structural  line.  But  the  ‘mere* 
scientists,  mainly  mathematicians  and  mathematical  physicists,  have  taken 
care  of  these  problems  with  extremely  important  structural  (1933) 
results.  In  the  solutions  of  these  semantic  problems,  the  term  ‘order* 
became  paramount. 

Perhaps  this  example  of  an  analysis  of  the  statement,  ‘Smith  kicks 
Brown*,  shows  the  justice  of  the  contention  of  this  work  that  no  man 
can  be  ‘intelligent*  if  he  is  not  acquainted  with  these  new  works  and 
their  structural  elucidations. 

We  see  that  no  statement  made  by  man,  whether  savage  or  civilized, 
is  free  from  some  kind  of  structural  metaphysics  involving  s.r .  We  see 
also  that  when  we  explicitly  start  with  undefined  words,  these  undefined 
words  have  to  be  taken  on  faith.  They  represent  some  kind  of  implicit 
creed,  or  metaphysics,  or  structural  assumptions.  We  meet  here  with  a 
tremendously  beneficial  semantic  effect  of  modern  methods,  in  that  we 
deliberately  state  our  undefined  terms.  We  thus  divulge  our  creeds  and 
metaphysics.  In  this  way,  we  do  not  blind  the  reader  or  student.  We 
invite  criticism,  elaboration,  verification,  evaluation . ,  and  so  accelerate 
progress  and  make  it  easier  for  others  to  work  out  issues.  Compare  the 
statement  of  Newton,  ( Hypotheses  non  Hugo*  (I  do  not  make  hypothe¬ 
ses),  in  his  PhUosophiae  Naturalis  Principia  MathemcUica,  when  he  pro- 

154  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

ceeded  to  coin  some  very  doubtful  hypotheses;  and  such  works  as 
produced  by  Peano,  Whitehead,  Russell,  and  others,  in  which  not  only  all 
assumptions  are  stated  explicitly,  but  even  the  assumptions,  given  in 
single  undefined  terms,  are  listed.  It  is  not  assumed  here  that  even 
Peano,  Whitehead,  Russell,  and  the  others  have  fulfilled  this  program 
entirely.  It  is  quite  probable  that  not  all  of  their  assumptions  are  stated 
explicitly.  However,  a  very  serious  and  revolutionary  beginning  has  been 
made  in  this  direction.  We  have  still  far  to  go,  for  at  present  even 
mathematicians  disregard  the  threefold  relational  character  of  mathe¬ 
matics,  and,  by  a  semantic  confusion  of  orders  of  abstraction,  make 
structurally  el  assumptions  false  to  the  facts  of  1933;  namely,  that 
mathematics  exists  ‘by  itself,  detached  from  the  producers,  Smith  and 
others.  This  procedure  reminds  one  of  the  old  N  ‘I  do  not  make 
hypotheses’,  proffered  just  at  the  moment  he  begins  to  legislate  about  the 
structure  of  the  universe  and  to  postulate  his  ‘absolute  space*  and  ‘abso¬ 
lute  time*  ‘without  reference  to  any  external  object  whatsoever*.  This, 
of  course,  was  structurally  unascertainable,  and  so  was  a  mere  figment  of 
his  imagination,  inside  of  his  skin,  and  may  become  a  pathological  seman¬ 
tic  projection  when  externalized  by  affective  pressure. 

That  we  must  all  start  with  undefined  terms,  representing  blind 
creeds  which  cannot  be  elucidated  further  at  a  given  moment,  may  fill  the 
hearts  of  some  metaphysicians  with  joy.  ‘Here*,  they  might  say,  ‘we 
have  the  goods  on  the  scientists ;  they  criticize  us  and  reject  our  theories, 
and  yet  they  admit  that  they  also  must  start  with  blind  creeds.  Now  we 
have  full  justification  for  assuming  whatever  we  want  to.’  But  this  joy 
would  be  short-lived  for  any  reasonably  sane  individual.  In  mathematics, 
we  deliberately  assume  the  minimum,  and  not  the  maximum,  as  in  meta¬ 
physics.  The  undefined  terms  selected  for  use  are  the  simplest  of  our 
experience;  for  instance,  ‘order*  (betweenness).  Also,  in  experimental 
sciences,  we  assume  the  least  possible.  We  demand  from  a  scientific 
theory,  according  to  the  standards  of  1933,  that  it  should  account  for  all 
relevant  facts  known  in  1933  and  should  serve  as  a  basis  for  the  predic¬ 
tion  of  new  facts,  which  can  be  checked  by  new  experiments.  If  meta¬ 
physicians  and  ‘philosophers*  would  comply  with  such  scientific  standards, 
their  theories  would  be  scientific.  But  their  old  theories  would  have  to 
be  abandoned  and  their  new  theories  would  become  branches  of  science. 
Under  such  structural  circumstances,  there  is  no  possibility  of  going 
outside  of  science,  as  we  can  enlarge  the  bounds  of  science  without 
known  limits,  in  search  for  structure. 

It  must  be  pointed  out  that  no  set  of  undefined  terms  is  ultimate. 
A  set  remains  undefined  only  until  some  genius  points  out  simpler  and 

ON  ORDER 

more  general  or  structurally  more  satisfactory  undefined  terms,  or  can 
reduce  the  number  of  such  terms.  Which  set  we  accept  is  determined, 
in  the  main,  by  pragmatic,  practical,  and  structural  reasons.  Out  of  two 
systems  which  have  many  characteristics  of  usefulness . ,  in  common,  we 
would  and  should  select  the  one  which  assumes  least,  is  the  simplest, 
and  carries  the  furthest.  Such  changes  from  one  set  to  another,  when 
scientific,  are  usually  epoch-making,  as  exemplified  in  mathematics. 

It  is  important  to  realize  that  this  semantic  attitude  signalizes  a  new 
epoch  in  the  development  of  science.  In  scientific  literature  of  the  old 
days,  we  had  a  habit  of  demanding,  ‘define  your  terms’.  The  new  1933 
standards  of  science  really  should  be,  ( state  your  undefined  terms'.  In 
other  words,  ‘lay  on  the  table  your  metaphysics,  your  assumed  structure, 
and  then  only  proceed  to  define  your  terms  in  terms  of  these  undefined 
terms'.  This  has  been  done  completely,  or  approximately  so,  only  in 
mathematics.  Yet,  probably  no  one  will  deny  that  the  new  requirements 
of  science  (1933),  no  matter  how  laborious,  are  really  desirable,  and 
constitute  an  advance  in  method,  in  accordance  with  the  structure  of 
human  knowledge. 

In  the  present  work,  this  method  will  be  employed  practically  all 
through.  Of  course,  names  for  objects  may  be  accepted  without  enquiry. 
So  we  have  already  a  large  vocabulary  at  our  disposal.  But  names  alone 
do  not  give  propositions.  We  need  relatipn-words,  and  it  is  here  where 
our  undefined  terms  become  important.  Up  to  this  stage  of  the  present 
work,  I  have  accepted,  without  over-full  explanation,  the  vocabularies 
made  by  the  linguists  of  exact  science,  whom  we  usually  call  mathema¬ 
ticians.  There  is  an  enormous  benefit  in  doing  so,  because,  no  matter 
how  imperfect  the  mathematical  vocabulary  may  be,  it  is  an  extensive 
and  developed  linguistic  system  of  similar  structure  to  the  world  around 
us  and  to  our  nervous  system  1933.  (See  Part  V.) 

Some  of  the  most  important  undefined  terms  which  play  a  marked 
role  in  this  work  are  'order*  (in  the  sense  explained),  ‘relation*,  and 
‘difference*,  although  we  could  define  relation  in  terms  of  multi¬ 
dimensional  order.  There  is  a  remarkable  structural  characteristic  of 
these  terms ;  namely,  that  they  are  non-el ,  and  that  they  apply  to  'senses* 
as  well  as  to  ‘mind*.  It  is,  perhaps,  well  to  suggest  that,  in  future  works, 
the  terms  selected  should  be  of  the  non-el  type.  Since  these  terms  apply 
equally  to  'senses*  and  to  ‘mind*,  we  see  that  in  such  terms  we  may 
attempt  to  give  a  ‘coherent*  account  of  what  we  experience.  The  expres¬ 
sion  ‘coherent*  implies  ‘mind*,  and  ‘experience*  implies  ‘senses*.  It  is 
amusing  to  watch  this  peculiar  circularity  of  human  knowledge,  many 
instances  of  which  will  appear  later  on.  Thus,  there  was  great  difficulty 

156  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANCUAGFS 

in  expressing  organism-as-a-whole  notions;  we  had  to  grope  about  in 
establishing  the  beginnings  of  a  suitable  vocabulary  before  we  could 
approach  problems  which  were  antecedent  in  order. 

It  is  necessary  to  notice  a  rather  curious  structural  similarity 
between  the  R  and  A  systems.  In  both  cases,  we  deal  with  certain  veloci¬ 
ties  about  which  we  know  positively  that  they  are  Unite .  The  velocity  of 
light  in  the  ALsystem  was  assumed  to  be  infinite,  although  we  know  it 
is  not  so,  and  so  ‘simultaneity’  had  absolute  meaning.  The  R  systems 
introduced  the  finite  velocity  of  light  by  ordering  events,  which  happens 
to  be  true  to  facts,  and  thus  ‘simultaneity’  lost  its  absolute  character. 
Likewise  in  the  ^-system  and  language,  the  velocity  of  nervous  impulses 
was  assumed  to  be  infinite,  to  spread  ‘instantaneously’.  And  so  we  had 
most  perplexing  ‘philosophical’  rigmaroles  about  ‘emotions',  ‘intellect’., 
taken  as  independent  separate  entities.  When  we  introduce  explicitly  the 
finite  velocity  of  nervous  impulses  (on  the  average,  120  metres  per  sec¬ 
ond  in  the  human  nerves),  we  are  able  to  reach  a  perfectly  clear  under¬ 
standing,  in  terms  of  order,  of  the  spread  of  impulses.  Some  ‘infinite 
velocity’  does  not  involve  order.  Conversely,  by  considering  the  order 
of  events,  we  introduce  finite  velocities.  We  shall  see  later  that  ‘infinite 
velocity’  is  meaningless  and  so  all  actual  happenings  can  be  ordered.  The 
above  is  an  important  factor  in  our  s.r . 

Let  us  give  a  rough  example.  Assume  that  Smith  has  had  a  bad 
dinner.  Some  nervous  impulse,  originating  from  the  bad  dinner,  starts 
going.  At  this  stage,  we  may  call  it  an  ‘undifferentiated’  nervous  impulse. 
It  travels  with  finite  velocity,  reaches  the  brain-stem  and  the  approxi¬ 
mately  central  part  of  his  brain,  which  we  call  the  thalamus ;  is  affected 
by  them  and  is  no  longer  ‘undifferentiated’  but  becomes,  let  us  say, 
‘affective’.  In  the  cortex,  it  is  affected  again  by  the  lessons  of  past 
experiences.  It  returns  again  to  the  lower  centres  and  becomes,  let  us 
say,  ‘emotion’ ;  and  then  anything  might  happen,  from  sudden  death  to  a 
glorious  poem. 

The  reader  must  be  warned  that  this  example  is  rough  and  over¬ 
simplified.  Impulses  are  reinforced  and  ‘inhibited’  from  a  complex  chain 
of  nervous  interconnections.  But  what  I  wish  to  show  by  this  example, 
is  that,  by  accepting  the  finite  velocity  of  nerve  currents,  in  terms  of 
order,  we  can  build  up  a  definite  vocabulary  to  deal,  not  only  with  the 
‘organism-as-a-whole’,  but  also  with  the  different  stages  of  the  process. 
This  is  important  because,  without  some  such  ordinal  scheme,  it  is 
structurally  impossible  to  evade  enormous  verbal  and  semantic  difficul¬ 
ties  which  lead  to  great  confusion. 

ON  OKI  >KK 

In  the  analysis  of  the  above  example,  only  the  structural  and 
methodological  aspects  are  emphasized.  No  attempt  is  made  to  legislate 
for  neurologists  or  to  instruct  them  how  they  should  define  and  use 
their  terms. 

Section  B.  Order  and  the  nervous  system . 

We  know  that,  structurally,  not  all  parts  of  the  nervous  system  are 
of  equal  phylogenetic  age.  The  ventral  part  of  the  brain,  the  thalamus 
(in  the  rough),  which  is  of  most  interest  in  this  connection,  is  older 
than  the  cerebral  cortex.  By  the  term  ‘thalamus’  I  denote  all  the  sub¬ 
divisions  and  most  important  appendages  which  we  need  not  mention 
by  their  technical  names.  In  man,  both  the  thalamus  and  the  cerebral 
cortex  are  much  enlarged  and  have  a  complex  structural  cyclic  inter¬ 
connection.  The  cerebral  cortex  is  a  term  applied  to  a  superficial  layer 
of  grey  nervous  tissue  covering  the  cerebral  hemispheres.  It  is  called 
(lie  ‘new  brain*  by  Edinger.  The  higher  correlation  centres  in  the  cere¬ 
bral  hemispheres  can  act  only  through  the  agency  of  the  lower  centres, 

I  he  brain-stem,  and  the  thalamus.  In  other  words,  the  cerebral  cortex, 
the  functioning  of  which  is  connected  chiefly  with  the  higher  associa¬ 
tions,  is  of  such  structure  that  no  nervous  impulse  can  enter  it  without 
first  passing  through  the  lower  centres  of  the  ventral  parts  of  the  brain 
and  brain-stem. 

In  the  lower  vertebrates,  which  lack  the  cerebral  cortex,  the  sub¬ 
cortical  mechanisms  are  adequate  for  all  simple  exigencies  of  life  and 
simple  association  processes,  these  sub-cortical  mechanisms  being  older 
phylogenetically  than  the  cerebral  cortex,  yet  younger  than  some  still 
mure  ventral  parts. 

The  brush-like  connections  between  the  nerves  are  called  synapses, 
and  although  a  nerve-fibre  seems  to  be  capable  of  transmitting  nerve 
impulses  in  both  directions,  the  nervous  impulse  can  seemingly  pass 
the  synapse  in  only  one  direction;  so  a  nervous  polarity  is  established 
whenever  synapses  are  present.1 

The  following  diagram  and  explanations  are  taken  from  Professor 
Herrick’s  Introduction  to  Neurology,  pp.  60,  61,  62,  63,  69,  70.  In  the 
quotations  I  retain  the  spelling  but  change  Herrick’s  Fig.  18  to  my  Fig.  1 ; 
all  but  one  word  of  the  italics  are  mine* 

♦I  quote  here  from  the  Second  Edition  of  the  Introduction  to  Neurology  an 
account  of  the  classical  theory  of  reflex  circuits  which  is  quite  satisfactory  for  my 
purpose.  In  his  later  work  (see  my  bibliography),  Professor  Herrick  forcibly 
points  out  the  limitations  of  the  reflex  theories  as  partial  patterns,  as  opposed  to  the 
activity  of  the  organism-as-a-whole.  In  the  Fifth  Edition  (1931),  the  chapter  on 
reflex  circuits  has  been  entirely  rewritten,  and  the  non-el  attitude  is  expressed  very 
dearly.  I  am  much  indebted  to  Professor  Herrick  for  drawing  my  attention  to 
this  rewritten  chapter. 

158  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

)> - 

n 

fti 

Ftt 

C 

FCP 

IS 

Diagrams  representing  the  relations  of  neurons  in  five  types  of  reflex  arcs:  A, 
simple  reflex  arc ;  B,  chain  reflex ;  C,  a  complex  system  illustrating  allied  and  an* 
tagonistic  reflexes  and  physiological  resolution;  D,  a  complete  system  illustrating 
allied  and  antagonistic  reflexes  with  a  final  common  path;  E,  a  complex  system 
illustrating  the  mechanism  of  physiological  association  A,A ,  association  neurons; 
C,C\C",Clf  and  C2,  centres  (adjustors)  ;  E,E'fE",  El,  and  E2,  effectors ;  FCPt  final 
common  path ;  R,R\R",Rlt  and  R2,  receptors. 

'The  structure  of  the  simple  reflex  circuit  is  diagrammatically  illus¬ 
trated  in  Fig.  1,  A.  The  receptor  ( R )  may  be  a  simple  terminal  expansion 
of  the  sensory  nerve-fiber  or  a  very  complex  sense  organ.  The  effec¬ 
tor  (E)  may  be  a  muscle  or  a  gland.  The  cell  body  of  the  afferent  neuron 
(1)  may  lie  within  the  center  (C)  or  outside,  as  in  the  diagram.  ...  A 
simple  reflex  act  involving  the  use  of  so  elementary  a  mechanism  as  has 
just  been  described  is  probably  never  performed  by  an  adult  vertebrate. 
The  nervous  impulse  somewhere  in  its  course  always  comes  into  rela¬ 
tion  with  other  reflex  paths,  and  in  this  way  complications  in  the 
response  are  introduced.  . .  . 

'Separate  reflex  circuits  may  be  so  compounded  as  to  give  the 
so-called  chain  reflex  (Fig.  1,  B).  Here  the  response  of  the  first  reflex 
serves  as  the  stimulus  for  the  second,  and  so  on  in  series.  The  units  of 

ON  ORDER 

these  chain  reflexes  are  usually  not  simple  reflexes  as  diagrammed,  but 
t  omplex  elements  of  the  types  next  to  be  described.  .  .  .  The  chain  reflex 
...  is  a  very  common  and  a  very  important  type.  Most  of  the  ordinary 
acts  in  the  routine  of  daily  life  employ  it  in  one  form  or  another,  the 
completion  of  one  stage  of  the  process  serving  as  the  stimulus  for  the 
initiation  of  the  next .  .  .  . 

'Figure  1,  C  illustrates  another  method  of  compounding  reflexes  so 
that  the  stimulation  of  a  single  sense  organ  may  excite  either  or  both 
of  two  responses.  If  the  two  effectors,  £1  and  £2,  can  cooperate  in  the 
|)«rformance  of  an  adaptive  response,  the  case  is  similar  to  that  of 
Fig.  1,  A,  with  the  possibility  of  a  more  complex  type  of  reaction.  This 
is  an  allied  reflex.  If,  however,  the  two  effectors  produce  antagonistic 
movements,  so  that  both  cannot  act  at  the  same  time,  the  result  is  a 
physiological  dilemma.  Either  no  reaction  at  all  results,  or  there  is  a 
sort  of  physiological  resolution  (sometimes  called  physiological  choice), 
one  motor  pathway  being  taken  to  the  exclusion  of  the  other.  Which 
path  will  be  chosen  in  a  given  case  may  be  determined  by  the  physio¬ 
logical  state  of  the  organs.  If,  for  instance,  one  motor  system,  £2,  is 
greatly  fatigued  and  the  other  rested,  the  threshold  of  £2  will  be  raised 
and  the  motor  discharge  will  pass  to  £1. 

'Figure  1,  D  illustrates  the  converse  case,  where  two  receptors 
discharge  into  a  single  center,  which,  in  turn,  by  means  of  a  final  com¬ 
mon  path  ( FCP )  excites  a  single  effector  (£).  If  the  two  receptors 
upon  stimulation  normally  call  forth  the  same  response,  they  will 
reinforce  each  other  if  simultaneously  stimulated,  the  response  will  be 
strengthened,  and  we  have  another  type  of  allied  reflex.  But  there  are 
cases  in  which  the  stimulation  of  £1  and  £2  (Fig.  1,  D)  would  naturally 
call  forth  antagonistic  reflexes.  Here,  if  they  are  simultaneously  stimu¬ 
lated,  a  physiological  dilemma  will  again  arise  which  can  be  resolved 
only  by  one  or  the  other  afferent  system  getting  control  of  the  final 
common  path. 

‘Figure  1,  E  illustrates  still  another  form  of  combination  of 
reflexes.  Here  there  are  connecting  tracts  (A,  A)  between  the  two  cen¬ 
ters  so  arranged  that  stimulation  of  either  of  the  two  receptors 
(£1  and  £2)  may  call  forth  a  response  in  either  one  of  two  effectors 
(£1  and  £2).  These  responses  may  be  allied  or  antagonistic,  and  much 
more  complicated  reflexes  are  here  possible  than  in  any  of  the  preceding 
cases.  .  .  . 

'It  must  be  kept  in  mind  that  in  higher  vertebrates  all  parts  of  the 
nervous  system  are  bound  together  by  connecting  tracts  (internuncial 
pathways) ....  These  manifold  connections  are  so  elaborate  that  every 

160  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

part  of  the  nervous  system  is  in  nervous  connection  with  every  other 
part,  directly  or  indirectly.  This  is  illustrated  by  the  way  in  which  the 
digestive  functions  (which  normally  are  quite  autonomous,  the  nervous 
control  not  going  beyond  the  sympathetic  system,  .  .  .  )  may  be  dis¬ 
turbed  by  mental  processes  whose  primary  seat  may  be  in  the  association 
centers  of  the  cerebral  cortex;  and  also  by  the  way  in  which  strychnin- 
poisoning  seems  to  lower  the  neural  resistance  everywhere,  so  that  a  very 
slight  stimulus  may  serve  to  throw  the  whole  body  into  convulsions.  .  .  . 

'Our  picture  of  the  reflex  act  in  a  higher  animal  will,  then,  include 
a  view  of  the  whole  nervous  system  in  a  state  of  neural  tension.  The 
stimulus  disturbs  the  equilibrium  at  a  definite  point  (the  receptor) ,  and 
the  wave  of  nervous  discharge  thus  set  up  irradiates  through  the  complex 
lines  determined  by  the  neural  connections  of  the  receptor.  If  the  stimu¬ 
lus  is  weak  and  the  reflex  path  is  simple  and  well  insulated,  a  simple 
response  may  follow  immediately.  Under  other  conditions  the  nervous 
discharge  may  be  inhibited  before  it  reaches  any  effector,  or  it  may 
irradiate  widely,  producing  a  very  complex  reflex  pattern.  .  .  . 

The  mechanism  of  the  reflex  should  not  be  regarded  as  an  open 
channel  through  which  energy  admitted  at  the  receptive  end-organ  is 
transmitted  to  be  discharged  into  the  effector  organ.  It  is  rather  a 
complex  apparatus,  containing  reserves  of  potential  energy  which  can  be 
released  upon  the  application  of  an  adequate  stimulus  in  accordance  with 
a  pattern  determined  by  the  inherent  structure  of  the  apparatus  itself. 
In  other  words,  the  nervous  discharge  [italics  of  Professor  Herrick]  is 
not  a  mere  transmission  of  the  energy  of  the  stimulus,  but  it  implies 
active  consumption  of  material  and  release  of  energy  ( metabolism ) 
within  both  the  nerve  centers  and  the  nerve-fibers.  The  energy  acting 
upon  the  effector  organ  may,  therefore,  be  different  in  both  kind  and 
amount  from  that  applied  to  the  receptive  end-organ.  The  response 
likewise  involves  the  liberation  of  the  latent  energy  of  the  effector 
{muscle  or  gland),  the  nervous  impulse  serving  merely  to  release  the 
trigger  which  discharges  this  reserve  energy/ 

It  is  necessary  to  warn  the  reader  that  the  human  nervous  system  is 
structurally  of  inconceivable  complexity.  It  is  estimated  that  there  are  in 
the  human  brain  about  twelve  thousand  millions  of  nerve  cells  or  neu¬ 
rons,  and  more  than  half  of  these  afe  in  the  cerebral  cortex.  Most  prob¬ 
ably,  the  majority  of  the  neurons  of  the  cerebral  cortex  are  directly  or 
indirectly  connected  with  every  cortical  field.  Were  we  to  consider  a  mil¬ 
lion  cortical  nerve  cells  connected  one  with  another  in  groups  of  only 
two  neurons  each,  and  compute  the  possible  combinations,  we  would  find 
the  number  of  possible  interneuronic  connection-patterns  to  be  repre- 

ON  ORDER 

scnted  by  102-™'000.  What  such  a  number  is  like  is  hardly  possible 
to  imagine.  For  comparison,  it  may  be  said  that  probably  the  whole 
visible  sidereal  universe  does  not  contain  more  than  1066  atoms ! 2 

Our  present  knowledge  of  the  nervous  system  is  limited  as  regards 
its  complexities  and  possibilities,  but  we  know  many  structural  facts 
which  seem  to  be  well  established.  One  of  these  is  that  the  human 
nervous  system  is  more  complex  than  that  of  any  animal.  Another  is 
that  the  human  cortex  is  of  later  origin  than,  and  in  a  way  an  outgrowth 
from,  the  more  central  parts  of  the  brain  (which  establishes  a  structure 
of  levels) .  A  third  is  that  the  interconnection  of  the  parts  of  the  ner¬ 
vous  system  is  cyclic.  A  fourth  is  that  the  velocity  of  nerve  currents  is 
Unite .  The  last  fact  is  of  serious  structural  importance,  and,  as  a  rule, 
disregarded. 

Section  C.  Structure ,  relations ,  and  multi-dimensional  order . 

In  such  an  ordered  cyclic  chain,  the  nerve  impulses  reach  and  tra¬ 
verse  the  different  levels  with  Unite  velocity  and  so,  in  each  case,  in  a 
definite  order .  ‘Intelligence1  becomes  a  manifestation  of  life  of  the 
organism-as-a-whole,  structurally  impossible  in  some  fictitious  ‘isolation'. 
To  ‘be*  means  to  be  related.  To  be  related  involves  multi-dimensional 
order  and  results  in  structure . 

‘Survival’,  ‘adaptation’,  ‘response’,  ‘habit  formation’,  ‘orientation’, 
‘learning’,  ‘selection’,  ‘evaluation’,  ‘intelligence’,  ‘semantic  reactions’,  and 
all  similar  terms  involve  structurally  an  ordered,  interrelated  structural 
complex  in  which  and  by  which  we  live  and  function.  To  ‘comprehend’, 
to  ‘understand’,  to  ‘know’,  to  be  ‘intelligent’. ,  in  the  pre-human  as  well  as 
the  human  way,  means  the  most  useful  survival  adjustment  to  such  an 
ordered,  interrelated  structure  as  the  world  and  ourselves. 

In  this  vocabulary,  ‘structure’  is  the  highest  abstraction,  as  it  involves 
a  whole,  taken  as-a-whoie,  made  up  of  interrelated  parts ,  the  relations  of 
which  can  be  defined  in  still  simpler  terms  of  order.  ‘Knowing*,  in  its 
broadest  as  well  as  in  its  narrow  human  sense,  is  conditioned  by  struc¬ 
ture,  and  so  consists  of  structural  knowings.  All  empirical  structures 
involve  relations,  and  the  last  depend  on  multi -dimensional  order.  A 
language  of  order ,  therefore,  is  the  simplest  form  of  language,  yet  in 
structure  it  is  similar  to  the  structure  of  the  world  and  ourselves.  Such 
a  language  is  bound  to  be  useful  for  adaptation  and,  therefore,  sanity ;  it 
results  in  the  understanding  of  the  structural,  relational,  multi-dimen¬ 
sional  order  in  the  environment  on  all  levels. 

We  must  stress  the  structural  fact  that  the  introduction  of  order  as 
a  fundamental  term  abolishes  some  fanciful  and  semantically  very  harm- 

162  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

ful  ‘infinities*.  If  an  impulse  could  travel  in  ‘no  time*  or  with  ‘infinite 
velocity*,  which  is  a  structural  impossibility  in  this  world,  such  an  impulse 
would  reach  different  places  ‘instantaneously*,  and  so  there  would  be  no 
order  involved.  But,  as  soon  as  the  actual  order  in  which  impulses  reach 
their  destination  is  found,  ‘infinite  velocities*  are  abolished.  We  shall 
show  later  that  ‘infinite  velocity*  is  a  meaningless  noise ;  here  we  stress 
only  the  point  that  it  is  a  structural  impossibility,  as  structure  involves 
relations  and  orders,  and  order  could  not  exist  in  a  world  where  'infinite 
velocities*  were  possible. 

Conversely,  if  in  our  analysis  we  disregard  order,  we  are  bound  to 
disregard  relations  and  structure  and  to  introduce,  by  necessity,  some 
fanciful  ‘infinite  velocities*.  Any  one  who  treats  ‘mind*  in  ‘isolation* 
makes  a  structurally  false  assumption,  and,  by  necessity,  unconsciously 
ascribes  some  meaningless  ‘infinite  velocity’  to  the  nerve  currents. 

We  have  dwelt  upon  this  subject  at  such  length  because  of  its  gen¬ 
eral  structural  and  semantic  importance.  The  first  step  towards  under¬ 
standing  the  theory  of  Einstein  is  to  be  entirely  convinced  on  the  above 
points.  Newton’s  disregard  of  order  introduced  an  unconscious  false  to 
facts  assumption  of  the  ‘infinite  velocity*  of  light,  which  fatalistically 
leads  to  an  objectification  called  ‘absolute  time’,  ‘absolute  simultaneity*, 
and  so  introduces  a  terminology  of  inappropriate  structure.  A  similar 
remark  applies  to  arguments  about  ‘mind*  in  an  objectified,  ‘isolated*  way. 
These  arguments  disregard  the  order  in  which  the  nervous  impulses 
spread  and  so,  by  necessity,  introduce  a  silent  false  to  facts  assumption 
of  the  ‘infinite  velocity’  of  nerve  currents. 

On  empirical  structural  grounds,  we  know  neurological  and  general 
facts  on  two  levels.  ( 1 )  Macroscopically,  we  have  a  structure  in  levels, 
stratified,  so  to  say,  with  complexities  arising  from  the  general  colloidal 
physico-chemical  structure  of  the  organism-as-a- whole.  (2)  The  general 
sub-microscopic,  atomic,  and  sub-atomic  structure  of  all  materials  simply 
gives  us  the  persistence  of  the  macroscopic  characteristics  as  the  relative 
invariance  of  function ,  due  to  dynamic  equilibrium,  and  ultimately 
reflected  and  conditioned  by  this  sub-microscopic  structure  of  all  mate¬ 
rials.  Under  such  actual  structural  conditions,  terms  like  ‘substance*, 
‘material’*,  and  ‘function*,  ‘energy*,  ‘action*.,  become  interconnected— 
largely  a  problem  of  preference  or  necessity  of  selecting  the  level  with 
which  we  want  to  deal. 

On  sub-microscopic  levels,  ‘iron’,  or  anything  else,  means  only  a 
persistence  for  a  limited  ‘time*  of  certain  gross  characteristics,  represent* 
ing  a  process  (structurally  a  four-dimensional  notion  involving  ‘time’) 
which  becomes  a  question  of  structure.  With  the  1933  known  unit  of 

ON  ORDER 

the  world  called  an  ‘electron’,  which  appears  as  an  4 energy*  factor,  the 
relative  persistence  or  invariance  of  dynamic  sub-microscopic  structure 
gives  us,  on  macroscopic  levels,  an  average,  or  statistical,  persistence  of 
gross  macroscopic  characteristics,  which  we  label  ‘iron’. 

The  above  should  be  thoroughly  understood  and  digested.  As  a  rule, 
we  ail  identify  orders  and  levels  of  abstractions  and  so  have  difficulty  in 
keeping  them  separate  verbally  (and,  therefore,  ‘conceptually’).  Thor¬ 
ough  structural  understanding  helps  us  greatly  to  acquire  these  new  and 
beneficial  s.r . 

Under  such  structural  empirical  conditions,  a  language  of  order, 
which  implies  relations  and  structure,  as  enlarged  to  the  order  of  abstrac¬ 
tions  or  level  of  consideration,  largely  volitional,  becomes  the  only 
language  which,  in  structure ,  is  similar  to  the  structure  of  the  world, 
ourselves  included,  and  so,  of  necessity,  will  afford  the  maximum  of 
semantic  benefits. 

It  should  be  understood  that,  on  structural  grounds,  terms  like 
‘substance’  and  ‘function’  become,  in  1933,  perfectly  interchangeable , 
depending  on  the  order  of  abstraction.  ‘Substance’,  for  instance,  on  the 
macroscopic  level  becomes  ‘invariance  of  function’  on  the  sub-microscopic 
level.  It  follows  that  what  we  know  about  the  macroscopic  (‘anatomical  ) 
structure  can  be  quite  legitimately  enlarged  by  what  we  know  of  function 
(structure  on  different  levels).  This  interchangeability  and  complemen¬ 
tary  value  of  evidence  is  conditioned  by  structural  considerations,  and 
the  fact  that  ‘structure’  is  multiordinal.  On  gross  anatomical  grounds, 
we  know  a  great  deal  about  this  structure  of  the  nervous  system.  Because 
of  experimental  difficulties,  very  little  is  known  of  the  structural  sub- 
microscopic  happenings,  yet  we  can  speak  about  them  with  benefit  in 
functional  terms  ;  as,  for  instance,  of  ‘activation  ,  facilitation  ,  resistance  , 
‘psychogenetic  effects’,  ‘diffusion’,  ‘permeability’,  the  older  ‘inhibition’,. 

In  such  a  cyclic  chain  as  the  nervous  system,  there  is,  as  far  as 
energy  is  concerned,  no  last  stage  of  the  process.  If  there  is  no  motor 
reaction  or  other  reflex,  then  there  is  a  semantic  or  associative  reaction 
with  ‘inhibitory’  or  activating  consequences,  which  are  functionally 
equivalent  to  a  motor  reaction.  At  each  stage,  a  ‘terminal  receptor  is  a 
reacting  organ  in  the  chain.3 

We  know  quite  well  from  psychiatry  how  nervous  energy  may 
deviate  from  constructive  and  useful  channels  into  destructive  and  harm¬ 
ful  channels.  The  energy  is  not  lost,  but  misdirected  or  misapplied.  For 
instance,  an  ‘emotional’  shock  may  make  some  people  release  their 
energy  into  useful  channels,  such  as  concentrated  efforts  in  some  direc¬ 
tion,  which  would  have  been  impossible  without  this  shock;  but,  in 

164  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

others,  an  ‘emotional'  shock  leads  to  the  building  up  of  morbid  ‘mental’ 
or  physical  symptoms. 

Since  the  nervous  structure  is  cyclic  in  most  of  its  parts,  as  well  as 
as-a- whole,  and  since  these  cycles  are  directly  or  indirectly  interconnected, 
mutual  interaction  of  those  cycles  may  produce  most  elaborate  behaviour 
patterns,  which  may  be  spoken  of,  in  their  manifestations,  in  terms  of 
order .  As  each  more  important  nerve  centre  has  incoming  and  outgoing 
nerve-fibres,  the  activation,  or  reinforcement,  or  diffusion  of  nerve  cur¬ 
rents  may  sometimes  manifest  itself  in  our  s.r  as  reversal  of  order  in 
some  aspects.  Neurologically,  considered  on  the  sub-microscopic  level, 
it  would  only  be  a  case  of  activation,  or  of  diffusion,  or  of  ‘inhibition'. , 
probably  never  a  problem  of  reversed  order  in  the  actual  nerve  currents. 

The  semantic  manifestations  of  order  and  reversed  order  are  of 
crucial  importance,  for  we  are  able  to  train  the  individual  to  different 
orders  or  reversals  of  orders.  This  procedure  neurologically  involves 
activations,  enforcements,  diffusions,  ‘inhibitions',  resistances,  and  all 
the  other  types  of  nervous  activities,  which  without  the  formulation  of 
psychophysiology  were  all  most  inaccessible  to  direct  training.  The 
structural  fact  that  order  and  reversal  of  order  in  semantic  manifesta¬ 
tion,  which  all  are  on  the  un-speakable  objective  level,  have  such  intimate 
and  profound  connection  with  fundamental  nervous  processes,  such  as 
activation,  enforcement,  diffusion,  permeability,  ‘inhibition',  resistance . , 
gives  us  tremendous  new  powers  of  an  educational  character  in  building 
up  sanity,  and  supplies  methods  and  means  to  affect,  direct,  and  train 
nervous  activities  and  s.r,  which  we  were  not  able  formerly  to  train 
psychophysiologically.  Perhaps  one  of  the  main  values  of  the  present 
work  is  the  discovery  of  physiological  means,  to  be  given  presently,  for 
training  the  human  nervous  system  in  ‘sanity'. 

The  reader  should  be  aware,  when  we  speak  of  order  and  reversal 
of  order,  that  we  mean  the  order  and  reversal  of  order  in  the  un-speak- 
able  s.r;  but  the  neurological  mechanism  is  of  a  different  character,  as 
already  explained.  Our  analysis  of  the  simple  semantic  manifestations 
involve  evaluation  and  so  order,  permitting  a  most  complex  re-education 
and  re-training  of  the  nervous  system,  which  were  entirely  beyond  our 
reach  with  the  older  methods. 

Experimental  evidence  seems  to  corroborate  what  has  been  sug¬ 
gested  here,  and  the  analysis,  in  terms  of  order,  seems  to  have  serious 
practical  neurological  significance,  owing  to  similarity  of  structure , 
resulting  in  evaluation ,  and  so  appropriate  s.r . 

For  our  analysis  in  terms  of  order,  we  start  with  the  simplest  imag¬ 
inable  nervous  cycle ;  but  it  must  be  explicitly  understood  that  such  simple 

ON  ORDER 

cycles  actually  never  exist,  and  that  our  diagrams  have  value  only  as 
picturing  the  cyclic  order ,  without  complications.  Let  us  repeat  that  the 
introduction  of  an  analysis  in  terms  of  order  or  reversal  of  order  in  the 
manifestation  involves,  under  educational  influence,  various  other  and 
different  actml  nervous  activities ,  a  class  of  activities  which  hitherto 
have  always  evaded  our  educational  influences.  For  structural  purpose, 
it  is  sufficient  to  make  use  of  the  distinction  between  lower  and  higher 
centres  (a  rough  and  ready  distinction)  and  to  consider  the  lower  centres 
generally  in  connection  with  the  thalamus  and  brain-stem  (perhaps  also 
other  sub-cortical  layers),  and  the  higher  centres  generally  in  connection 
with  the  cortex.  This  lack  of  precision  is  intentional,  for  we  need  only 
sufficient  structural  stratification  to  illustrate  order,  and  it  seems  advis¬ 
able  to  assume  only  the  well-established  minimum  of  structure. 

We  have  already  mentioned  the  absolute  individuality  of  the  organ¬ 
ism  and,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  of  everything  else  on  objective  levels.  The 
reader  need  have  no  metaphysical  shivers  about  such  extreme  individual¬ 
ity  on  the  un-speakable  levels.  In  our  human  economy,  we  need  both 
similarities  and  differences,  but  we  have  as  yet,  in  our  ^-system,  chiefly 
concentrated  our  attention  and  training  on  similarities,  disregarding  dif¬ 
ferences.  In  this  work,  we  start  structurally  closer  to  nature  with 
un-speakable  levels,  and  make  differences  fundamental,  similarities 
appearing  only  at  a  later  stage  (order)  as  a  result  of  higher  abstractions . 
In  simple  words,  we  obtain  similarities  by  disregarding  differences,  by 
a  process  of  abstracting.  In  a  world  of  only  absolute  differences,  with¬ 
out  similarities,  recognition,  and,  therefore,  ‘intelligence’,  would  be 
impossible. 

It  is  possible  to  demonstrate  how  ‘intelligence’  and  abstracting  both 
started  together  and  are  due  to  the  physico-chemical  structure  of  proto¬ 
plasm.  All  living  material,  usually  called  protoplasm,  has,  in  some 
degree,  the  nervous  functions  of  irritability,  conductivity,  integration , . 
It  is  obvious  that  a  stimulus  S  does  not  affect  the  little  piece  of  primitive 
protoplasm  A  ‘all  over  and  at  once’  (infinite  velocity),  but  that  it  affects 
it  first  in  a  definite  spot  B ,  that  the  wave  of  excitation  spreads,  with 
finite  velocity  and  usually  in  a  diminishing  gradient,  to  the  more  remote 
portions  of  A .  We  notice  also  that  the  effect  of  the  stimulus  S  on  A  is 
not  identical  with  the  stimulus  itself.  A  falling  stone  is  not  identical 
with  the  pain  we  feel  when  the  stone  falls  on  our  foot.  Neither  do  our 
feelings  furnish  a  full  report  as  to  the  characteristics  of  the  stone,  its 
internal  structure,  chemistry,.  So  we  see  that  the  bit  of  protoplasm  is 
affected  only  partially,  and  in  a  specific  way,  by  the  stimulus.  Under 
physico-chemical  conditions,  as  they  exist  in  life,  there  is  no  place  for  any 

166  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

‘all ness’.  In  life,  we  deal  structurally  only  with  ‘non-allness’ ;  and  so  the 
term,  ' abstracting  in  different  orders',  seems  to  be  structurally  and 
uniquely  appropriate  for  describing  the  effects  of  external  stimuli  on 
living  protoplasm.  ‘Intelligence’  of  any  kind  is  connected  with  the 
abstracting  (non-allness)  which  is  characteristic  of  all  protoplasmic 
response.  Similarities  are  perceived  only  as  differences  become  blurred, 
and,  therefore,  the  process  is  one  of  abstracting. 

The  important  novelty  in  my  treatment  is  in  the  structural  fact  that 
I  treat  the  term  ‘abstracting’  in  the  non-el  way.  We  find  that  all  living 
protoplasm  ‘abstracts’.  So  I  make  the  term  abstracting  fundamental,  and 
I  give  it  a  wide  range  of  meanings  to  correspond  to  the  facts  of  life  by 
introducing  abstractions  of  different  orders .  Such  a  treatment  has  great 
structural  advantages,  which  will  be  explained  in  Part  VII. 

As  our  main  interest  is  in  ‘Smith*’,  we  will  speak  mostly  of  him, 
although  the  language  we  use  is  structurally  appropriate  for  character¬ 
izing  all  life.  Abstracting’  becomes  now  a  physiological  term  with  struc¬ 
tural,  actional,  physico-chemical,  and  non-el  implications. 

Accidentally,  some  light  is  thus  thrown  on  the  problem  of  ‘evolution’. 
In  actual  objective  life,  each  new  cell  is  different  from  its  parent  cell,  and 
each  offspring  is  different  from  its  parents.  Similarities  appear  only  as 
a  result  of  the  action  of  our  nervous  system,  which  does  not  register 
absolute  differences.  Therefore,  we  register  similarities,  which  evaporate 
when  our  means  of  investigation  become  more  subtle.  Similarities  are 
read  into  nature  by  our  nervous  system,  and  so  are  structurally  less 
fundamental  than  differences.  Less  fundamental,  but  no  less  important, 
as  life  and  ‘intelligence’  would  be  totally  impossible  without  abstracting . 
It  becomes  clear  that  the  problem  which  has  so  excited  the  s.r  of  the 
people  of  the  United  States  of  America  and  added  so  much  to  the  merri¬ 
ment  of  mankind,  ‘Is  evolution  a  “fact”  or  a  “theory”?*,  is  simply  silly. 
Father  and  son  are  never  identical — that  surely  is  a  structural  ‘fact’ — so 
there  is  no  need  to  worry  about  still  higher  abstractions,  like  ‘man’  and 
‘monkey’.  That  the  fanatical  and  ignorant  attack  on  the  theory  of  evolu¬ 
tion  should  have  occurred  may  be  pathetic,  but  need  concern  us  little,  as 
such  ignorant  attacks  are  always  liable  to  occur.  But  that  biologists 
should  offer  ‘defences',  based  on  the  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions, 
and  that  philosophers  should  have  failed  to  see  this  simple  dependence 
is  rather  sad.  The  problems  of  ‘evolution’  are  verbal  and  have  nothing  to 
do  with  life  as  such,  which  is  made  up  all  through  of  different  individ¬ 
uals,  ‘similarity’  being  structurally  a  manufactured  article,  produced  by 
the  nervous  system  of  the  observer. 

ON  ORDER 

In  my  own  practice,  I  have  become  painfully  aware  of  a  similar 
discrepancy  in  the  learned  s.r  of  some  older  professors  of  biology,  who 
quite  often  try  to  inform  me  that  ‘Life  is  overlapping',  and  that  ‘no  sharp 
distinction  between  “man”  and  “animal”  can  be  made'.  They  forget 
or  do  not  know  that,  structurally,  actual  ‘life'  is  composed  of  absolute 
individuals,  each  one  unique  and  different  from  all  other  individuals. 
Each  individual  should  have  its  individual  name,  based  on  mathematical 
extensional  methods ;  for  instance,  xlt  x2f  x5,  ...  xn;  of  Smithi,  Smith, . , 
or  Fidoi,  Fido2 , .  ‘Man'  and  ‘animal’  are  only  labels  for  verbal  fictions 
and  are  not  labels  for  an  actual  living  individual.  It  is  obvious  that  as 
these  verbal  fictions,  ‘man’  and  ‘animal’,  are  not  the  living  individual, 
their  ‘overlapping’  or  ‘not  overlapping'  depends  only  on  our  ingenuity, 
our  power  of  observation  and  abstraction,  and  our  capacity  of  coining 
non-el  functional  definitions. 

Let  us  see  how  adaption  might  work  in  practice.  Let  us  consider 
two  or  three  caterpillars,  which  we  may  name  Cu  C2t  C3,  since  each  of 
them  is  an  absolute  individual  and  different  from  the  others.  Let  us 
assume  that  Ci  is  positively  heliotropic,  which  means  that  he  is  compelled 
to  go  toward  light ;  that  C2  is  negatively  heliotropic,  which  means  that 
he  would  tend  to  go  away  from  light;  and  that  C3  is  non-heliotropic, 
which  means  that  light  would  have  no  effect  on  him  of  a  directional  char¬ 
acter.  At  a  certain  age,  Cx  would  crawl  up  the  tree  near  which  he  was 
born  and  so  reach  the  leaves,  eat  them,  and,  after  eating  them,  would  be 
able  to  complete  his  development.  C2,  and  probably  C3,  would  die,  as 
they  would  not  crawl  up  the  tree  toward  sufficient  food.  Thus,  we  see 
that  among  the  indefinite  number  of  possible  individual  make-ups  of  C* 
(fc  —  1,  2,  3,  .  .  .  n),  each  one  being  different,  only  those  which  were 
positively  heliotropic  would  survive  under  the  conditions  of  this  earth, 
and  all  the  rest  would  die.  The  positively  heliotropic  would  propagate 
and  their  positive  heliotropism  might  be  perpetuated,  the  negatively 
heliotropic  and  non-heliotropic  becoming  extinct.  This  would  only  occur, 
however,  in  a  world  in  which  trees  have  roots  in  the  ground  and  leaves 
on  their  parts  toward  the  sun.  In  a  world  where  the  trees  grew  with  their 
roots  toward  the  sun  and  leaves  in  the  ground,  the  reverse  would  hap¬ 
pen;  namely,  the  negatively  heliotropic  and  non-heliotropic  would  sur¬ 
vive,  and  the  positively  heliotropic  would  die  out.  We  can  not  foretell 
whether,  in  such  a  world,  there  would  be  caterpillars;  so  this  is  an 
hypothetical  example. 

Experiments  made  with  such  caterpillars  have  Shown  that  the  posi¬ 
tively  heliotropic  ones  crawl  toward  the  sun,  even  upon  a  plant  which 
has  been  turned  over,  with  the  roots  toward  the  sun.  They  crawl  a  way 

168  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

from  food ,  and  die.  We  see  that  the  external  environmental  conditions 
determine  which  characteristics  survive,  and  so  we  reach  the  notion  of 
adjustment. 

The  practical  result  of  these  conditions  is  that  the  indefinite  numbei 
of  individual  variations,  although  they  undoubtedly  exist,  seldom  come 
to  our  attention,  as  those  variations  which  do  not  fit  their  environmental 
conditions  become  extinct ;  their  variations  do  not  become  hereditary,  and 
consequently  we  can  seldom  find  them  outside  of  a  laboratory. 

This  shows,  also,  the  permanent  connection  and  interdependence 
of  the  facts  of  nature.  The  structural  fact  that  our  trees  grow  with  their 
roots  in  the  ground  and  their  leaves  upward  is  not  an  independent  fact ; 
it  has  something  to  do  with  the  structure  of  the  world  and  the  position 
and  the  effect  of  the  sun , .  So  the  fact  that  we  have  positively  heliotropic 
caterpillars  of  a  special  kind,  and  not  negatively  heliotropic  ones,  has 
something  to  do  with  the  structure  of  the  rest  of  the  world. 

To  illustrate  this  interconnection  and  interdependence  of  nature  still 
more  clearly,  let  me  suggest  an  hypothetical  question.  How  would  condi¬ 
tions,  as  they  are  on  this  earth,  compare  with  those  which  would  obtain, 
if  it  were,  let  us  say,  one  mile  greater  in  diameter?  Some  try  to  guess 
the  answer ;  yet  this  question  cannot  be  answered  at  all.  The  diameter  of 
this  earth  is  strictly  dependent  on  all  the  structural  conditions  which  pre¬ 
vail  in  this  world.  Since  it  is  impossible  to  know  what  kind  of  a  universe 
it  would  be,  in  which  this  earth  could  be  different  from  what  we  know, 
it  is,  of  course,  equally  impossible  to  foresee  whether  on  such  a  fictitious 
earth,  in  such  a  fictitious  universe,  there  would  even  be  life  at  all. 
Because  the  structure  of  the  world  is  such  as  we  know  it,  our  sun,  our 
earth,  our  trees,  our  caterpillars,  and,  finally,  ourselves  have  their  struc¬ 
ture  and  characteristics.  We  do  not  need  to  enter  here  into  the  problems 
of  determinism  versus  indeterminism,  as  these  problems  are  purely  verbal, 
depending  on  our  orders  of  abstractions,  the  ‘logic'  we  accept,  and  so, 
finally,  on  our  pleasure,  as  is  explained  more  in  detail  later  on,  and  could 
not  be  solved  satisfactorily  in  an  A,  el  system,  with  its  two-valued  ‘logic*. 

According  to  the  evidence  at  hand  in  1933,  ‘Smith*'  appears  among 
the  latest  inhabitants  of  this  earth,  and  subject  to  the  general  test  of 
survival,  as  already  explained.  The  few  thousand  years  during  which 
there  had  been  any  ‘Smith*'  are  too  short  a  period  to  test,  with  any  certi¬ 
tude,  his  capacity  for  survival.  We  know  of  many  species  of  animals, 
and  also  races  of  man,  of  which  very  little  trace  has  been  left.  What  we 
know  about  their  history  is  mostly  through  a  few  fossils,  which  are  kept 
in  museums. 

ON  ORDER 

The  external  world  is  full  of  devastating  energies  and  of  stimuli  too 
strong  for  some  organisms  to  endure.  We  know  that  only  those  organ¬ 
isms  have  survived  which  could  successfully  either  protect  themselves 
from  over-stimulations  or  else  were  under  protective  circumstances.  If 
we  look  over  the  series  of  surviving  individuals,  paying  special  attention 
to  the  higher  animals  and  man,  we  find  that  the  nervous  system  has, 
besides  the  task  of  conducting  excitation.,  the  task  of  so-called  ‘inhibi¬ 
tion’.  Response  to  stimuli,  by  survival,  proved  its  usefulness.  But  to 
diminish  the  response  to  some  stimuli  or  avoid  stimuli,  proved  also  to  be 
useful,  again  by  survival.  It  is  known  that  the  upper  or  latest  layers  of 
the  nervous  system  are  mostly  such  protective  layers,  to  prevent  imme¬ 
diate  responses  to  stimulation.  With  the  development  of  the  nervous 
system  from  the  simplest  to  the  most  complex,  we  see  an  increase  in 
behaviour  of  a  modifiable  or  individually  adjustable  type.  In  terms  of 
order ,  and  using  the  old  language,  ‘senses’  came  first  in  order  and  ‘mind’ 
next,  in  all  their  forms  and  degrees. 

If  we  speak  in  neurological  terms,  we  may  say  that  the  present 
nervous  structure  is  such  that  the  entering  nerve  currents  have  a  natural 
direction,  established  by  survival ;  namely,  they  traverse  the  brain-stem 
and  the  thalamus  first,  the  sub-cortical  layers  next,  then  the  cerebral 
cortex,  and  return,  transformed,  by  various  paths.  Experience  and 
science  in  1933  are  showing  that  this  is  the  order  established  under  a 
heavy  toll  of  destruction  and  non-survival  in  a  system  of  adjustment,  and 
so  should  be  considered  the  ‘natural’  order,  because  of  its  survival  value. 

We  all  know  in  practice  about  a  ‘sensation’,  and  a  ‘mental  picture* 
or  ‘idea’.  As  ‘sensations’  were  often  very  deceptive  and,  therefore,  did 
not  always  lead  to  survival,  a  nervous  system  which  somehow  retained 
vestiges,  or  ‘memories’,  of  former  ‘sensations’  and  could  recombine 
them,  shift  them . ,  proved  of  higher  survival  value,  and  so  ‘intelligence’ 
evolved,  from  the  lowest  to  the  highest  degrees. 

Experience  and  experiments  show  that  the  natural  order  was  ‘sensa¬ 
tion’  first,  ‘idea’  next ;  the  ‘sensation’  being  an  abstraction  of  some  order, 
and  the  ‘idea’  already  an  abstraction  from  an  abstraction  or  an  abstrac¬ 
tion  of  higher  order. 

Experience  shows  again  that  among  humans ,  this  order  in  manifes¬ 
tations  is  sometimes  reversed;  namely,  that  some  individuals  have  ‘idea’ 
first ;  namely,  some  vestiges  of  memories,  and  ‘sensations’  next,  without 
any  external  reason  for  the  ‘sensations’.  Such  individuals  are  considered 
‘mentally’  ill ;  in  legal  terms,  they  are  called  ‘insane’.  They  ‘see’,  where 
there  is  nothing  to  see ;  they  ‘hear’,  where  there  is  nothing  to  hear ;  they 
are  paralysed,  where  there  is  no  reason  to  be  paralysed ;  they  have  pains, 

170  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

when  there  is  no  reason  to  have  pains,  and  so  on,  endlessly.  Their  sur¬ 
vival  value,  if  not  taken  care  of,  is  usually  nil.  This  reversal  of  order, 
but  in  a  mild  degree,  is  extremely  common  at  present  among  all  of  us 
and  underlies  mainly  all  human  misfortunes  and  un-sanity. 

This  reversal  of  order  in  its  mild  form  is  involved  in  identification 
or  the  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions ;  namely,  when  we  act  as  if  an 
‘idea’  were  an  ‘experience'  of  our  ‘senses',  thus  duplicating  in  a  mild 
form  the  mechanism  of  the  ‘mentally'  ill.  This  implies  nervous  disturb¬ 
ances,  since  we  violate  the  natural  ( survival )  order  of  the  activities  of  the 
nervous  system.  The  mechanism  of  projection  is  also  connected  with 
this  reversal  of  order .  This  reversal  transforms  the  external  world  into 
a  quite  different  and  fictitious  entity.  Both  ignorance  and  the  old  meta¬ 
physics  tend  to  produce  these  undesirable  nervous  effects  of  reversed 
order  and  so  non-survival  evaluation.  If  we  use  the  nervous  system  in  a 
way  which  is  against  its  survival  structure,  we  must  expect  non-survival. 
Human  history  is  short,  but  already  we  have  astonishing  records  of 
extinction. 

That  such  reversal  of  order  in  the  manifestations  of  the  functioning 
of  the  nervous  system  must  be  extremely  harmful,  becomes  evident  when 
we  consider  that  in  such  a  case  the  upper  layers  of  our  nervous  system 
(the  cortex)  not  only  do  not  protect  us  from  over-stimulation  originat¬ 
ing  in  the  external  world  and  inside  us,  but  actually  contribute  to  the 
over-stimulation  by  producing  fanciful,  yet  very  real,  irritants.  Experi¬ 
ments  on  some  patients  have  shown  how  they  benefit  physically  when 
their  internal  energy  is  liberated  from  fighting  phantoms  and  so  can  be 
redirected  to  fight  the  colloidal  disturbances.  Such  examples  could  be 
cited  endlessly  from  practically  every  field  of  medicine  and  life.  This 
problem  of  ‘reversal  of  order’  is  not  only  very  important  semantically, 
but  also  very  complex,  and  it  will  be  analysed  further  on. 

The  reader  should  not  miss  the  fact  that  an  analysis  in  terms  of 
order  throws  a  new  light  on  old  problems,  and  so  the  scientific  benefit  of 
the  use  of  such  a  term  is  shown.  But  this  is  not  all ;  the  use  of  the  term 
order  has  brought  us  to  the  point  where  we  can  see  far-reaching  prac¬ 
tical  applications  of  the  knowledge  we  already  possess,  and  of  which  we 
have  not  so  far  made  any  systematic  use. 

We  know  that  the  activity  of  the  nervous  system  is  facilitated  by 
repetition,  and  we  can  learn  useful  habits  as  easily  as  harmful.  In  the 
special  case  of  s.r  also  we  can  train  ourselves  either  way,  though  one  may 
have  useful  survival  value;  the  other  being  harmful,  with  no  survival 
value.  The  problem  is  again  one  of  order,  and,  among  others,  a  problem 
of  extension  and  intension,  as  has  already  been  mentioned  several  times. 

ON  ORDER 

Section  D.  Order  and  the  problems  of  extension  and  intension. 

The  problems  of  extension  and  intension  are  not  new,  but  have  been 
treated  as  yet  only  casually  by  ‘philosophers’,  ‘logicians’,  and  mathema¬ 
ticians,  and  it  has  not  been  suspected  what  profound,  far-reaching,  and 
important  structural  psycho-logical,  semantic  components  they  represent. 

At  this  point,  to  avoid  confusion,  a  warning  is  necessary.  The 
problems  with  which  we  are  dealing  have  never  been  analysed  from  the 
point  of  view  of  this  work ;  namely,  from  that  of  structure.  So,  naturally, 
all  that  has  been  accomplished  in  these  fields  is  over-simplified,  and 
leaves  out  vital  characteristics.  Discrepancies  have  arisen  between  the 
structure  of  the  old  verbiage  and  that  of  the  new.  Before  it  is  possible 
to  formulate  the  general  theory  of  this  work,  it  will  be  necessary  to  go 
ahead  in  spite  of  discrepancies,  and  then  to  formulate  the  general  theory 
and  show  how  these  discrepancies  had  a  perfectly  general  origin  in  the 
stratified— and,  therefore,  ordered — structure  of  human  knowledge.  The 
discrepancies  were  inherent  and  unavoidable  in  the  old  way,  but  are 
avoidable  in  the  new.  It  is  the  main  aim  of  the  present  theory  to  eluci¬ 
date  structural  issues  in  connection  with  s.r  and  many  problems  of 
human  and  scientific  conduct,  mathematics  and  insanity  included,  and,  in 
general,  with  all  known  problems  of  scientific  method  and  theory  of 
knowledge.  But  we  ought  not  to  be  surprised  if  such  a  pioneering 
enquiry  proves  to  need  many  corrections  and  elaborations  in  the  future. 
Psychiatrists  are  the  least  likely  to  disregard  the  problems  of  structure 
and  s.rt  since  their  science  is  young  and  still  flexible.  Besides,  the  psychia¬ 
trists  know  a  great  deal  about  ‘human  nature’  and  behaviour,  though  they 
are  handicapped  by  insufficient  knowledge  of  the  exact  sciences  and  the 
absence  of  A,  non-el  semantics.  The  opposite,  perhaps,  would  be  true 
about  mathematicians.  They  know  a  great  deal  about  how  to  play  with 
symbols.  Their  work  is  engrossing  and  exacting.  But  very  few  are 
capable  of  separating  themselves  enough  from  this  play  to  contemplate 
the  broader,  more  ‘human’,  aspects  of  their  own  science,  the  interplay 
of  symbols  in  language,  their  structure,  and  the  bearing  of  structure  on 
s.r  and  adaptation. 

Some  of  these  specialists  might  say  that  the  author  uses  their  terms 
in  a  sense  different  from  that  in  which  they  use  them,  and  that,  conse¬ 
quently,  from  their  point  of  view,  this  work  is  not  strictly  legitimate. 
However,  when  a  mathematician  lays  down  a  definition,  such  as  1+1=2, 
this  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  application  we  make  of  it  when  we  say 
that  one  penny  and  one  penny  make  two  pennies.  Neither  can  he  object 
when  we  add  one  gallon  (of  water)  to  one  gallon  (of  alcohol)  and  do 

172  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANOUAGKS 

not  obtain  two  gallons  (of  the  alcohol-water  mixture),  but  slightly  less, 
This  last  is  a  profound  experimental  fact,  intimately  connected  with  the 
structure  of  ‘matter’  and,  therefore,  of  the  world  around  us.  The  mathe¬ 
matician  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  fact  that  his  additive  definitions, 
important  as  they  are,  do  not  cover  the  facts  of  the  world  around  us, 
which  happens  not  to  be  additive  in  its  more  fundamental  aspects. 

Also,  the  mathematical  definition,  one  and  one  make  two,  is  not 
invalidated  by  such  non-additive  facts.  The  mathematician  does  not 
claim,  but  rather  disclaims,  content  in  its  formulae.  There  is  no  mention 
of  pennies  or  apples  or  gallons  of  alcohol , .  It  is  simply  a  definite  lan¬ 
guage  of  definitive  structure  for  talking  about  anything  which  can  be 
covered.  If  facts  cannot  be  covered  by  given  linguistic  forms  and 
methods,  new  forms,  new  structures,  new  methods  are  invented  or 
created  to  cover  the  structure  of  facts  in  nature. 

The  mathematician  created  such  a  different  language  long  ago.  He 
now  calls  his  additive  language  ‘linear’,  and  the  corresponding  equations 
are  of  ‘first  degree’.  He  calls  his  non-additive  language  ‘non-linear’  and 
the  equations  are  of  ‘higher  degrees’.  These  latter  equations  happen  to 
be  much  more  difficult  than  the  former  and  of  complex  structure,  so  that 
very  often  they  can  be  solved  only  by  approximation  to  linear  equations. 
Now,  without  anybody’s  fault,  the  world  around  us  does  not  happen  to 
be  an  additive  affair  in  its  more  fundamental  structural  aspects.  Perhaps 
the  most  important  and  beneficial  results  of  the  new  physical  theories  is 
that  they  point  out  this  structural  fact,  and  take  it  into  consideration. 
The  reader  should  recall  the  example  about  the  man-made  green  leaf 
and  the  non-man-made  green  leaf,  which  differ  in  structure,  and  he 
will  understand  how  our  additive  tendencies  are  the  result  of  our  primi¬ 
tive  state  of  development  and  of  this  projection  of  our  anthropomorphic 
point  of  view  on  the  world.  We  reversed  the  natural  order  and  imposed 
on  the  world  the  structure  of  our  verbal  forms,  instead  of  the  natural 
order  of  patterning  the  structure  of  language  after  the  structure  of  the 
world. 

This  digression  was  especially  necessary  before  approaching  the 
problem  of  ‘extension’  and  ‘intension’.  These  have  never  been  analysed 
from  the  point  of  view  of  structure  and  order,  and  whatever  is  known 
about  them  is  taken  for  granted.  It  is  true  that  we  hear  now  and  then 
casual  remarks  that  mathematicians  had  a  predilection  for  extension  and 
‘philosophers’  for  intension,  but  these  true  remarks  are  not  further 
analysed. 

We  usually  forget  that  whenever  a  mathematician  or  a  ‘philosopher’ 
produces  a  work,  this  involves  his  ‘attitude’,  which  represents  an  ex- 

ON  OKDKR 

trcmely  complex  psycho-logical  s.r  of  the  organism-as-a-whole.  In  most 
cases,  these  attitudes  determine  not  only  the  character  of  our  work,  but 
also  other  reactions  which  make  up  our  individual  and  social  life.  His¬ 
torically,  the  mathematicians  have  a  steady  record  of  achievement,  and 
‘philosophers’  (excluding  epistemologists)  one  of  uselessness  or  failure. 

I  las  this  record  something  to  do  with  the  extensional  and  intensional 
attitudes  ?  In  fact,  it  has.  It  is  easy  to  show  that  the  extensional  attitude 
is  the  only  one  which  is  in  accordance  with  the  survival  order  and  ner¬ 
vous  structure ,  and  that  the  intensional  attitude  is  the  reversal  of  the 
natural  order,  and,  therefore,  must  involve  non-survival  or  patho¬ 
logical  s.r. 

One  of  the  simplest  ways  of  approaching  the  problems  of  ‘extension’ 
and  ‘intension’  is  perhaps  to  point  its  connection  with  definitions.  A  col¬ 
lection  may  be  defined,  so  we  are  told,  by  enumeration  of  its  members, 
as,  for  instance,  when  we  say  that  the  collection  contains  Smith,  Brown, 
Jones , .  Or  we  may  define  our  collection  by  giving  a  defining  ‘property’. 
We  are  told  that  the  first  type  of  definitions  which  enumerates  individual 
members  is  to  be  called  a  definition  by  extension,  the  second,  which  gives 
a  defining  ‘property’,  is  to  be  called  a  definition  by  intension. 

We  can  easily  see  that  a  ‘definition  by  extension’  uniquely  charac¬ 
terizes  the  collection,  Smithi,  Browni,  Jonesi,.  Any  other  collection, 
Smith2,  Brown2,  Jones2 . ,  would  obviously  be  different  from  the  first  one, 
since  the  individuals  differ.  If  we  ‘define’  our  collection  by  intension ; 
that  is,  by  ascribing  some  characteristic  to  each  of  the  individuals,  for 
instance,  that  they  have  no  tails,  many  collections  of  individuals  without 
tails  might  be  selected.  Since  these  collections  would  be  composed  of 
entirely  different  individuals,  they  would  be  entirely  different,  yet  by 
‘intension’,  or  defining  characteristic,  they  all  would  be  supposed  to  be 
one  collection. 

Similar  contrast  exists  between  relations  in  extension,  and  relations 
in  intension.  These  relations  have  been  defined  more  or  less  as  follows: 
‘Intensional  relations  are  relations  of  “concepts” ;  extensional  relations 
are  relations  of  denoted  facts'.  Or,  ‘relations  of  intension  are  those 
which  are  ascertainable  a  priori;  a  relation  of  extension  is  discoverable 
only  by  inspection  of  the  existent ’.  Or,  ‘intension  covers  the  relations 
which  hold  for  all  the  possible  individuals,  while  extension  holds  only  for 
the  existent \  ‘A  relation  of  intension  is  one  which  is  only  discoverable 
by  logical  analysis ;  a  relation  of  extension  is  one  which  is  only  discover¬ 
able  by  the  enumeration  of  particulars’,  .* 

All  that  has  just  been  said  are  perhaps  standard  definitions;  but, 
for  my  purpose,  they  are  profoundly  unsatisfactory.  Because  we  have 

174  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

had  no  better  understanding  of  this  most  important  question  of  order,  a 
great  deal  of  confusion  has  occurred  in  human  'thought'  and  many  of  our 
disciplines  have  become  twisted  in  undesirable  directions.  This,  to  a  large 
degree,  accounts  for  the  obscurity  which  characterizes  the  problems  we 
are  dealing  with  in  this  book.  But  it  should  be  emphasized  that  even  in 
this  very  unsatisfactory  form,  'intension*  and  'extension',  as  they  were 
felt  and  applied  ( s.r ,  largely  disregarding  the  verbal  formulations),  have 
played  an  enormous  role  in  the  development  of  our  forms  of  representa¬ 
tion,  and  our  'civilization*.  Unfortunately,  without  an  ordinal  analysis, 
it  was  impossible  to  evaluate  properly  the  relative  importance  of  these 
semantic  attitudes,  and  to  realize  the  serious  importance  of  these  prob¬ 
lems  for  a  theory  of  sanity  and  resulting  consequences. 

Here,  again,  the  knowledge  which  psychiatry  gives  will  help  a  great 
deal.  We  know,  in  the  rough,  quite  a  little  about  two  semantic  mechan¬ 
isms  which  are  called  extroversion  and  introversion.  In  the  rough, 
again,  the  extrovert  projects  all  that  is  going  on  within  himself  upon 
the  outside  world,  and  believes  that  his  personal  projections  have  some 
kind  of  non-personal  objective  existence,  and  so  have  'the  same'  validity 
and  value  for  other  observers.  As  a  result,  quite  naturally,  the  extrovert 
is  due  to  receive  a  great  many  unpleasant  shocks,  for  the  other  observer 
does  not  necessarily  observe  or  'perceive'  in  the  external  events  the 
characteristics  which  the  first  observer  ‘finds'.  He  has  often  projected 
them  from  his  'inside',  but  they  were  entirely  personal.  The  first  ob¬ 
server,  in  his  semantic  conviction  that  his  observations  are  the  only, 
uniquely  correct,  observations,  feels  that  the  second  observer  is  either 
blind  in  some  way,  or  unfair  to  him.  In  acute  cases,  he  develops  a  mania 
of  persecution.  He  feels  that  everybody  misunderstands  him ;  nobody  is 
fair  to  him;  everybody  is  hostile  to  him;  he  will  get  even  with  them;  in 
the  name  of  'justice',  he  will  punish  them , .  A  dangerous  and  quite  often 
incalculable  bitterness  and  hostility  follow.  Such  types  are  usually  trou¬ 
blesome,  and,  if  the  affective  components  are  strong,  then  such  types  are 
dangerously  ill  and  liable  to  produce  bloodshed  or  make  other  attacks. 
The  most  pronounced  types  in  this  extreme  direction  are  called  paranoids 
and  paranoiacs. 

The  introvert  type  is  different.  He  is  mostly  concentrated  on  what 
is  going  on  inside  of  his  own  skin.  Almost  all  of  what  is  going  on  out¬ 
side  of  his  skin,  he  interprets  in  personal  terms  and  feelings.  Whatever 
unpleasant  happens,  he  is  always  guilty ;  always  willing  to  take  the  blame, 
which  is  quite  often  just,  for  many  psycho-logical  reasons  upon  which  we 
cannot  dwell  here.  This  type,  in  its  extreme  development,  quite  often 

ON  ORDER 

finds  a  solution  in  suicide.  The  most  extreme  cases  are  called  ‘dementia 
praecox*  or  ‘schizophrenic*  types. 

In  everyday  experience,  it  is  seldom  that  such  clear-cut  types  as 
just  described  can  be  observed.  For  the  purpose  of  studying  such  ex¬ 
treme  types,  one  has  to  do  researches  in  asylums.  Even  there  we  find 
a  great  number  of  mixed  cases.  In  daily  life  we  find  in  practically 
everybody  a  predominance  of  one  or  the  other  of  these  types  of  s.r,  but 
in  some  the  two  types  appear  to  be  inextricably  mixed.  Observations 
upon  this  problem  among  so-called  ‘normal*  men  is  difficult,  as  they  rep¬ 
resent  great  complexities. 

It  has  been  already  mentioned  that  the  well-balanced  man,  a  man 
who  has  survival  value,  should  be  a  well-balanced  mixture  of  both  ten¬ 
dencies  ;  namely,  an  extroverted-introvert,  or,  if  we  wish,  an  introverted- 
extrovert.  As  yet,  these  problems,  no  matter  how  important  they  may  be, 
are  beyond  our  educational  methods,  and  only  in  acute  cases  are  they 
taken  care  of  by  physicians,  and  then  mostly  in  asylums.  It  is  important 
to  have  simple  means  to  deal  with  these  semantic  problems  in  elementary 
education  as  a  preventive  method,  or  as  a  branch  of  semantic  hygiene. 

Even  this  brief  analysis  shows  how  tremendously  powerful  the 
affective  factors  are  which  may  be  behind  the  unbalanced  semantic  atti¬ 
tudes.  The  reader  should  not  miss  the  fact  that  in  both  types,  when  well 
developed,  there  is  material  for  an  extreme  amount  of  self-imposed 
suffering.  Then  the  nervous  energy  produced  by  the  organism  is  ab¬ 
sorbed  in  fighting  phantoms,  instead  of  being  directed  toward  useful  ends, 
such  as  regulating  the  normal  activities  of  the  organism,  or  fighting 
internal  enemies,  whereas,  there  should  also  be  some  energy  left  for 
activities  and  interests  useful  socially  or  for  the  survival  of  the  race. 

While  the  majority  of  individuals  present  different  degrees  of 
prevalence  of  one  mechanism  over  the  other,  yet  fairly  clear-cut  cases 
are  to  be  found.  The  extreme  complexity  of  the  structure  of  the  nervous 
system  of  man  justifies  the  enormous  number  of  degrees  recognized. 
So  large,  indeed,  is  this  number  of  possibilities,  that  we  have  little  dif¬ 
ficulty  in  understanding  that  the  individuality  of  every  one  is  unique. 

Extroverted  and  introverted  individuals  are  usually  born  such; 
at  least,  they  usually  have  a  predisposition  to  be  the  one  or  the  other.  To 
what  extent  these  tendencies  can  be  aggravated  or  improved  by  education 
is  not  yet  solved,  and,  indeed,  has  never  been  much  bothered  about.  To 
consider  our  activities  merely  as  results  of  inborn  tendencies  is  too  nar¬ 
row  a  view.  The  human  nervous  system  is  not  finished  at  birth,  and  it 
continues  its  development  for  some  time  after  the  birth  of  the  child. 
So  it  is  much  more  influenced  by  environmental  conditions,  the  verbal 

176  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

included,  than  is  the  nervous  system  of  an  animal.  The  make-up  of  the 
individual  is  thus  some  function  of  different  variables,  among  which  the 
hereditary  inclinations  and  the  environmental  conditions  appear  in  a 
relation,  at  present,  not  fully  known.  The  individual  feels  and  acts  ac¬ 
cording  to  his  complex  make-up,  including  acquired  s.r,  no  matter  what 
factors  have  played  a  role  in  its  moulding,  and,  as  a  rule,  he  is  little  in¬ 
fluenced  by  the  way  he  rationalizes  his  activities.  From  this  point  of 
view,  we  may  consider  that  the  extensional  make-ups  and  intensional 
characters  are  bound  to  show  themselves  later  on  in  life,  no  matter  how 
the  subject  may  have  rationalized  them,  if  his  s,r  have  not  been  modified. 

It  seems  evident  that  the  extroverted  and  introverted  tendencies 
have  some  connection  with  extensional  and  ihtensional  types  of  reac¬ 
tion  ;  but,  of  course,  they  are  not  identical.  They  influence  the  individual 
in  the  selection  of  a  profession,  and  in  the  preference  for  some  special 
trend  of  activity.  Thus,  mathematicians,  generally,  have  an  inclination 
toward  extension,  ‘philosophers’  toward  intension.  Now,  it  is  interesting 
to  note  that  mathematicians  have  a  record  of  continuous  constructive 
progress,  and  at  each  epoch  have  produced  the  highest  kind  of  language 
known.  Also,  the  most  important  achievements  in  the  fields  which  tra¬ 
ditionally  belonged  to  ‘philosophers’  have  actually  been  produced  by 
mathematicians.  The  ‘philosophers’,  in  the  main,  have  a  record  of 
failure. 

The  reason  for  this  difference,  which  is  too  remarkable  to  be  a  mere 
coincidence,  may  be  found  by  application  of  the  term  ‘order’  in  our 
analysis.  The  extensional  method  is  the  only  method  which  is  in  accord¬ 
ance  with  the  structure  of  our  nervous  system  as  established  by  survival . 
Reversed  intensional  methods  disorganize  this  normal  mode  of  activity 
of  the  nervous  system,  and  so  lead  toward  nervous  and  ‘mental’  illnesses. 

As  explained  before,  the  structure  of  our  nervous  system  was  estab¬ 
lished  with  ‘senses’  first,  and  ‘mind’  next.  In  neurological  terms,  the 
nervous  impulses  should  be  received  first  in  the  lower  centres  and  pass 
on  through  the  sub-cortical  layers  to  the  cortex,  be  influenced  there  and 
be  transformed  in  the  cortex  by  the  effect  of  past  experiences.  In  this 
transformed  state  they  should  then  proceed  to  different  destinations, 
as  predetermined  by  the  structure  established  by  survival  values.  We 
know,  and  let  us  remember  this,  that  the  reversed  order  in  semantic 
manifestation — namely,  the  projection  into  * senses*  of  memory  traces  or 
doctrinal  impulses— is  against  the  survival  structure,  and  hallucinations, 
delusions,  illusions,  and  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions  are  to  be 
considered  pathological.  In  a  ‘normal’  human  nervous  system  with 
survival  value,  the  nervous  impulses  should  not  be  lost  in  the  sub-cortical 

ON  ORDER 

layers.  In  such  a  case,  the  activity  of  our  human  nervous  system  would 
correspond  to  the  activity  of  the  less-developed  nervous  systems  of  ani¬ 
mals  which  have  no  cortex  at  all.  It  must  be  remembered,  also,  that  the 
sub-cortical  layers  which  have  a  cortex,  as  in  man,  are  quite  different  from 
corresponding  layers  of  those  animals  which  have  never  developed  a  cor¬ 
tex.  It  is  impossible  to  avoid  the  conclusion  that  survival  values  are 
sharply  characterized  by  adequacy ,  and  that  animals  without  cortex  have 
nervous  systems  adequate  for  their  needs  under  their  special  conditions ; 
otherwise,  they  would  not  have  survived.  This  applies,  also,  to  those  ani¬ 
mals  who  have  a  cortex.  Their  activities  for  survival  depend  on  this 
cortex ;  and  when  the  cortex  is  removed,  their  activities  become  inade¬ 
quate.  Their  sub-cortical  layers  alone  are  not  adequate  to  insure  sur¬ 
vival.  For  survival,  such  animals  must  use  not  only  their  lower  centres 
and  their  sub-cortical  layers,  but  also  their  cortices. 

Among  animals,  as  all  evidence  shows,  the  enormous  majority  have, 
without  human  interference,  nervous  systems  working  usually  in  the 
‘ normal*  way;  that  is,  according  to  the  survival  structure.  ‘Insanity'  and 
kindred  nervous  disturbances  are  known  only  among  ourselves  (how¬ 
ever,  see  Part  VI ) .  Apparently,  the  cortex,  through  its  enormous  internal 
complexity,  which  provides  many  more  pathways,  and  through  its  com¬ 
plex  interconnections,  which  offer  many  more  possibilities,  with  a  greater 
number  of  degrees  of  ‘inhibition',  of  excitability,  of  delayed  action,  of 
activation . ,  introduces  not  only  a  much  greater  flexibility  of  reaction,  but, 
through  this  flexibility,  a  possibility  for  abuse,  for  reversal  of  manifesta¬ 
tions,  and  so  for  a  deterioration  of  the  survival  activity  of  the  nervous 
system  as-a-whole.  The  sub-cortical  layers  and  other  parts  of  the  brain 
of  man  are  different  from  the  corresponding  parts  of  the  animal  brain, 
which  has  a  less-developed  cortex.  The  nervous  system  works  as-a- 
whole,  and  the  anatomical  homology  of  the  parts  of  different  nervous 
systems  is  a  very  inadequate,  perhaps  even  a  misguiding,  foundation  for 
inferring  a  priori  the  functioning  of  these  systems,  which  ultimately 
depend  not  only  on  the  macroscopic  but  also  on  the  microscopic  and 
sub-microscopic  structures.  For  instance,  we  can  cut  off  the  head  of 
some  insects,  and  they  go  along  quite  happily  and  do  not  seem  to  mind 
the  operation  much.  But  we  could  not  repeat  this  with  higher  animals. 
The  behaviour  is  changed.  A  decorticated  pigeon  behaves  differently  from 
a  decorticated  rat,  though  neither  of  them  seems  affected  greatly  by  the 
operation.  A  decorticated  dog  or  ape  is  affected  much  more.  Man  is  entirely 
changed.  None  of  the  higher  types  is  able  to  survive  long  if  decorticated. 

There  is  on  record  the  medical  history,  reported  by  Edinger  and 
Fischer,  of  a  boy  who  was  born  entirely  without  cerebral  cortex.  There 

178  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

were  apparently  no  other  important  defects.  This  child  never  showed 
any  development  of  sensory  or  motor  power,  or  of  ‘intelligence’,  or  signs 
of  hunger  or  thirst.  During  the  first  year  of  his  life,  he  was  continually 
in  a  state  of  profound  stupor,  without  any  movements,  and  from  the 
second  year  on,  until  his  death  (at  three  years  and  nine  months),  was 
continually  crying.5 

Although  many  animals,  for  instance  fishes,  have  no  differentiated 
cortex,  yet  their  nervous  system  is  perfectly  adequate  for  their  lives  and 
conditions.  But  in  a  more  complex  nervous  system,  the  relative  func¬ 
tions  of  different  parts  of  the  brain  undergo  fundamental  transforma¬ 
tion.  In  the  most  complex  nervous  system,  as  found  in  man,  the  older 
parts  of  the  brain  are  much  more  under  the  control  of  the  cerebral 
cortex  than  in  any  of  the  animals,  as  is  shown  in  the  example  above. 
The  absence  of  the  human  cortex  involves  a  much  more  profound  dis¬ 
turbance  of  the  activities  of  the  other  parts  of  the  brain.  Since  the 
cortex  has  a  profound  influence  upon  the  other  parts  of  the  brain,  the  in¬ 
sufficient  use  of  the  cortex  must  reflect  detrimentally  upon  the  function¬ 
ing  of  the  other  parts  of  the  brain.  The  enormous  complexity  of  the 
structure  of  the  human  brain  and  the  corresponding  complexity  of  its 
functioning  accounts  not  only  for  all  human  achievements,  but  also  for  all 
human  difficulties.  It  also  explains  why,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  our 
anatomy  differs  but  little  from  that  of  some  higher  animals,  veterinary 
science  is  more  simple  than  human  medicine. 

Because  of  the  structure  of  the  nervous  system,  we  see  how  the 
completion  of  one  stage  of  the  process  which  originated  by  an  external 
stimulus  (A)  and  has  itself  become  a  nervously  elaborated  end-product 
(B),  may,  in  its  turn,  become  the  stimulus  for  a  still  further  nervously 
elaborated  new  end-product  (C),  and  so  on.  When  association  or  rela¬ 
tion  neurons  enter,  the  number  of  possibilities  is  enormously  increased. 

It  must  be  emphasized  that  A,  B,  C . ,  are,  fundamentally,  entirely 
different .  For  instance,  the  external  event  A*  may  be  a  falling  stone, 
which  is  an  entirely  different  affair  from  the  pain  we  have  when  this 
stone  falls  on  our  foot.  It  thus  becomes  clearer  what  is  meant  by  a  state¬ 
ment  that  the  ‘senses’  abstract  in  their  own  appropriate  way,  determined 
by  survival  value,  the  external  events ;  give  these  abstractions  their  spe¬ 
cial  colouring  (a  blow  on  the  eye  gives  us  the  feeling  of  light) ;  discharge 
these  transformed  stimuli  to  further  centres,  in  which  they  become  again 
abstracted,  coloured,  transformed , .  The  end-product  of  this  second 
abstracting  is  again  an  entirely  different  affair  from  the  first  abstraction. 

Obviously,  for  survival  value,  this  extremely  complex  nervous  sys¬ 
tem  should  work  in  complete  co-ordination.  Processes  should  pass  the 

ON  ORDER 

entire  cycle .  If  not,  there  must  be  something  wrong  with  the  system. 
The  activities  of  the  organism  are  then  regressive,  of  lower  order,  a  con¬ 
dition  known  as  ‘mental’  illness.  The  gross  anatomical  divisions  of  the 
nervous  system  should  not  be  relied  upon  too  much  as  an  index  of  func¬ 
tion.  Perhaps  these  anatomical  speculations  are  even  harmful  for  under¬ 
standing,  because  they  falsify  the  facts,  emphasize  the  macroscopic 
similarities  unduly  and  disregard  subtle  yet  fundamentally  important 
microscopic  and  sub-microscopic  structures  and  differences,  which  are 
perfectly  manifest  in  the  functioning,  but  which  are  difficult  to  observe 
directly  on  their  level. 

The  term  ‘abstracting*  is  a  multiordinal  term,  and  hence  has  differ¬ 
ent  meanings,  depending  on  the  order  of  abstractions.  It  is  a  functional 
term  and,  to  indicate  the  differences  in  meanings,  it  is  necessary  to  indi¬ 
cate  the  different  orders.  It  is  structurally  a  non~el  term,  built  upon  the 
extensional  mathematical  pattern  x/f  x?\  x"'.,  or  xlr  x2,  .  -  .  xn,  or  x * 

( k  =  1,  2,  3,  .  .- .  »).  This  allows  us  to  give  the  term  ‘abstracting  of  dif¬ 
ferent  orders’  a  perfectly  unique  meaning  in  a  given  problem  and  yet  to 
keep  in  a  fluid  state  its  most  important  functional  implications .  Some¬ 
thing  similar  happens  when  the  mathematician  discusses  his  x„ .  No  one 
can  miss  the  fact  that  he  deals  with  a  variable  which  can  take  n  values ; 
so  this  symbol  has  a  quite  definite  descriptive  structural  and  semantic 
value.  So  has  the  ‘abstracting  of  different  orders’. 

It  is  desirable  to  introduce  consciously  and  deliberately  terms  of  a 
structure  similar  to  the  structure  of  human  knowledge,  of  our  nervous 
system,  and  of  the  world,  involving  appropriate  s.r.  Multiordinal  terms 
are  uniquely  appropriate,  since  they  take  their  00-valued  structure  from 
the  structure  of  events  (1933)  and  do  not  reflect  their  older,  one- valued, 
false  to  fact  character  on  the  events.  (Note  the  order.) 

Now  we  are  ready  to  reformulate  the  problem  of  extension  and 
intension  in  terms  of  order . 

If  the  natural  survival  order  is  lower  abstractions  first  and  higher 
next,  then  extension  starts  with  absolute  individuals,  and  conforms  to 
the  proper  survival  order.  Extension  recognizes  the  uniqueness,  with 
corresponding  one-value,  of  the  individual  by  giving  each  individual  a 
unique  name,  and  so  makes  confusion  impossible.  Training  in  s.r  of 
sanity  becomes  a  possibility,  and  order  becomes  paramount.  Extension 
and  order  cannot  be  divided.  When  we  speak  about  ‘order’,  we  imply 
extension,  and,  when  we  speak  about  extension,  order  is  implied.  That 
modern  mathematics  and  mathematical  ‘logic’  has  so  much  to  do  with 
order,  as  to  make  this  term  fundamental,  is  a  necessary  consequence  of 
the  extensional  method  which  starts  with  unique  individuals,  labels  them 

180  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

by  unique  names  and  only  then  generalizes  or  passes  to  oo-valued  higher 
order  abstractions  like  ‘numbers’, .  The  direction  of  the  process  of  ab¬ 
straction  is  here  in  the  survival  order,  from  lower  abstractions  to  higher. 
It  hardly  needs  to  be  emphasized  that,  to  the  best  of  our  knowledge  in 
1933,  it  is  the  only  possible  way  to  follow  the  natural  order  and  to  evade 
reading  into  a  fundamentally  one-valued  external  event,  our  older  undif¬ 
ferentiated  oo-valued  fancies  (which  happens  if  the  process  is  reversed 
in  order)  involving  powerful  factors  in  our  s.r . 

Intension  means  structurally  the  reversal  of  the  survival  order,  since 
it  starts  with  undifferentiated  oo-valued  higher  abstractions  and  distorts 
or  disregards  the  essential  one-values  of  the  individuals  and  reads  into 
them  as  uniquely  important  undifferentiated  oo-valued  characteristics. 

Historically,  mathematicians  have  had  a  predilection  and,  because  of 
the  character  of  their  ‘element’  (numbers)  and  their  technique,  a  struc¬ 
tural  necessity,  for  the  use  of  extensional  methods.  It  does  not  need 
much  imagination  to  see  why  they  have  produced  results  of  utmost 
(although  relative)  importance  and  validity  at  each  date. 

‘Philosophers’  and  reasoners  of  that  class  have  had  a  predilection 
for  intension,  and  this  also  explains  why,  in  spite  of  tremendously  acute 
verbal  exercises,  they  have  not  produced  anything  of  lasting  value,  for 
they  were  carried  away  by  the  structure  of  the  language  they  used.  This 
predilection  being  already  based  on  the  reversal  of  the  survival  order,  it 
was  bound  to  lead  in  the  less-resistant  individuals  to  nervous  and  ‘mental’ 
defects. 

The  issues,  as  presented  here,  are  very  clear-cut,  and,  in  fact,  too 
clear-cut,  as  we  have  disregarded  for  the  present  the  cyclic  order  of  the 
nervous  process.  This  last  fact  first  abolishes  the  sharp  distinction  be¬ 
tween  ‘pure’  extension  and  ‘pure’  intension,  each  process  never  being 
‘pure’,  but  always  ‘impure’,  one  influencing  the  other.  ‘Pure’  intension 
and  ‘pure’  extension  are  delusional,  to  be  found  only  in  ‘mentally’  ill, 
with  no  survival  value.  This  explains  why  we  have  to  use  the  terms  of 
preference  and  order.  Without  these  terms  I  would  not  have  been  able 
to  carry  through  this  analysis  at  all.  This  reversal  of  order  in  s.r  implies 
different  distribution,  diffusion,  intensity  of  nerve  currents  in  the  sub- 
microscopic  field,  and  so  involves  important,  different  semantic  com¬ 
ponents  of  non-survival  value.  It  is  most  desirable  to  learn  to  control 
the  activities  on  the  sub-microscopic  level  by  means  of  training  on  the 
macroscopic  level,  if  means  to  do  this  can  be  devised. 

The  writer  is  not  at  all  convinced  that,  acting  as  we  do  under  the 
spell  of  intensional  and  ignorant  ‘philosophers’,  the  existing  systems  and 
educational  methods  are  not  largely  following  the  reversal  of  the  sur- 

ON  OKI )KK 

vival  order  of  our  nervous  processes.  It  seems  unnecessary  to  point  out 
that  a  structural  and  semantic  enquiry  on  this  particular  question  might 
be  important  and  beneficial.  It  seems,  without  much  doubt,  that  human 
institutions  and  activities  should  be  in  accord  with  ‘human  nature  ,  if  we 
are  to  expect  them  to  survive  without  crushing  us,  and  a  scientific 
enquiry  in  this  ‘human  nature'  would  be  not  only  desirable  but  exceed¬ 
ingly  important. 

The  reader,  with  the  help  of  another  person,  should  perform  a  very 
simple  experiment.  Let  the  assistant  select  secretly  a  dozen  newspaper 
headlines  of  letters  of  equal  size.  Let  the  reader  then  sit  in  a  chair  with¬ 
out  altering  his  distance  from  the  assistant  and  let  the  assistant  show 
him  one  of  these  headlines.  If  he  is  able  to  read  the  headline,  it  should 
be  rejected,  and  a  new  one  selected  by  the  assistant  and  put  a  foot  or 
more  farther  away.  If  this  one  is  read  correctly,  it  should  be  rejected, 
and  a  third  one  placed  still  farther  away.  By  such  trials  we  can  finally 
find  a  distance  which  is  slightly  greater  than  the  maximum  range  of  clear 
visibility  for  the  reader,  so  that,  although  the  headline  is  only  slightly 
beyond  the  distance  at  which  one  could  read  it,  yet  it  would  be  illegible. 
Let  the  reader  then  try  as  hard  as  possible  to  read  headlines  which  are 
just  beyond  his  visual  range.  When  he  is  convinced  that  he  cannot  read 
the  headline,  let  the  assistant  tell  him  the  content  of  it.  Then  the  sitter 
can  usually  see  with  his  eyes  the  letters,  when  he  knows  whatsis  sup¬ 
posed  to  be  there.  The  question  arises,  what  part  in  the  ‘seeing  is  due 
to  ‘senses',  and  what  to  ‘mind’?  The  answer  is,  that,  structurally,  the 
‘seeing*  is  the  result  of  a  cyclic  interdependent  process,  which  can  be  split 
only  verbally .  The  independent  elements  are  fictitious  and,  structurally, 
have  little  or  nothing  to  do  with  actual  facts.  The  human  nervous  sys¬ 
tem  represents,  structurally,  a  mutually  interdependent  cyclic  chain, 
where  each  partial  function  is  in  the  functional  chain,  together  with 
enforcing  and  ‘inhibiting',  and  other  mechanisms. 

Up  to  this  stage,  we  have  used  the  term  ‘cyclic  order ,  but,  in  real¬ 
ity,  the  order  is  recurrent ,  though  of  a  character  better  described  by  the 
‘spiral  theory*,  as  explained  in  my  Manhood  of  Humanity  on  p.  233.  In 
the  ‘spiral  theory',  we  find  the  foundation  for  this  peculiar  stratification 
in  levels  and  orders,  which  is  necessitated  by  the  structure  and  function 
of  the  human  nervous  system.  It  should  be  noticed  that  the  equations 
of  the  circle  and  spiral  are  non-linear,  non-plus  equations. 

The  above  relation  underlies  a  fundamental  mechanism,  known  in 
psychiatry  as  ‘sublimation',  in  which,  and  by  which,  quite  primitive  im¬ 
pulses,  without  losing  their  intensity  and  fundamental  character,  quite 
often  are  transformed  from  very  primitive  levels,  which  frequently 

182  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

represent  vicious  and  anti-social  effects,  into  desirable  characteristics, 
socially  useful.  Thus,  a  sadistic  impulse  may  be  sublimated  into  the 
socially  useful  vocation  of  the  butcher,  or,  still  further,  into  the  skill  and 
devotion  to  the  service  of  their  fellowmen,  shown  by  many  surgeons. 
We  see  that  this  mechanism  is  of  tremendous  importance,  and  respon¬ 
sible  for  what  we  call  ‘culture’  and  many  other  values.  Our  educational 
methods  should  understand  this  mechanism  and  apply  this  knowledge 
in  the  semantic  training  of  youth.  It  is  important  to  realize  that  this 
mechanism  appears  as  the  only  semantic  mechanism  of  correction  which 
is  in  accord  with  the  structure  of  the  human  nervous  system,  and  so  it 
seems  workable.  Various  metaphysical  preachings  usually  start  by  dis¬ 
organizing  the  proper  survival  working  of  the  human  nervous  system, 
and  then  we  wonder  that  they  fail,  and  that  we  cannot  change  ‘human 
nature’.  To  deal  with  ‘human  nature’,  which  is  not  something  static  and 
absolute,  we  need  to  approach  it  with  more  structural  understanding  and 
less  prejudice.  Then,  and  then  only,  can  we  eventually  look  for  better 
semantic  results. 

The  writer  does  not  want  the  reader  to  conclude  that,  because  in 
mathematics  we  have  followed  the  survival  order  through  extension,  the 
mathematicians  must,  by  necessity,  be  the  sanest  of  the  sane.  Quite  often 
this  is  not  true,  since  many  complexities  exist  which  will  be  taken  under 
analysis  later. 

Section  E.  Concluding  remarks  on  order . 

One  thing  remains  fundamental ;  namely,  that  the  problems  of  order 
and  extension  are  of  paramount  structural  importance  for  sanity  and  our 
lives.  They  should  be  worked  out  and  applied  to  the  semantic  training 
of  the  young  in  elementary  education , .  This  would  certainly  produce 
a  new  generation  saner  than  we  are,  and  one  which  would,  perhaps,  lead 
lives  less  troubled  than  our  own,  and  so,  perhaps,  of  better  survival 
value. 

To  appreciate  fully  the  immensity  of  the  task  of  a  more  detailed 
analysis  of  the  problems  of  ‘extension’  and  ‘intension’,  the  reader  is 
advised  to  read  the  Survey  of  Symbolic  Logic ,  by  Professor  C.  I.  Lewis, 
University  of  California  Press,  1918,  in  which  Chapter  V  is  devoted 
to  an  important  attempt  at  a  formulation  of  strict  implication  of  both 
extensional  and  intensional  character,  which  is  the  only  organism- 
as-a-whole,  non-el  possibility.  Lewis’s  theory  of  ‘strict  implication’ 
introduces  the  notions  of  impossible  propositions  and  so  throws  consid¬ 
erable  light  on  the  problem  of  non-sense,  a  light  which  is  very  seriously 
needed. 

ON  ORDER 

In  concluding,  it  must  be  mentioned  that  a  theory  of  sanity,  because 
of  the  survival  value  of  order,  cannot  start  with  the  older,  undifferen¬ 
tiated  similarities,  which  are  a  product  of  higher  abstractions,  and  thus 
of  later  origin,  but  must  start  with  differences  as  fundamental,  and  so 
preserve  the  structure  and  order  of  the  survival  trend  as  applied  in  this 
work. 

Animals  do  not  possess  such  a  highly  differentiated  nervous  sys¬ 
tem  as  human  beings.  The  difference  between  their  higher  and  lower 
abstractions  is  thus  not  so  fundamental,  as  we  shall  see  later  on.  With 
them  the  question  of  order  is  less  important,  as  they  cannot  alter  it. 
Animals  have  the  benefit  of  better  co-ordination,  since  in  them  the  above- 
described  structural  difficulties  do  not  arise.  They  have  normally  no 
'insane*.  But,  also,  for  the  same  reason,  animals  are  not  able  to  start 
every  generation  where  the  older  left  off.  In  other  words,  animals  are 
not  time-binders. 

The  structural  complexity  and  differentiation  of  the  nervous  sys¬ 
tem  in  man  is  responsible,  as  is  well  known,  not  only  for  all  our  achieve¬ 
ments  and  control  over  the  world  around  us,  but  also  for  practically  all 
our  human,  mostly  semantic  difficulties,  many  ‘mental*  ills  included.  The 
analysis  in  terms  of  order  on  the  macroscopic  level  (semantic  manifesta¬ 
tions)  reveals  a  profound  connection  with  sub-microscopic  processes  of 
distribution . ,  of  nervous  energy.  When  the  mechanism  which  controls 
these  processes  is  properly  understood,  then  they  can  be  controlled  and 
educated  by  special  semantic  training.  In  other  words,  theoretical,  doc¬ 
trinal,  higher  abstractions  may  have  a  stabilizing  and  regulating  physio¬ 
logical  effect  on  the  function  of  our  nervous  system. 

The  reader  may  be  interested  to  know  that  ‘order*  is  very  important 
in  animal  life.  An  analysis  of  nest-building  and  the  rearing  of  young 
among  birds  shows  that  each  step  of  the  cycle  is  necessary  before  the 
next  step  is  taken.  If  the  cycle  is  broken,  they  usually  cannot  adjust 
themselves  to  the  new  state  of  affairs,  but  must  start  from  the  begin¬ 
ning.6  This  is  a  situation  similar  to  our  own  when  we  cannot  recall  a 
line  in  a  poem,  but  have  to  start  from  the  beginning  of  the  piece  in  order 
to  recapture  it.  Pavlov  was  able,  by  the  change  of  four-dimensional 
order  of  stimuli,  to  induce  profound  nervous  disturbances  in  the  nervous 
systems  of  his  dogs , . 

It  appears,  also,  that  in  mild  cases  of  aphasia,  which  is  a  neurologi¬ 
cal  disturbance  of  linguistic  processes,  with  word-blindness,  word-deaf¬ 
ness  . ,  the  notion  of  ‘order*  and  ‘relations*  is  often  the  first  to  be  disturbed. 
In  some  cases,  lower  order  abstractions  are  carried  out  successfully,  but 
calculation,  algebra,  and  other  higher  order  abstractions,  which  require 

184  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

ordered  chains,  become  impossible.  The  aphasic  seems  to  have  a  general 
incapacity  for  grasping  relations,  realizing  ordered  series ,  or  grasping 
their  succession.7 

We  see  that  the  problems  of  order  are  somehow  uniquely  important ; 
and  so  the  investigation  of  the  psycho-logics  of  mathematics,  which  is 
based  on  order,  might  give  us  means  of  at  least  partial  control  of  dif¬ 
ferent  undesirable  human  semantic  afflictions. 

But,  after  all,  we  should  not  be  surprised  that  it  is  so.  The  struc¬ 
ture  of  nervous  systems  consists  of  ordered  chains  produced  by  the  im¬ 
pact  of  external  and  internal  stimuli  in  a  four-dimensional  space- time 
manifold,  which  have  a  spatial  and  also  a  temporal  order.  The  introduc¬ 
tion  of  the  finite  velocity  of  nerve  currents,  which,  although  known,  was, 
as  a  rule,  disregarded  by  all  of  us,  introduces  automatically  our  ordering 
in  ‘space'  and  ‘time'  and,  therefore,  in  space-time.  That  is  why  the  old 
anatomical  three-dimensional  analogies  are  vicious  and  false  to  facts 
when  generalized.  For  better  or  worse,  we  happen  to  live  in  a  four¬ 
dimensional  world,  where  ‘space'  and  ‘time’  cannot  be  divided.  Whoever 
does  this  splitting  must  introduce  fictitious,  non-survival  entities  and 
influences  into  his  system,  which  is  moulded  by  this  actual  world  and 
unable  to  adjust  itself  to  fictions. 

It  seems  obvious  that  all  these  problems  of  ‘adjustment*  and  ‘non- 
adjustment*,  ‘fictitious' or ‘actual'  worlds . ,  are  strictly  connected  with  our 
s.r  toward  these  problems,  and  so  ultimately  with  some  structural  knowl¬ 
edge  about  them.  But  attitudes  involve  lower  order  abstractions,  ‘emo¬ 
tions',  affective  components,  and  other  potent  semantic  factors  which 
we  have  usually  disregarded  when  dealing  with  science  and  with  scien¬ 
tific  problems  and  method.  For  adjustment,  and,  therefore,  for  sanity, 
we  must  take  into  account  the  neglected  aspects  of  science,  of  mathe¬ 
matics,  and  of  scientific  method ;  namely,  their  semantic  aspects.  In  this 
way  we  shall  abandon  that  other  prevalent  structural  fiction  referred  to 
at  the  beginning  of  the  present  chapter ;  namely,  that  science  and  mathe¬ 
matics  have  an  isolated  existence. 

The  above  considerations  of  order  lead  to  a  formulation  of  a  funda¬ 
mental  principle  (a  principle  underlying  the  whole  of  the  non-aristotelian 
system)  ;  namely,  that  organisms  which  represent  processes  must  develop 
in  a  certain  natural  survival  four-dimensional  order,  and  that  the  reversal 
of  that  order  must  lead  to  pathological  (non-survival)  developments. 
Observations  disclose  that,  in  all  human  difficulties,  ‘mental*  ills  included, 
a  reversal  of  the  natural  order  can  be  found  as  a  matter  of  fact,  once 
we  decide  to  consider  order  as  fundamental.  Any  identification  of  inher¬ 
ently  different  levels,  or  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions,  leads  auto- 

ON  ORDER 

niatically  to  the  reversal  of  natural  order.  As  a  method  of  preventive 
education  and  psychotherapy,  whenever  we  succeed  in  reversing  the 
reversed  order  or  restoring  the  natural  survival  order,  serious  beneficial 
results  are  to  be  expected.  These  theoretical  conclusions  have  been  fully 
justified  by  experience  and  the  work  of  Doctor  Philip  S.  Graven  in 
psychotherapy.  It  should  be  noticed  that  different  primitive  ‘magic  of 
words’,  or  modem  ‘hypostatizations’,  ‘reifications’,  ‘misplaced  concrete¬ 
ness*,  ‘objectifications*. ,  and  all  semantic  disturbances  represent  nothing 
else  but  a  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions,  or  identifications  in  value 
of  essentially  different  orders  of  abstractions. 

The  above  considerations  are  entirely  general,  but,  because  of  their 
novelty,  they  have  not,  as  yet,  been  applied  in  the  non-aristotelian  simple 
and  workable  form  to  psychiatry  or  education.  In  a  very  instructive 
paper  on  The  Language  of  Schizophrenia*  Doctor  William  A.  White 
applies  some  of  these  notions.  Because  of  the  method  of  approach,  I 
will  quote  from  this  paper.  It  should  be  understood  that  this  paper 
deals,  also,  with  other  issues,  and  the  quotations  do  not  do  justice  to  the 
author,  because  I  quote  only  those  passages  which  are  of  particular  inter¬ 
est  here,  omitting  the  literature  given  by  Doctor  White.  The  italics  and 
one  footnote  are  mine. 

*It  requires  but  a  moment's  serious  consideration  to  realize  that  the  subject 
of  schizophrenic  language  must  be  immense  if  for  no  other  reason  than,  that  it 
involves  an  understanding  of  the  whole  subject  of  language  of  which  it  is  but  a 
part.  The  extent  and  depth  of  the  subject  of  language  may  be  further  appreciated 
from  the  fact  that  the  single  feature  of  its  neuronic  background  as  it  is  brought 
to  attention  in  aphasia  constitutes  one  of  the  most  complex  problems  in  the  whole 
field  of  neurology  and  one  with  respect  to  which  we  are  still  hopelessly  ignorant, 
especially  when  the  enormous  amount  of  work  that  has  been  done  in  this  field  is 
considered.  .  .  , 

‘There  have  been  a  few  other  recent  contributions  to  the  subject  of  schizo¬ 
phrenic  thought  and  speech  which,  as  they  run  more  in  line  with  my  own  thinking 
on  the  subject,  I  will  refer  to  more  fully.  These  studies  equate  the  processes  of 
thinking  of  schizophrenic  persons  with  those  of  primitive  peoples  and  of  children . 

*.  .  .  In  the  archaic  thinking  of  a  prelogical  kind,  found  among  primitive  sav¬ 
age  races,  the  vividness  of  the  images  is  greater  than  among  more  highly  developed 
races,  and  the  effect  produced  in  the  observer  is  projected  and  believed  to  be  an 
inherent  attitude  of  the  object,  which  thus  acquires  a  “demonic”  character.  All 
things  which  arouse  a  similar  emotion  are  thought  of  as  being  actually  the  same. 
In  dementia  praecox  there  is  a  similar  loss  of  objectivity;  hallucinations  and  reality 
are  imperfectly  distinguished,  and  every  happening  has  a  meaning  and  effect  on  the 
observer ;  the  idea  of  an  action  produces  the  action  directly,  instead  of  offering  a 
possibility  of  action,  and  this  is  interpreted  as  a  compulsion  from  without.  Para¬ 
logical  thinking  is  a  stage  beyond  this;  identification  of  objects  is  based  on  simi¬ 
larities,  differences  being  neglected.  .  .  .  This  form  of  thought  is  common  in  dementia 
praecox. 

.  .  While  for  the  normal  person  the  chief  criterion  of  the  world  of  real  ob¬ 
jects  is  their  independence  of  him,  whereas  imaginary  things  depend  for  their 

186  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

existence  on  him,  the  general  characteristic  of  the  schizophrenic  patient’s  experience 
is  that  his  mental  and  imaginary  experiences  have  a  substantial  and  concrete  nature 
when  the  normal  person  would  see  only  symbols  and  analogies.  His  thoughts  have 
magic  power  and  can  produce  real  results ;  they  have  for  him  a  substance  and  he 
can  manipulate  them  physically.  ... 

Ma>ny. other  childish  manifestations  resemble  those  of  schizophrenic  persons: 
children  s  jokes,  tricks,  and  plays  in  words  have  a  similar  autistic  character,  with 
no  apparent  meaning  in  relation  to  actualities,  and  this  changes  at  puberty.  Chil¬ 
dren,  like  the  patients,  love  to  make  up  a  sort  of  neoplastic  language  of  their  own, 
having  meanings  known  only  to  themselves  or  their  immediate  circle.  Persevera¬ 
tion  and  stereotypy  in  speech  and  actions  are  often  observed  in  children.  Their 
musical  performances  show  the  same  mechanical  rendering,  and  the  same  prefer¬ 
ence  for  simple  melodies  and  rhythms  as  are  found  in  schizophrenic  patients.  .  .  . 

'Just  in  the  same  way  we  must  be  careful  not  to  equate  the  regressive  psychotic 
and  the  primitive  too  literally .  That  there  are  close  analogies  in  their  respective 
ways  of  thinking  there  is  no  doubt  and  that  the  recognition  of  these  analogies  has 
been  of  the  utmost  importance  in  enabling  us  to  understand  schizophrenic  thinking 
must  be  acknowledged  but  perhaps,  to  be  on  the  safe  side,  the  matter  should  rest 
there  for  the  present  at  least. 

'Another  point  should  be  made  at  this  time,  after  what  has  been  said  of  the 
loss  of  the  boundaries  of  the  ego,  its  indefiniteness,  etc.  These  expressions  are  apt 
to  be  equated,  if  we  do  not  think  carefully,  with  such  concepts  as  disintegration 
and  dementia.  We  must  not  lose  sight  of  the  magic  of  words  and  not  be  led  astray 
by  the  old  meanings  when  we  are  striving  for  new  ones  but  are  forced  to  use  the 
words  in  current  use.  .  .  .  Now  regression  to  a  childish  or  primitive  level  of  this 
sort,  which  is  what  occurs  in  those  conditions  in  which  the  ego  is  said  to  lose  its 
clearness  of  definition,  does  not  imply  disintegration  in  the  sense  of  disorder  but 
regression  to  a  different  kind  of  order  or,  as  my  friend  Korzybski  would  say,  to  a 
lower  order  of  abstraction. 

‘This  is  important  for  a  principle  is  embodied  in  the  nature  of  this  change.  .  .  . 

'This  principle ,  namely,  that  the  schizophrenic  thought  processes  and  language 
are  of  a  lower  order  of  abstraction ,  accounts,  in  part  at  least,  for  another  phe¬ 
nomenon.  If  by  a  process  of  regression  the  mechanisms  of  thinking  tend  to  ever 
more  primitive  levels  then  we  should  expect  them  ultimately  to  arrive  at  a  con¬ 
crete  perceptional  level,  and  when  this  occurs  hallucinations,  which  have  long  been 
regarded  as  evidence  of  the  schizophrenic  splitting,  come  into  the  picture.  While 
I  believe  that  there  must  be  other  factors  to  account  for  the  hallucinations  they  are 
at  least  to  be  expected  as  the  natural  outcome  of  regression — as  are  the  forms  of 
thought  already  referred  to. . . . 

‘It  comes  about,  therefore,  that  we  cannot  understand  the  language  of  the 
schizophrenic  patient  without  the  aid  of  these  principles,  because  the  language  of 
a  lower  level  of  psychologic  development,  or  a  lower  order  of  abstraction,  must 
remain  unintelligible  to  those  who  think  in  the  terms  of  higher  levels.  The  whole 
problem  of  the  understanding  of  the  psychoses,  from  this  point  of  view,  might  be 
well  considered  as  the  problem  of  the  translation  of  the  language  of  the  psychoses. 

'Summary  and  Conclusions 

'1.  A  complete  understanding  of  the  language  of  schizophrenia  would  imply 
an  understanding  of  language  in  general  of  which  schizophrenic  language  is  only 
a  part.  This  would  further  imply  an  understanding  of  thought  in  general  of  which 
language  is  largely  an  expression.  Because  of  its  extent  this  program  is  quite 
impossible,  but  certain  principles  need  to  be  clearly  in  mind  in  order  to  avoid 
taking  over,  in  any  attempt  to  understand  the  language  of  schizophrenia,  certain 
misconceptions  in  both  of  these  territories  which  are  still  rife,  not  having  been 
as  yet  fully  replaced  by  the  newer  ways  of  thinking  about  the  matters  involved.  .  .  . 

ON  ORDER 

‘2.  There  is  one  psychiatric  assumption  I  have  made  and  which  is  fundamental 
to  my  approach  to  the  problem  of  the  language  of  schizophrenia.  It  is  that  schizo¬ 
phrenia  is  a  regression  psychosis.  This  is  of  the  greatest  importance  for,  if  it  is 
true,  we  should  expect  to  find  in  the  thinking  and  ih  the  language  of  schizophrenic 
patients  characteristics  of  earlier  stages  of  development,  earlier  genetic  levels. 

‘3.  The  development  or  evolution  of  thought  and  speech,  the  assumption  of 
genetic  levels,  implies  that  there  must  be  a  taw  in  accordance  with  which  this  devel¬ 
opment  proceeds .  This  law  is  that  thought  and  language  in  their  development 
change  from  feeling,  concreteness  and  perception  in  the  direction  of  reasoning, 
differentiation  and  abstraction. 

‘4.  The  law  of  schizophrenic  thought  and  language  must  be  the  reverse  of  the 
law  for  their  development,  on  the  assumption  that  schizophrenia  is  a  regression 
psychosis. 

‘5.  This  reversal  of  the  taw  of  development  implies  results  that  are  very  dif¬ 
ferent  from  those  implied  in  the  old  terms  “disintegration”  and  “dementia” 

‘6.  This  reversal  can  be  briefly  and  simply  indicated.  The  language  of  schizo¬ 
phrenia  is  of  a  lower  order  of  abstraction  than  normal  adult  language. 

*7.  The  thinking  and  the  speech  of  schizophrenia  while  of  a  lower  order  of 
abstraction  nevertheless  make  use  of  words  which  we  are  accustomed  to  use  to 
express  a  higher  order.  This  discrepancy  is  one  reason  why  such  language  is  so 
hard  for  us  to  understand.  Another  reason  for  our  difficulty  in  understanding  the 
schizophrenic  patient  is  that  while  some  of  his  symbols  are  of  a  lower  order  of 
abstraction  by  no  means  all  of  them  are  so  that  there  is  a  strange  mixture  which 
further  confuses  our  understanding.  Still  another  difficulty  is  due  to  the  magic 
of  words.*  We  are  still  far  from  free  of  this  influence  and  are  therefore  forced 
to  think  that  when  there  is  a  word  there  must  be  a  thing  corresponding  to  it  and 
also  forced  to  think  of  the  wording  as  necessarily  meaning  what  it  usually  has 
meant  in  our  experience. 

‘8.  The  reversal  of  the  law  of  development  in  schizophrenia  also  accounts,  in 
P^t  at  least,  for  hallucinations  which  have  long  been  regarded  as  signs  of  the 
schizophrenic  splitting.  Regression  must  lead  ultimately  to  concrete,  perceptional 
configurations  and  all  that  that  implies. 

For  the  t  understanding  of  the  language  of  schizophrenia,  therefore,  the 
whole  dynamic  situation  needs  to  be  comprehended.  The  main  obstacle  to  this  un¬ 
derstanding  has  been,  in  the  past,  the  magic  of  words.*  . .  .* 

Identification,  or  the  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions,  in  an 
aristotelian  or  infantile  system,  plays  a  much  more  pernicious  role  than 
the  present  official  psychiatry  recognizes.  Any  identification,  at  any  level, 
or  of  any  orders,  represents  a  non-survival  s.r  which  leads  invariably  to 
the  reversal  of  the  natural  survival  order,  and  becomes  the  foundation 
for  general  improper  evaluation,  and,  therefore,  general  lack  of  adjust¬ 
ment,  no  matter  whether  the  maladjustment  is  subtle  as  in  daily  life,  or 
whether  it  is  aggravated  as  in  cases  of  schizophrenia.  A  non-aristotelian 
system,  by  a  complete  elimination  of  ‘identity’  and  identification,  supplies 
simple  yet  effective  means  for  the  elimination  by  preventive  education 
of  this  general  source  of  maladjustment.  Book  II  is  entirely  devoted 
to  this  subject. 

.  Magic  of  words’  represents  only  a  minor  yet  very  complex  manifestation  of 
anstotehan  s.r  of  identification  and,  naturally,  exhibits,  also,  the  reversed  natural 
order  m  evaluation. — A.  K.J 

CHAPTER  XIII 

ON  RELATIONS 

To  be  is  to  be  related.  (266)  cassius  j.  keyser 

Science,  in  other  words,  is  a  system  of  relations.  <4i7)  h.  poincar£ 

Asymmetrical  relations  are  involved  in  all  series — in  space  and  time, 
greater  and  less,  whole  and  part,  and  many  others  of  the  most  important 
characteristics  of  the  actual  world.  All  these  aspects,  therefore,  the  logic 
which  reduces  everything  to  subjects  and  predicates  is  compelled  to  con¬ 
demn  as  error  and  mere  appearance.  (453)  bertrand  russell 

My  own  investigations  in  this  field,  extending  over  some  fifteen  years, 
together  with  the  facts  already  at  hand,  as  I  see  them,  have  forced  me  to 
the  conclusion  that  the  organic  individual  is  fundamentally  ...  a  system 
of  relations  between  a  physical  substratum  or  structure  and  chemical  re¬ 
actions.  (90)  CHARLES  M.  CHILD 

The  thalamus,  which  in  the  lower  vertebrates  deprived  of  the  cortex 
ensures  the  general  reactions  of  the  organism  and  the  elementary  mental 
functions,  possesses  an  affective  excitability  in  relation  with  the  profound 
biological  tendencies  of  the  organism;  among  the  higher  mammals,  indeed, 
it  seems  to  preserve  this  r61e  of  affective  regulation,  whose  importance  in 
the  behaviour  of  the  organism  and  mental  life  is  so  often  misunderstood. 

(411)  ....  HENRI  PlfeRON 

.  .  .  organic  impressions  ('interoceptive*  sensibility)  appear  in  all  cases 
to  arrive  at  the  cortex  only  when  translated  by  the  thalamus,  with  its 
own  affective  elaboration.  (4ii)  henri  pi£ron 

Nevertheless,  the  consuming  hunger  of  the  uncritical  mind  for  what  it 
imagines  to  be  certainty  or  finality  impels  it  to  feast  upon  shadows  in  the 
prevailing  famine  of  substance.  (22)  E.  t.  bell 

In  the  foregoing  chapters  I  made  use  of  an  expression,  The  organ- 
ism-as-a-whole’,  which  is  employed  continually  in  biology,  psychiatry, 
and  other  branches  of  science.  This  expression  is  a  restricted  form  of 
the  general  structural  principle  of  non-elementalism.  This  expression 
implies  that  an  organism  is  not  a  mere  algebraic  sum  of  its  parts,  but  is 
more  than  that,  and  must  be  treated  as  an  integrated  whole.  It  was  men¬ 
tioned  that  the  non-additivity  and  the  ‘more’  than  a  mere  ‘sum*  are 
complex  problems  which  call  for  a  new  method  of  analysis.  We  have 
already  seen  that  a  simple  analysis  of  the  expression,  ‘Smith  kicks 
Brown',  involves  a  full-fledged  structural  metaphysics,  or  set  of  assump¬ 
tions  and  terms  which  are  taken  on  faith,  since  they  cannot  be  defined, 
except  circularly.  In  the  present  chapter,  these  subjects  of  great  semantic 
importance  will  be  developed  further. 

One  of  the  fundamental  structural  defects  and  insufficiencies  of  the 
traditional  ^-system  was  that  it  had  no  place  for  ‘relations7,  since  it 

ON  RKLATIONS 

assumed  that  everything  could  be  expressed  in  a  subject-predicate  form. 
As  we  shall  see,  this  is  not  true.  Restriction  to  the  subject-predicate  form 
leaves  out  some  of  the  most  important  structural  means  we  have  for 
representing  this  world  and  ourselves  and  has  resulted  in  a  general  state 
of  un-sanity.  The  explicit  introduction  of  ‘relations'  is  rather  a  recent 
innovation.  A  few  words  may  be  said  about  them,  although  the  term 
‘relation'  is  one  of  the  terms  that  we  may  accept  as  undefined,  or  that  we 
may  define  in  terms  of  multi-dimensional  order. 

Some  relations,  when  they  hold  between  A  and  B,  hold  also  be¬ 
tween  B  and  A.  Such  relations  are  called  symmetrical.  For  instance,  the 
relation  ‘spouse'.  If  it  holds  between  A  and  B,  it  holds  also  between 
B  and  A.  If  A  is  the  spouse  of  B,  B  is  the  spouse  of  A.  Terms  like 
‘similarity'  and  ‘dissimilarity'  also  designate  relations  of  this  kind.  If 
A  is  similar  or  dissimilar  to  B,  so  is  B  similar  or  dissimilar  to  A.  In 
general,  a  symmetrical  relation  is  such  that,  if  it  holds  between  A  and  B, 
it  also  holds  between  B  and  A.  In  other  words,  the  order  in  which  we 
consider  the  relation  of  our  entities  is  immaterial. 

It  is  easy  to  see  that  not  all  relations  are  of  such  a  character.  For 
instance,  in  the  relation  ‘A  is  the  brother  of  B',  B  is  not  necessarily  a 
brother  of  A,  because  B  might  be  the  sister  of  A.  In  general,  relations 
which  hold  between  A  and  B,  but  not  necessarily  between  B  and  A,  are 
called  non-symmetrical .  In  these  relations  order  becomes  important.  It 
is  not  a  matter  of  indifference  in  what  order  we  consider  our  entities. 

If  a  relation  is  such  that,  if  it  holds  between  A  and  B,  it  never  holds 
between  B  and  A,  it  is  called  asymmetrical.  Let  us  take,  for  instance, 
the  relations  ‘father',  ‘mother',  ‘husband', .  We  readily  see  that  if  A  is 
a  father,  or  mother,  or  husband  of  B,  B  is  never  a  father,  or  mother,  or 
husband  of  A.  The  reversal  of  order  is  impossible  in  asymmetrical  rela¬ 
tions,  and  so  any  asymmetrical  relation  establishes  a  definite  order. 

Relations  such  as  before ,  after ,  greater,  more,  less ,  above ,  to  the 
right ,  to  the  left,  part,  and  whole,  and  a  great  many  others  of  the  most 
important  terms  we  have,  are  asymmetrical.  The  reader  may  easily 
verify  this  for  himself.  For  instance,  if  A  is  more  than  B,  B  is  never 
more  than  A, .  We  see  at  once  that  the  troublesome  little  words,  which 
are  necessary  to  express  order  as  ‘before'  and  ‘after' ;  terms  of  evalua¬ 
tion,  such  as  ‘more'  and  ‘less' ;  and  terms  on  which  elementalism  or 
non-elementalism  depends,  such  as  ‘part'  and  ‘whole',  are  in  the  list  of 
asymmetrical  relations. 

Relations  can  be  classified  in  another  way,  when  three  or  more 
terms  are  considered.  Some  relations,  called  transitive,  are  such  that, 
whenever  they  hold  between  A  and  B  and  also  between  B  and  C,  they 

190  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

hold  between  A  and  C.  For  example,  if  A  is  before,  or  after,  or  above, 
or  more . ,  than  B,  and  B  is  before,  or  after,  or  above,  or  more . ,  than  C, 
then  A  is  before,  or  after,  or  above,  or  more . ,  than  C. 

It  should  be  noted  that  all  relations  which  give  origin  to  series  are 
transitive.  But  so  are  many  others.  In  the  above  examples,  the  rela¬ 
tions  were  transitive  and  asymmetrical,  but  there  are  numerous  relations 
which  are  transitive  and  symmetrical.  Among  these  are  relations  of 
equality,  of  being  equally  numerous , . 

Relations  which  are  not  transitive  are  called  non-transitive.  For 
instance,  dissimilarity  is  not  transitive.  If  A  is  dissimilar  to  B,  and  B 
dissimilar  to  C,  it  does  not  follow  that  A  is  dissimilar  to  C. 

Relations  which,  whenever  they  hold  between  A  and  B,  never  hold 
between  A  and  C  are  called  intransitive .  ‘Father’,  ‘one  inch  longer’, 
‘one  year  later’. ,  are  intransitive  relations. 

Relations  are  classified  in  several  other  ways ;  but,  for  our  purpose, 
the  above  will  be  sufficient. 

It  is  necessary  now  to  compare  the  relational  forms  with  the  sub¬ 
ject-predicate  form  of  representation,  which  structurally  underlies  the 
traditional  ^-system  and  two-valued  ‘logic’.  The  structural  question 
arises  whether  all  relations  can  be  reduced  to  the  subject-predicate  forms 
of  language. 

Symmetrical  relations,  which  hold  between  B  and  A  whenever  they 
hold  between  A  and  B,  seem  plausibly  expressed  in  the  subject-predicate 
language.  A  symmetrical  and  transitive  relation,  such  as  that  of  ‘equal¬ 
ity’,  could  be  expressed  as  the  possession  of  a  common  ‘property’.  A 
non-transitive  relation,  such  as  that  of  ‘inequality’,  could  also  be  consid¬ 
ered  as  representing  ‘different  properties’.  But  when  we  analyse  asym¬ 
metrical  relations,  the  situation  becomes  obviously  different,  and  we  find 
it  a  structural  impossibility  to  give  an  adequate  representation  in  terms 
of  ‘properties’  and  subject-predicates. 

This  fact  has  very  serious  semantic  consequences,  for  we  have  al¬ 
ready  seen  that  some  of  the  most  important  relations  we  know  at  pres¬ 
ent  belong  to  the  asymmetrical  class.  For  example,  the  term  ‘greater’ 
obviously  differs  from  the  term  ‘unequal’,  and  ‘father’  from  the  term 
‘relative’.  If  two  things  are  said  to  be  unequal,  this  statement  conveys 
that  they  differ  in  the  magnitude  of  some  ‘property’  without  designating 
the  greater.  We  could  also  say  that  they  have  different  magnitudes,  be¬ 
cause  inequality  is  a  symmetrical  relation ;  but  if  we  were  to  say  that  a 
thing  is  unequal  to  another,  or  that  the  two  have  different  magnitudes, 
when  one  of  them  was  greater  than  the  other,  we  simply  should  not  give 
an  adequate  account  of  the  structural  facts  at  hand .  If  A  is  greater  than 

ON  RELATIONS 

B,  and  we  merely  state  that  they  are  unequal  or  of  different  magnitudes, 
we  imply  the  possibility  that  B  is  greater  than  A,  which  is  false  to  facts. 
To  give  an  adequate  account,  and  to  prevent  false  implications ,  there 
is  no  other  way  than  to  say  which  one  is  greater  than  the  other.  We 
see  that  it  is  impossible  to  give  an  A  adequate  account  when  asymmetri¬ 
cal  relations  are  present.  The  possession  of  the  ‘same’  ‘property’,  or  of 
different  ‘properties’,  are  both  symmetrical  relations  and  seem  covered 
by  the  subject-predicate  form.  But  it  is  impossible  to  account  adequately 
for  asymmetrical  relations  in  terms  of  ‘properties’.  In  other  words,  we 
see  that  a  language  and  ‘logic*  based  upon  subject-predicate  structure 
may  perhaps  express  symmetrical  relations,  but  fail  to  express  adequately 
asymmetrical  relations,  because  both  ‘sameness*  and  difference  of  predi¬ 
cates  are  symmetrical.1  Asymmetrical  relations  introduce  a  language  of 
new  structure,  involving  new  s.r.  Yet  asymmetrical  relations  include 
many  of  the  most  important  ones.  They  are  involved  in  all  order,  all 
series,  all  function,  in  ‘space’,  in  ‘time’,  in  ‘greater’  and  ‘less’,  ‘more’  and 
‘less’,  ‘whole’  and  ‘part’,  ‘infinity’,  ‘space-time’, .  If  we  are  restricted  to 
the  use  of  forms  of  representation  unfitted  for  the  expression  of  asym¬ 
metrical  relations,  ordinal,  serial,  functional,  and  structural  problems 
could  not  be  dealt  with  adequately.  We  should  also  have  many  insoluble 
semantic  puzzles  in  connection  with  ‘space’,  ‘time’,  ‘cause  and  effect’, 
and  many  other  relations  in  the  world  around  us,  and  ourselves. 

A  very  interesting  structural  and  semantic  fact  should  be  noticed, 
that  in  symmetrical  relations  order  is  immaterial,  in  non-symmetrical 
relations  it  is  important,  and  in  asymmetrical  relations  order  plays  an 
all-important  role  and  cannot  be  reversed.  Order  itself  is  expressed  in 
terms  of  asymmetrical  relations;  as,  for  instance,  ‘before’  or  ‘after’, 
which  apply  to  ‘space’,  to  ‘time’,  ‘space-time’,  ‘structure’. ,  and  also  to 
all  processes  and  activities,  the  activities  of  the  nervous  system  included. 
The  asymmetrical  relations  ‘greater’,  ‘father’. ,  imply  ordering,  while  the 
‘unequal*  (having  different  ‘properties’)  or  a  ‘relative’.,  do  npt  imply 
ordering.  If  we  consider  subject-predicate  forms  as  expressing  a  rela¬ 
tion  between  the  ‘observer’  and  the  ‘observed*,  excluding  humans,  this 
last  relation  is  also  asymmetrical.  Applying  correct  symbolism:  if  a 
leaf  appears  green  to  me,  I  certainly  do  not  ‘appear  green’  to  the  leaf ! 
The  last  remark  suggests  that  any  A  revision  of  the  ^-system  is  struc¬ 
turally  impossible.  To  attempt  a  revision,  we  must  begin  with  the  formu¬ 
lation  of  a  ^-system  of  different  structure. 

The  above  simple  considerations  have  very  far-reaching  conse¬ 
quences,  as  without  relations,  and  particularly  without  asymmetrical 
relations,  we  cannot  have  order,  and  without  order,  in  the  analysis  of 

192  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

processes,  we  are  bound  to  introduce  explicity  or  implicitly  some  objec¬ 
tively  meaningless  ‘infinite  velocities’  of  the  propagation  of  the  process. 
Thus,  the  ‘infinite  velocity’  of  light,  which  is  known  to  be  false  to  facts, 
is  at  the  very  foundation  of  the  iV-system.  The  equally  false  to  facts 
silent  assumption  of  the  ‘infinite  velocity’  of  nerve  currents  underlies 
A  animalistic  ‘psychology’  and  results  in  elementalism.  This  el  ‘psychol¬ 
ogy’,  until  this  day,  vitiates  all  human  concerns  and  even  all  science,  the 
newer  quantum  theories  not  excluded. 

General  non-elementalism  and,  in  particular,  its  restricted  aspect, 
the  ‘organism-as-a-whole’,  implies  the  relation  of  the  ‘parts’  to  the  ‘whole’, 
for  which  we  need  asymmetrical  relations.  In  the  statement  ‘ more  than 
an  algebraic  sum’,  ‘more’  is  also  an  asymmetrical  relation.  When  we 
analysed  the  statement,  ‘Smith  kicks  Brown’,  we  saw  that  the  prob¬ 
lems  of  ‘space’,  ‘time’,  ‘infinity’. ,  entered,  the  solution  of  which  requires 
serial  notions,  which  evade  analysis  without  asymmetrical  relations. 

The  solution  of  the  problems  of  ‘space’  and  ‘time’  are  fundamental 
for  a  theory  of  sanity,  as  they  are  potent  structural  factors  in  all  s.r. 
In  the  majority  of  ‘mentally’  ill,  we  find  a  disorientation  as  to  ‘space’ 
and  ‘time*.  Similar  milder  forms  of  disorientation  appear  in  all  forms 
of  semantic  disturbances,  as  they  are  disturbances  of  evaluation  and 
meanings  in  the  form  of  delusional  ‘absolute  space’  and  ‘absolute  time’. 
These  semantic  disturbances  cart  be  eliminated  only  by  considerations  of 
multi-dimensional  order,  which  are  impossible  without  asymmetrical  re¬ 
lations,  and  so  could  not  have  been  accomplished  in  an  ^-system. 

The  problems  of  multi-dimensional  order  and  asymmetrical  rela¬ 
tions  are  strictly  interdependent  and  are  the  foundation  of  structure  and 
so  of  human  ‘knowledge’ ;  and  they  underlie  the  problems  of  human  ad¬ 
justment  and  sanity.  Without  going  into  details,  I  shall  suggest  some 
relational  and  ordinal  aspects  as  found  in  the  structure  and  function  of 
the  human  nervous  system  and  their  bearing  on  semantic  reactions  and 
sanity.  I  shall  also  apply  these  considerations  to  the  analysis  of  a  his¬ 
torically  very  important  delusional  factor  which  has  influenced,  until 
now,  the  s.r  of  mankind  away  from  sanity.  I  am  dealing  only  with 
selected  topics,  important  for  my  purpose,  which,  to  the  reader,  may 
appear  one-sided  and  unduly  isolated.  In  fact,  all  issues  involved  are 
strictly  interconnected  in  a  circular  way,  and  no  verbal  analysis  of  objec¬ 
tive  levels  can  ever  be  ‘complete’  or  ‘exhaustive’,  and  this  should  be 
remembered.  On  the  A  silent  assumption  of  the  infinite  velocity  of 
nervous  impulses,  that  the  nervous  impulses  spread  ‘instantaneously’,  ‘in 
no  time’  (to  use  an  Alice-in- Wonderland  expression),  order  was  of  no 
importance.  But  when  we  take  into  account  the  Unite  and  known  velocity 

UN  RELATIONS 

rtcx 
Subcortical 
layers 

of  nervous  impulses,  and  the  serial,  chain  structure  of  the  nervous  sys¬ 
tem,  order  becomes  paramount.  In  such  a  serial  structure,  the  problems 
of  resistance,  ‘inhibitions’,  blockage,  activation . ,  become  intelligible,  so 
that  some  sane  orientation  is  possible  in  this  maze.  It  may  be  added  that 
the  intensity  and  the  transformation  of  nervous  impulses  must  somehow 
be  connected  with  the  paths  they  travel  and  are,  therefore,  problems  to 
be  spoken  about  in  terms  of  order. 

What  has  just  been  said  may  be  illustrated  by  a  rough  and  over¬ 
simplified  hypothetical  diagram.  Fig.  1  shows  how  the  normal  (survival 
in  man)  impulse  should  travel.  It  should 
pass  the  thalamus,  pass  the  sub-cortical  lay¬ 
ers,  reach  the  cortex,  and  return.  That  the 
impulse  is  altered  in  passing  this  complicated 
chain  is  indicated  in  the  diagram  by  the  arbi¬ 
trarily  diminishing  thickness  of  the  line  of 
the  impulse. 

Fig.  2  illustrates  an  hypothetical  abnor¬ 
mal  (non-survival  in  man)  impulse.  It 
emerges  from  the  lower  centres.  For  some 
reason  or  other,  the  main  impulse  is  blocked 
semantically,  or  otherwise,  and  does  not 
reach  the  cortex;  only  a  weak  impulse  does, 
in  such  a  case?  We  should  expect  regression  to  the  level  of  activities  of 
organisms  which  have  no  cortex,  or  a  cortex  very  little  developed.  But 
this  could  not  be  entirely  true,  as  organisms 
without  a  cortex  have  a  nervous  system  ade¬ 
quate  for  their  lives,  activities . ,  in  their  en¬ 
vironment,  with  survival  values.  But  a  higher 
organism  with  a  cortex,  no  matter  how  rudi¬ 
mentary,  has  the  other  parts  of  the  nervous 
structure  quite  different  in  function,  and 
without  the  cortex  they  are  inadequate  for 
survival,  as  experience  shows.  We  see  that 
the  order  in  which  the  impulses  pass,  or,  are 
deviated  from  their  survival  path,  is  para¬ 
mount.  A  great  many  different  reasons 
may  produce  such  deviation,  too  many  to 
list  conveniently.  A  great  many  of  them  are  known,  in  spite  of  the  fact 
that,  in  general,  we  know  very  little  about  nerve  mechanisms.  Suffice 
to  say,  that  we  know,  on  colloidal  grounds  and  from  experience,  that 
macroscopic  or  microscopic  lesions,  drugs,  and  false  doctrines  affecting 

Nervous 
Impulse 

Fig.  1 

What  should  be  expected 

rtex 
Subcortical 
layers 

rvout 

impulse 

Fig.  2 

194  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

the  sub-microscopic  levels,  may  often  produce  similar  end-results.  Here 
I  use  the  term  ‘false  doctrines'  in  the  non-el  sense,  and,  therefore,  take 
into  account  affective  and  evaluation-components,  which  are  usually  dis¬ 
regarded  when  we  speak  about  ‘false  doctrines'. 

Here  we  must  consider  a  problem  of  crucial,  general  human  sig¬ 
nificance.  It  seems  evident  that  evaluation  in  life,  and  particularly  in 
human  life,  represents  a  most  fundamental  psycho-logical  process  under¬ 
lying  motivation  and,  in  general,  s.r ,  which  shape  our  behaviour  and 
result  in  collective  structures  which  we  may  call  ‘stages  of  civilization’. 

We  may  distinguish  three  periods  of  human  development  as  char¬ 
acterized  by  their  standards  of  evaluation : 

1)  The  pre-human  and  primitive  period  of  literal,  general,  and 
unrestricted  identification.  The  semantics  of  this  period  could  be  for¬ 
mulated  roughly  as  ‘everything  is  everything  else',  which  might  be  called 
one- valued  semantics. 

2)  The  infantile,  or  A  period  of  partial  or  restricted  identification, 
allowing  symmetrical  relations,  to  the  exclusion  of  asymmetrical  rela¬ 
tions.  Its  semantics  involve,  among  others,  the  ‘law  of  identity' — ‘every¬ 
thing  is  identical  with  itself',  its  two-valued  character  being  expressed 
by  the  postulate  ‘A  is  B  or  not  B\ 

3)  The  adult,  or  A ,  or  scientific  period  based  on  the  complete 
elimination  of  identification,  by  means  of  asymmetrical  and  other  rela¬ 
tions,  which  establishes  structure  as  the  foundation  of  all  ‘knowledge'. 
Its  semantics  follow  the  oo-valued  semantics  of  probability  and  recognize 
‘equality',  ‘equivalence'. ,  but  no  ‘identity'. 

Before  analysing  the  above  three  periods  separately,  it  must  be 
stated  that  ‘identity',  defined  as  ‘absolute  sameness',  necessitates  ‘abso¬ 
lute  sameness'  in  ‘all’  aspects,  never  to  be  found  in  this  world,  nor  in 
our  heads.  Anything  with  which  we  deal  on  the  objective  levels  repre¬ 
sents  a  process,  different  all  the  ‘time',  no  matter  how  slow  or  fast  the 
process  might  be;  therefore,  a  principle  or  a  premise  that  ‘everything 
is  identical  with  itself'  is  invariably  false  to  facts.  From  a  structural 
point  of  view,  it  represents  a  foundation  for  a  linguistic  system  non¬ 
similar  in  structure  to  the  world  or  ourselves.  All  world  pictures,  specu¬ 
lations  and  s.r  based  on  such  premises  must  build  for  us  delusional 
worlds,  and  an  optimum  adjustment  to  an  actual  world,  so  fundamentally 
different  from  our  fancies,  must,  in  principle,  be  impossible. 

If  we  take  even  a  symbolic  expression  1  =  1,  ‘absolute  sameness'  in 
‘all’  aspects  is  equally  impossible,  although  we  may  use  in  this  connection 
terms  such  as  ‘equal',  ‘equivalent’,.  ‘Absolute  sameness  in  all  aspects' 
would  necessitate  an  identity  of  different  nervous  systems  which  produce 

ON  RELATIONS 

and  use  these  symbols,  an  identity  of  the  different  states  of  the  nervous 
system  of  the  person  who  wrote  the  above  two  symbols,  an  identity  of 
the  surfaces . ,  of  different  parts  of  the  paper,  in  the  distribution  of  ink, 
and  what  not.  To  demand  such  impossible  conditions  is,  of  course, 
absurd,  but  it  is  equally  absurd  and  very  harmful  for  sanity  and  civ¬ 
ilization  to  preserve  until  this  day  such  delusional  formulations  as  stan¬ 
dards  of  evaluation ,  and  then  spend  a  lifetime  of  suffering  and  toil  to 
evade  the  consequences.  This  may  be  comparable  to  the  spending  of 
many  years  in  teaching  and  training  our  children  that  one  and  one  never 
equal  two,  that  twice  two  never  equal  four . ,  and  then  they  would  have 
to  spend  a  lifetime  full  of  surprises  and  disappointments,  if  not  trage¬ 
dies,  to  learn,  when  they  are  about  to  die,  that  the  above  statements  are 
always  correct  in  mathematics  and  very  often  true  in  daily  life,  and 
finally  acquire  the  sadly  belated  wisdom  that  they  were  taught  false 
doctrines  and  trained  in  delusional  s.r  from  the  beginning. 

If  we  revised  these  false  doctrines,  we  would  not  twist  the  lives  of 
younger  generations  to  begin  with.  It  seems  that,  for  the  sake  of  sanity, 
the  term  ‘identity*,  symbolizing  such  a  fundamental  false  structural  doc¬ 
trine,  should  be  entirely  eliminated  from  the  vocabulary,  but  the  term 
‘identification’  should  be  retained  in  psychiatry  as  a  label  for  extremely 
wide-spread  delusional  states  which,  at  present,  in  a  mild  form,  affect 
the  majority  of  us. 

If  we  investigate  the  standards  of  evaluation  of  animals,  the  ex¬ 
periments  of  Pavlov  and  his  followers  show  that,  after  establishing  a 
‘conditional  reflex*  (which  means  a  physiological  relating  of  a  signal 
with  food,  for  instance),  the  physiological  effect  of  the  signal  on  the 
nervous  system  of  the  animal  is  to  produce  secretions  similar  in  quan¬ 
tity  and  quality  to  those  the  food  produces.  We  can  thus  say  that,  from 
a  physiological  point  of  view,  the  animal  organism  identifies  the  signal 
with  food.  That  represents  the  animal  standard  of  evaluation  at  that 
given  period.  But  even  the  animal  nervous  system  is  flexible  enough  to 
learn  by  experience  that  identification  has  no  survival  value,  for,  if,  after 
the  signal,  food  is  repeatedly  not  forthcoming,  he  identifies  again  the 
signal  with  the  absence  of  food.  In  more  complex  experiments,  when 
both  these  identifications  are  interplayed,  the  result  is  a  real  physiological 
dilemma,  culminating,  usually,  in  a  more  or  less  profound  nervous  dis¬ 
turbance,  corresponding  to  ‘mental’  ills  in  humans. 

Identification  represents  a  comparatively  unflexible,  rigid  form  of 
adaptation,  of  low  degree  conditionality,  so  to  say,  and,  by  neurological 
necessity,  represents  the  processes  of  animal  adaptation,  inadequate  for 
modern  man.  On  human  levels,  it  is  found  best  exemplified  in  primitive 

196  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

peoples  and  in  cases  of  ‘mentally’  ill.  In  less  severe  cases  of  semantic 
disturbances,  we  also  find  identification  of  different  degrees  of  intensity. 
The  milder  cases  are  usually  considered  as  ‘normal’,  which,  in  principle, 
is  very  harmful,  because  it  establishes  an  animalistic,  or  primitive,  stan¬ 
dard  of  evaluation  for  ‘normal’.  ‘Identity’,  as  we  have  seen,  is  invariably 
false  to  facts ;  and  so  identification  produces,  and  must  produce,  non¬ 
survival  s.r,  and,  therefore,  must  be  considered  pathological  for  mod¬ 
ern  man. 

That  identification  afflicts  the  majority  of  us  today  is  also  shown 
by  experiments  with  conditional  reflexes  and  the  psychogalvanic  experi¬ 
ments  which  show  clearly  that  the  majority  of  humans  identify  the  sym¬ 
bol  with  actualities,  and  secretions  very  often  follow ,  In  other  words, 
the  reactions  are  of  such  a  low  order  of  conditionality  as  we  find  in 
animals  and  in  primitive  men.  In  principle,  it  makes  no  difference 
whether  a  sound  (or  word),  or  other  signal  (symbol)  is  identified  with 
food  or  other  actualities  which  are  not  symbols,  and  the  secretions  are 
produced  by  the  adrenal  glands,  for  instance,  resulting  in  fear  or  anger, 
instead  of  by  the  salivary  or  sweat  glands.  In  all  such  cases,  in  experi¬ 
ments  with  humans,  the  evaluation  is  false  to  facts,  and  the  physiological 
secretion  is  uncalled  for  if  the  evaluation  would  be  appropriate  to  the 
situation.  In  very  few  instances,  the  human  experiments  with  condi¬ 
tional  and  psychogalvanic  reflexes  break  down,  in  the  sense  that  the 
signal-symbol  is  not  identified  with  first  order  actualities,  and  so  such 
an  organism  has  no  uncontrolled  glandular  secretions  for  signal-symbols 
alone .  In  a  ^-system  of  evaluation,  which  involves  on  semantic  levels 
the  consciousness  of  abstracting,  these  exceptional  persons  (1933),  with 
proper  evaluation  and  controlled  reactions,  prove  the  rule  for  modern 
man.  In  other  words,  modern  man,  when  he  stops  the  pre-human  and 
primitive  identification,  will  have  a  much-increased  and  conscious  con¬ 
trol  of  his  secretions,  colloidal  states  of  his  nervous  system . ,  and  so  of 
his  reactions  and  behaviour.  The  above  applies  to  all  j.r,  ‘logical’  pro¬ 
cesses  included. 

Identification  is  found  in  all  known  forms  of  ‘mental’  ills.  A  sym¬ 
bol,  in  any  form,  or  any  s.r  may  be  identified  in  value  with  some  fictitious 
‘reality’  at  a  given  date,  resulting  in  macro-physiological  (glandular,  for 
instance)  or  micro-physiological  (colloidal.,)  activities  or  disturbances 
which  result  in  particular  semantic  states  and  behaviour.  It  is  impos¬ 
sible  to  deny  that  ‘mentally’  ill  have  inappropriate  standards  of  evalua¬ 
tion,  and  that  identification  appears  always  as  an  important  factor  in 
pathological  evaluations.  Experiments  with  ‘mentally’  ill  show  clearly 
that  this  evaluation  can  be  altered  or  improved  by  different  chemical 

ON  RELATIONS 

agencies  which  affect  the  colloids  of  the  nervous  system,  by  environ¬ 
mental  changes  . ,  and  by  changing  the  standards  of  evaluation  which,  at 
present,  is  usually  called  ‘psychotherapy*.  The  analysis  of  the  mechan¬ 
ism  of  evaluation  leads,  naturally,  to  a  generalized  and  simplified  method, 
which  may  have  not  only  a  therapeutic  but  also  an  important  new  pre¬ 
ventive  value. 

Literal  identification  is  found  in  all  primitive  peoples  and  accounts 
for  their  semantic  states,  reactions,  their  metaphysics,  low  development . , 
but  it  is  impossible,  for  lack  of  space,  to  go  into  details  here. 

The  A  standard  of  evaluation  departed  from  literal  identification  to 
some  extent.  We  still  preserve  in  our  school  books  as  the  most  funda¬ 
mental  law  of  thought —the  law  of  identity* — often  expressed  in  the 
form  ‘everything  is  identical  with  itself*,  which,  as  we  have  seen,  is 
invariably  false  to  facts.  We  do  not  realize  that,  in  a  human  world,  we 
are  dealing  at  most  only  with  ‘equality*,  ‘equivalence*. ,  at  a  given  place 
and  date,  or  by  definition,  but  never  with  ‘identity*,  or  ‘absolute  same¬ 
ness*,  disregarding  entirely  space-time  relations,  involving  ‘all*  the 
indefinitely  many  aspects  which,  through  human  ingenuity,  we  often 
manufacture  at  will.  In  an  actual  world  of  four-dimensional  processes 
and  the  indefinitely  many  ‘aspects*  manufactured  by  ourselves,  adjustment 
in  principle  is  impossible,  or,  at  best,  only  accidental,  if  we  retain  ‘iden¬ 
tity*.  The  A  evaluation  was  based  on  symmetrical  relations  of  ‘identity* 
and  also  partial  ‘identity*,  expressed  even  in  our  political,  economic . , 
doctrines  and  corresponding  behaviour,  the  analysis  of  which  would 
require  a  special  volume  to  be  written,  I  hope  soon,  by  some  one. 

Under  the  pre-human  and  primitive  standards  of  evaluation,  science 
was  not  possible.  Under  the  A  standards  the  beginnings  of  science  be¬ 
came  possible,  but  if  science  had  not  departed  from  those  standards,  we 
would  have  had  no  modern  science.  Lately,  when  the  persecution  of 
science  has  increasingly  relaxed  (not  in  all  countries  in  a  similar  de¬ 
gree)  and  scientists  were  allowed  to  develop  their  disciplines  with  much 
less  fear  of  persecution,  sometimes  even  encouraged  and  helped  by  public 
interest,  scientists  found  that  they  invariably  had  to  build  their  own 
vocabularies  of  a  distinctly,  although  unrealized,  A  character.  The  chasm 
between  human  affairs  and  science  became  wider  and  wider.  The  reason 
for  it  was  that,  in  life,  even  at  present,  we  preserve  A  standards  of 
evaluation,  and  science  mainly  depends  on  subtler  A  means  involving 
asymmetrical  relations  which  alone  can  give  us  structure .  I  will  return 
repeatedly,  later  on,  to  the  A  re-evaluation  of  the  A  standards  of  values. 

The  A  evaluation  is  based  on  asymmetrical  and  other  relations.  I 
shall  not  attempt  to  summarize  it  here  because  the  problems  are  very 

198  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

large  and  this  whole  volume  is  devoted  to  that  subject.  Here  I  shall 
mention,  once  more,  that  only  with  A  standards  of  evaluation  does  a 
scientific  treatment  of  man  and  his  affairs  become  possible.  A  ^-system 
depends  on  a  complete  elimination  of  identification  which  affects  bene¬ 
ficially  all  our  s.r,  as  experience  and  experiments  show. 

It  has  been  already  emphasized  that  in  the  human  child  the  nervous 
system  is  not  physically  finished  at  birth,  and  that  for  some  years  there¬ 
after  it  is  plastic.  Hence,  the  ‘environment’ — which  includes  languages, 
doctrines,  with  their  structure,  all  connected  with  evaluation-components 
conditions  the  future  functioning  of  the  system.  The  way  in  which  the 
nervous  system  works,  the  ‘sanity’,  ‘un-sanity’  and  ‘insanity’  of  the  in¬ 
dividual  depends  to  a  large  extent  on  how  this  plastic  and  sensitive 
apparatus  is  treated,  particularly  in  childhood.  Because  of  the  serial 
structure  of  the  nervous  system,  the  language  and  doctrines  supplied 
should  be  of  the  structure  necessary  for  the  adequate  representation  of 
serial  structures  and  functions.  With  the  old  A  means  this  could  not 
be  accomplished. 

At  this  point,  it  will  be  well  to  introduce  an  important  semantic 
subject,  to  which  we  shall  return  later;  namely,  the  connection  between 
the  primitive  subject-predicate  language  and  identification.  For  ex¬ 
ample,  the  statement,  ‘the  leaf  is  green’,  is  taken  to  imply  ‘greenness’, 
which,  by  its  verbal  structure,  has  the  character  of  a  ‘substantive’  and 
implies  some  sort  of  objective  independence.  It  is  not  considered  as  an 
asymmetrical  relation  between  the  observer  and  the  observed  and,  ac¬ 
cordingly,  tends  toward  an  additive  implication.  ‘Greenness’  is  thus 
objectified  and  added  to  the  leaf  in  describing  a  ‘green  leaf’.  The  objec¬ 
tified  greenness’  leads  to  an  anthropomorphic  mythology,  which,  in  turn, 
involves  and  develops  the  undifferentiated  projecting  mechanism  so  fun¬ 
damental  in  semantic  disturbances.  The  objectification  is  evaluated 
structurally  as  a  ‘real’  situation,  and  this  introduces  the  non-survival 

reversed  order  evaluation  in  which  the  use  of  the  ‘is’  of  identity,  result- 
ing,in  identification,  is  the  main  factor.  The  stronger  the  structural  ‘be¬ 
lief  in  the  truth  of  the  representation,  or,  in  other  words,  the  more 
we  identify  the  higher  order  abstractions  with  the  lower,  which,  in  fact, 
are  different,  the  more  dangerous  becomes  the  ‘emotional’  tension  in  the 
form  of  unjustified  evaluation ,  which,  ultimately,  must  involve  delusional 
factors,  no  matter  how  slight,  and  result  in  semantic  disturbances.  Ignor¬ 
ance,  involving  strong  faith  in  the  erroneous  structural  belief,  is  dan¬ 
gerously  akin  to  more  developed  symptoms  of  ‘mental’  illness  called 
illusions,  delusions,  and  hallucinations.  We  are  mostly  semantic  vic¬ 
tims  of  the  primitive  doctrines  which  underlie  the  A  structure  of  our 

ON  RKLATIONS 

language,  and  so  we  populate  the  world  around  us  with  semantic  phan¬ 
toms  which  add  to  our  fears  and  worries,  or  which  lead  to  abnormal 
cheerfulness,  well  known  among  some  'mentally'  ill. 

It  should  be  realized  that  in  the  A  system  of  evaluation  many  indi¬ 
viduals  profit  in  various  ways  by  what  amounts  to  distracting  the  atten¬ 
tion  of  mankind  from  actual  life  problems,  which  make  us  forget  or 
disregard  actualities.  They  often  supply  us  with  phantom  semantic  struc¬ 
tures,  while  they  devote  their  attention  to  the  control  of  actualities  not 
seldom  for  their  personal  benefit.  If  one  surveys  the  A  situation  impar¬ 
tially,  one  occasionally  feels  hopeless.  But,  no  matter  how  we  now  con¬ 
spire  one  against  another,  and  thus,  in  the  long  run,  against  ourselves, 
the  plain  realization  that  the  difficulty  is  found  in  the  standards  of 
evaluation,  establishes  the  necessary  preliminary  step  to  the  escape. 

It  is  a  well-known  fact  that,  in  a  large  proportion  of  'mental*  ills, 
we  find  a  semantic  flight  from  'reality*  ( m.o )  when  their  'reality*  be¬ 
comes  too  hard  to  endure.  It  is  not  difficult  to  see  that  different  myth¬ 
ologies,  cults . ,  often  supply  such  structural  semantic  ‘flights  from  reality* ; 
and  that  those  who  actually  help,  or  who  are  professionally  or  otherwise 
engaged  in  producing  and  promulgating  such  semantic  flights,  help  man¬ 
kind  to  be  un-sane,  to  deal  with  phantoms,  to  create  dream  states , .  There 
is  no  longer  any  excuse  in  the  old  animalistic  law  of  supply  and  demand 
— that,  because  there  is  a  demand  for  such  flights,  they  should  be  sup¬ 
plied.  That  argument  is  not  held  to  apply  to  those  who  peddle  drugs  or 
wood  alcohol.  The  flights  from  reality  always  have  the  earmarks  of 
'mental*  illness.  Very  often  such  actively  engaged  individuals  are  them¬ 
selves  ill  to  the  point  of  hallucinations;  they  often  'hear  voices',  'see 
visions*,  ‘speak  tongues*,.  Very  often  other  morbid  symptoms  occur 
which  are  similar  to  those  shown  by  the  'mentally'  ill  of  the  usual  hos¬ 
pital  types.  It  is  not  generally  realized  that,  although  the  patient  suffers 
intensely,  he  usually  shows  marked  resistance  to  any  attempt  to  relieve 
him  of  his  semantic  affliction.  Only  after  he  is  relieved  by  semantic 
re-education  does  the  patient  realize  how  very  unhappy  he  was. 

The  situation  is  very  serious.  There  is  a  powerful  well-organized 
system,  with  enormous  wealth  behind  it,  based  on  A  and  pre-aristotelian 
standards  of  evaluation  which  keeps  mankind  in  delusional  semantic 
states.  Its  members  do  their  best,  better  than  they  know,  to  keep  man¬ 
kind  uttrsane  in  flights  from  ‘reality*,  instead  of  helping  to  revise  the  A 
standards  of  evaluation  and  to  reorganize  the  horrible  ‘realities',  all  of 
our  own  making,  into  realities  less  painful.  The  comparatively  few  psy¬ 
chiatrists  are  naturally  not  a  match  for  such  vast  numbers  of  well- 

200  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

organized  men  and  women  who,  in  their  blissful  ignorance,  work  in  the 
opposite  direction ;  and  all  of  us  pay  the  price. 

The  activities  of  these  individuals  often  promulgate  something  simi¬ 
lar  to  the  well-known  ‘induced  insanity’.  Quite  often  paranoid  or  para¬ 
noiac  and,  more  rarely,  hypomanic  patients  can  influence  their  immediate 
companions  to  such  an  extent  that  they  join  in  believing  in  their  delu¬ 
sions  and  copy  their  s.r .  Susceptible  associates  begin  to  develop  similar 
delusions  and  hallucinations  and  to  pass  through  episodes  themselves, 
perfectly  oblivious  to  contradictions  with  external  m.o  reality.  There 
are  many  paranoiac-like  semantic  epidemics  of  this  kind  on  record.  It 
is  instructive  to  visit  some  ‘meetings’  and  watch  the  performer  and  the 
audience.  The  pathetic  side  of  it  is  that  these  performers,  themselves  not 
realizing  the  harmfulness  of  the  situation,  often  pretend,  or  genuinely 
believe,  that  they  are  helping  mankind  by  preaching  some  metaphysical 
‘morals’.  What  they  actually  produce  is  a  disorganization  of  the  survival¬ 
working  of  the  human  nervous  system,  particularly  if  they  train  the 
structurally  undeveloped  nervous  system  of  children  to  delusional  evalu¬ 
ations  and  s.r ,  and,  in  general,  make  sanity  and  higher  and  effective 
ethical  standards  very  difficult  or  impossible.  It  is  positively  known  that 
s.r  are  inextricably  connected  with  electrical  currents,  secretions  of  dif¬ 
ferent  glands . ,  which,  in  turn,  exert  a  powerful  influence  on  colloidal 
structure  and  behaviour,  and  so  condition  our  neurological  and  physio¬ 
logical  development.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  imposing  delusional 
s.r  on  the  undeveloped  child  must  result  in  at  least  colloidal  injury,  which 
later  on  facilitates  arrested  development  or  regression,  and,  in  general, 
leads  away  from  adjustment  and  sanity. 

Lack  of  space  and  the  essentially  constructive  aims  of  the  present 
system  do  not  allow  me  to  analyse  many  fundamental  interrelations  in 
the  development  of  man,  but  a  brief  list,  worthy  of  analysis,  may  be  sug¬ 
gested  : 

1 )  The  relation  between  the  pre-human  reactions  and  the  reactions 
of  the  primitive  man,  involving  always  some  copying  by  mutants  of  the 
responses  of  the  prevailing  simpler  organisms. 

2)  The  interrelation  between  the  reactions  of  the  primitive  man, 
his  animism,  anthropomorphism,  his  other  s.r  and  the  structure  of  his 
language  and  semantics. 

3)  The  relation  between  the  structure  of  primitive  languages  and 
the  structure  of  the  ‘philosophical  grammar’  formulated  by  Aristotle, 
generally  called  ‘logic’. 

4)  The  relation  between  this  grammar,  the  structure  of  language, 
and  the  further  development  of  our  structural  metaphysics  and  s.r. 

ON  RELATIONS 

5)  The  influence  the  last  conditions  exerted  on  the  structure  of 
our  institutions,  doctrines,  and  the  s.r  related  to  them. 

6)  The  relation  between  the  ‘copying  animals  in  our  nervous  pro¬ 
cesses’  and  semantic  blockages . ,  preventing  an  adult  civilization,  agree¬ 
ment,  sanity,  and  other  desirable  human  reactions. 

This  brief  list  suggests  an  enormous  field  for  further  research,  but, 
even  now,  the  formulation  of  a  ^-system  of  evaluations  makes  a  few 
points  clearer. 

An  infant,  be  it  primitive  or  modern,  begins  life  with  s.r  of  identity 
and  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions,  natural  to  his  age,  yet  false  in 
principle,  and  structurally  false  to  fact.  At  present,  parents  and  teachers 
seldom  check  or  counteract  this  tendency,  mostly  not  realizing  the  impor¬ 
tance  of  this  semantic  factor  and  its  role  in  the  future  adjustment  of  the 
individual.  In  the  rough,  to  a  baby,  his  cry  ‘is*  food.  Words  ‘are’  magic. 
This  identification  is  structurally  false  to  facts,  but  in  babyhood  it  mostly 
works .  To  the  infant,  experience  proves  that  the  noises  he  makes,  a  cry 
or  a  word,  have  the  objective  value, — food.  The  semantic  identity  of  the 
symbol  and  the  un-speakable  object  level, — food, — has  been  established. 
This  infantile  attitude  or  s.r  is  carried  on  into  grown-up  life. 

Under  very  simple  conditions  of  primitive  peoples,  in  spite  of  many 
difficulties,  this  attitude  of  identification  is  not  always  checked  by 
experience,  and  experimenting  is  non-existent  at  this  stage.  If  it  is,  then 
such  checking  of  identification  is  ‘explained’  by  some  sort  of  demonology 
and  ‘good’  or  ‘evil’  ‘spirits’, .  Delusional,  from  the  modern  point  of  view, 
s.r  are  compensated  by  mythologies,  making  the  two  sides  of  the  semantic 
equation  equivalent.  This  equating  tendency  is  inherent  in  all  human  s.r. 
It  expresses  the  instinctive  ‘feel’  for  the  similarity  of  structure  as  the 
base  of  ‘knowledge’,  and  it  ultimately  finds  its  expression  in  mathematical 
equations.  In  all  psycho-logical  processes  of  ‘understanding’,  we  must 
have  some  standards  of  evaluation  and  ‘equivalence’.  On  primitive  levels, 
this  is  accomplished  by  literal  identification  and  delusional  mythology  of 
the  type,  that  a  storm  at  sea  is  ‘caused’  by  a  violent  quarrel  between  a 
‘god’  and  his  ‘wife’ ;  or,  in  contemporaneous  mythology,  a  draught,  or 
fire,  or  death  by  lightning,  is  explained  as  ‘punishment’  for  ‘sins’,. 
Semantic  compensation  is  needed  and  produced.  A  similar  semantic 
process  produces  scientific  theories,  but  with  different  standards  of  eval¬ 
uation.  At  present,  scientific  theories  do  not  cover  all  semantic  needs  and 
urges  of  mankind,  owing  to  the  prevailing  false  to  fact  identification  of 
different  orders  of  abstractions.  With  the  full  consciousness  of  abstract¬ 
ing,  which  means  proper  evaluation  or  differentiation  between  orders  of 
abstractions,  science  will  then  cover  all  our  non-pathological  semantic 

202  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

needs,  and  different  primitive  mythologies  will  become  unnecessary.  A 
very  harmful,  primitive,  delusional  semantic  factor  of  blockages  would 
be  eliminated. 

The  ‘is’  of  identity  plays  a  great  havoc  with  our  s.r,  as  any  ‘identity’ 
is  structurally  false  to  fact.  An  infant  does  not  know  and  cannot  know 
that.  In  his  life,  the  ‘is’  of  identity  plays  an  important  semantic  role, 
which,  if  not  checked  intelligently,  becomes  a  pernicious  semantic  factor 
in  his  grown-up  reactions,  which  preserve  the  infantile  character  and 
with  which  adult  adjustment  and  semantic  health  is  impossible.  The 
infant  begins  to  speak  and  again  he  is  trained  in  the  ‘is’  of  identity. 
Symbols  are  identified  with  the  un-speakable  actions,  events  and  objects 
under  penalty  of  pain  or  even  death.  The  magic  of  words  begins  its  full 
sway.  As  a  rule,  parental,  crude  disciplining  of  the  infant,  particularly 
in  former  days,  trained  the  s.r  of  the  infant  again  in  the  delusional  ‘is* 
of  identity.  The  results  are  semantically  and  structurally  very  far- 
reaching  and  are  found  to  underlie  modern  mythologies,  militarism,  the 
prevailing  economic  and  social  systems,  the  control  by  fear  (be  it  ‘hell’ 
or  machine  guns),  illusory  gold  standards,  hunger, . 

Experience  shows  that  such  identification  of  symbols  with  the 
un-speakable  levels  works  very  well  with  animals.  With  man,  it  leads 
only  to  the  misuse  of  the  human  nervous  system,  semantic  disturbances 
of  evaluation,  and  the  prevailing  unstable  animalistic  systems  in  practi¬ 
cally  all  fields,  resulting  in  the  general  chaos  in  human  affairs. 

It  should  be  noticed  that  the  ‘is’  of  predication  also  expresses  a  sort 
of  partial  identity ,  leading  to  primitive  anthropomorphism  and  general 
confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions.  By  an  inherent  necessity,  our  lives 
are  lived  on  the  un-speakable  objective  levels,  which  include  not  only 
ordinary  objects  but  also  actions  and  immediate  feelings,  symbols  being 
only  auxiliary  means.  The  natural  ordinal  evaluation,  which  should  be 
the  foundation  for  healthy  s.r ,  appears  as  the  event-process  level  first, 
the  object  next  in  importance ;  the  objective  level  first,  the  symbolic  next 
in  importance ;  the  descriptive  level  first,  the  inferential  level  next  in 
importance , .  The  semantic  identification  of  these  different  levels  not  only 
abolishes  the  natural  evaluation,  but,  in  fact,  reverses  the  natural  order. 
Once  this  is  realized,  we  see  clearly  that  all  statements  about  the  objec¬ 
tive  level,  which  is  made  up  of  absolute  individuals,  are  only  probable  in 
different  degrees  and  can  never  be  certain.  The  ‘is’  of  identity  underlies, 
also,  the  two-valued,  too  primitive,  too  restricted,  and  structurally 
fallacious  A  'logic’. 

The  crucial  semantic  importance  of  asymmetrical  relations  becomes 
obvious  when  we  consider  that  all  evaluation  and  non-el  meanings 

ON  RELATIONS 

depend  ultimately  on  asymmetrical  relations.  In  the  technical  fields, 
mathematics  and  the  exact  sciences;  in  the  semi-scientific  fields,  eco¬ 
nomics,  politics,  sociology.;  in  the  as  yet  non-scientific  fields,  ‘ethics’, 
‘happiness*,  ‘adjustment*. ,  represent  ultimately  different  forms  of  evalua¬ 
tion,  impossible  to  formulate  adequately  under  aristotelianism. 

Obviously,  a  ^-system  based  on  proper  semantic  evaluation  leading 
to  non-pathological  reactions,  adjustments . ,  must  make  relations  and 
multi-dimensional  order  fundamental  for  sanity.  The  semantic  connec¬ 
tion  between  mathematical  methods  and  all  the  other  concerns  of  man 
becomes  also  necessary  and  obvious. 

In  mathematics,  recently,  the  notion  of  equality  needed  a  refinement 
and  the  notion  of  ‘identity*  has  been  introduced.  The  present  analysis 
discloses  that,  although  the  refinement  and  the  symbol  may  be  retained, 
yet  the  name  should  be  entirely  abandoned,  because  it  conceals  a  very 
semantically  vicious  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions.  If,  by  definition, 
we  produce  new  terms,  these  new  terms  are  of  a  higher  order  abstraction 
than  the  terms  used  in  the  definition,  and  so  the  identification  of  them 
as  to  the  orders  of  abstractions  is  physiologically  and  structurally  false 
to  facts. 

The  problems  discussed  in  the  present  chapter  have  been  felt 
vaguely  for  more  than  two  thousand  years  and  found  their  first  histor¬ 
ical  expression  in  the  rift  between  Aristotle,  the  biologist,  and  Plato,  the 
founder  of  mathematical  philosophy.  Mathematics  is,  in  principle,  A , 
and  so,  in  the  study  of  mathematics,  we  can  learn  most  about  the  princi¬ 
ples  of  non-aristotelianism.  In  physics,  only  very  recently,  do  we  begin 
to  eliminate  the  ‘is*  of  identity  and  elementalism  which  resulted  in  the 
Ef  systems.  All  sciences  strive  to  become  more  mathematical  and  exact 
and  so  A.  In  fact,  all  advances  in  science  are  due  to  the  building  of  new 
A  languages,  usually  called  ‘terminology*.  We  can  go  further  and  say, 
definitely,  that,  to  have  any  science,  we  must  make  a  A  revision  of  the 
languages  used.  Similarly  with  ‘man*,  either  we  decide  to  introduce 
into  human  affairs  scientific  evaluation,  and  so  part  company  with  the 
A  and  pre-aristotelian  system  of  evaluation,  or  preserve  A  structure, 
and  have  no  science  of  man,  or  science  of  sanity,  but  continue  in  the 
prevailing  chaos. 

CHAPTER  XIV 

ON  THE  NOTION  OF  INFINITY 

The  questions  on  which  there  is  disagreement  are  not  trivialities;  they 
are  the  very  roots  of  the  whole  vast  tree  of  modern  mathematics.  (22) 

E.  T.  BELL 

The  task  of  cleaning  up  mathematics  and  salvaging  whatever  can  be 
saved  from  the  wreckage  of  the  past  twenty  years  will  probably  be  enough 
to  occupy  one  generation.  (22)  E.  T.  bell 

The  intention  of  the  Hilbert  proof  theory  is  to  atone  by  an  act  performed 
once  for  all  for  the  continual  titanic  offences  which  mathematics  and  all 
mathematicians  have  committed  and  will  still  commit  against  mind,  against 
the  principle  of  evidence;  and  this  act  consists  of  gaining  the  insight  that 
mathematics,  if  it  is  not  true,  is  at  least  consistent.  Mathematics,  as  we 
saw,  abounds  in  propositions  that  are  not  really  significant  judgments. 
<549)  #  HERMANN  WEYL 

An  objectiyated  property  is  usually  called  a  set  in  mathematics.  (549) 

HERMANN  WEYL 

If  the  objects  are  indefinite  in  number,  that  is  to  say  if  one  is  constantly 
exposed  to  seeing  new  and  unforseen  objects  arise,  it  may  happen  that  the 
appearance  of  a  new  object  may  require  the  classification  to  be  modified, 
and  thus  it  is  we  are  exposed  to  antinomies.  There  is  no  actual  {given 
complete)  infinity .  <4i7)  h.  poincar£ 

The  structural  notion  of  ‘infinite’,  ‘infinity’,  is  of  great  semantic 
importance  and  lately  has  again  become  a  subject  of  heated  mathematical 
debates.  My  examination  of  this  subject  is  from  the  point  of  view  of  a 
^-system,  general  semantic,  and  a  theory  of  sanity  which  completely 
eliminates  identification.  In  Supplement  III,  I  give  a  more  detailed 
A  analysis  of  the  problem  already  anticipated  by  Brouwer,  Weyl, 
Chwistek,  and  others.  These  problems  are  not  yet  solved,  because 
mathematicians,  in  their  orientations  and  arguments,  still  use  el,  A 
‘logic’,  ‘psychology’,  and  epistemology,  which  involve  and  depend  on 
the  ‘is’  of  identity,  making  agreement  impossible. 

Mathematical  infinity  was  first  put  on  record  by  the  Roman  poet, 
Titus  Lucretius,  who,  as  far  back  as  the  first  century  b.c.,  wrote  very 
beautifully  about  it  in  his  De  Rerum  Natural  As  the  author  was  a  poet, 
and  his  work  poetry,  a  few  privileged  literati  had  great  pleasure  in  read¬ 
ing  it;  but  this  discovery,  not  being  rigorously  formulated,  remained 
inoperative,  and  so  practically  worthless  for  mankind  at  large,  for  2000 
years.  Only  about  fifty  years  ago,  mathematical  infinity  was  rediscovered 
by  mathematicians,  who  formulated  it  rigorously,  without  poetry.  Since 
then,  mathematics  has  progressed  with  all  other  sciences  in  an  unprece- 

ON  THE  NOTION  OF  INFINITY 

dented  way.  That  this  structural  linguistic  discovery  was  made  so  late  is 
probably  due  to  the  usual  blockage,  the  old  s.r,  old  habits  of  ‘thought’, 
and  prejudices. 

In  all  arguments  about  infinity,  from  remote  antiquity  until  Bolzano 
(1781-1848),  Dedekind  (1831-1916),  and  Cantor  (1845-1918),  there 
was  a  peculiar  maxim  involved.  All  arguments  against  infinity  involved 
a  certain  structural  assumption,  which,  at  first  inspection,  seemed  to  be 
true  and  ‘self-evident’,  and  yet,  if  carried  through,  would  be  quite 
destructive  to  all  mathematics  existing  at  that  date.  Arguments  favorable 
to  infinity  did  not  involve  these  tragic  consequences.  Quite  naturally, 
mathematicians,  and  particularly  Cantor,  began  to  investigate  this  peculiar 
maxim  and  the  s.r  which  were  playing  havoc.  The  structural  assumption 
in  question  is  that  ‘if  a  collection  is  part  of  another,  the  one  which  is  a 
part  must  have  fewer  terms  than  the  one  of  which  it  is  a  part’.  This  s.r 
was  deeply  rooted,  and  even  found  a  scholarly  formulation  in  Euclid’s 
wording  in  one  of  his  axioms:  ‘The  whole  is  greater  than  any  of  its 
parts’.  This  axiom,  although  it  is  not  an  exact  equivalent  of  the  maxim 
stated  above,  by  loose  reasoning,  which  was  usual  in  the  older  days,  could 
be  said  to  imply  the  troublesome  maxim.  It  is  not  difficult  to  see  that 
the  E  axiom,  as  well  as  our  troublesome  maxim,  expresses  a  struc¬ 
tural  generalization  taken  from  experience  which  applies  only  to  finite 
processes,  arrays , .  Indeed,  both  can  be  taken  as  a  definition  of  finite 
processes,  arrays , .  It  does  not  follow,  however,  that  the  one  definition 
and  structure  must  be  true  of  infinite  processes,  arrays , .  As  a  matter  of 
fact,  the  break-down  of  this  maxim  gives  us  the  precise  definition  of 
mathematical  infinity.  A  process  of  generating  arrays . ,  is  called  infinite 
when  it  contains,  as  parts,  other  processes,  arrays . ,  which  have  ‘as  many’ 
terms  as  the  first  process,  array , . 

The  term  ‘infinite’  means  a  process  which  does  not  end  or  stop,  and 
it  is  usually  symbolized  by  oo.  The  term  may  be  applied,  also,  to  an 
array  of  terms  or  other  entities,  the  production  of  which  does  not  end 
or  stop.  Thus  we  may  speak  of  the  infinite  process  of  generating  num¬ 
bers  because  every  positive  integer,  no  matter  how  great,  has  a  successor ; 
we  can  also  speak  of  infinite  divisibility  because  the  numerical  technique 
gives  us  means  to  accomplish  that.  The  term  ‘infinite’  is  used  here  as  an 
adjective  describing  the  characteristics  of  a  process ,  but  should  never  be 
used  as  a  noun,  as  this  leads  to  self-contradictions.  The  term  ‘infinity’, 
as  a  noun,  is  used  here  only  as  an  abbreviation  for  the  phrase  ‘infinite 
process  of  generating  numbers’, .  If  used  in  any  other  way  than  as  an 
abbreviation  for  the  full  phrase,  the  term  is  meaningless  in  science  (not 
in  psychopathology)  and  should  never  be  used.  The  above  semantic 

206  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

restrictions  are  not  arbitrary  or  purely  etymological,  but  they  follow  the 
rejection  of  the  ‘is*  of  identity  of  a  ^-system. 

Before  we  can  apply  the  term  ‘infinite*  to  physical  processes,  we 
must  first  theoretically  elucidate  this  term  to  the  utmost,  and  only  then 
find  out  by  experiment  whether  or  not  we  can  discover  physical  pro¬ 
cesses  to  which  such  a  term  can  be  applied.  Fortunately,  we  have  at  our 
disposal  a  semantic  process  of  generating  numbers  which,  by  common 
experience,  by  definition,  and  by  the  numerical  technique,  is  such  that 
every  number  has  a  successor.  Similarly,  our  semantic  processes  are 
capable  by  common  experience,  by  definition,  and  by  the  numerical 
technique  to  divide  a  finite  whole  indefinitely.  Thus,  if  we  do  not  identify 
external  physical  objective  processes  with  internal  semantic  processes, 
but  differentiate  between  them  and  apply  correct  symbolism,  we  can  see 
our  way  clear.  If  we  stop  this  semantic  process  of  generating  numbers 
at  any  stage,  then  we  deal  with  a  finite  number,  no  matter  how  great ; 
yet  the  process  remains,  by  common  experience,  by  definition,  and  by  the 
numerical  technique,  such  that  it  can  proceed  indefinitely.  In  the  A 
sense,  ‘infinite*,  as  applied  to  processes,  means  as  much  as  ‘indefinite*. 
We  should  notice  that  the  semantic  process  of  generating  numbers  should 
not  be  identified  with  a  selection  of  a  definite  number,  which,  by  necessity, 
is  finite,  no  matter  how  great.  The  identification  of  the  semantic  process 
of  generating  numbers  with  a  definite  number ;  the  identification  of  the 
semantic  process  of  infinite  divisibility  of  finites  in  the  direction  of  the 
small  with  the  generating  of  numbers  in  the  direction  of  the  great ;  and 
the  identification  of  semantic  internal  processes  with  external  physical 
processes . ,  are  found  at  the  foundation  of  the  whole  present  mathemati¬ 
cal  scandal,  which  divides  the  mathematical  world  into  two  hostile  camps* 

The  process  of  infinite  divisibility  is  closely  connected  with  the 
process  of  the  infinite  generation  of  numbers.  Thus  we  may  have  an 
array  of  numbers  1,  2,  3,  ...  n,  all  of  which  are  finite.  The  semantic 
process  of  passing  from  n  to  n  + 1  is  not  a.  number,  but  constitutes  a 
characteristic  of  the  semantic  process.  The  result  of  the  semantic  process ; 
namely,  n  +  1,  again  becomes  a  finite  number.  If  we  take  a  fraction,  a/n, 
the  greater  an  n  is  selected,  the  smaller  the  fraction  becomes,  but  with 
each  selection  the  fraction  again  is  finite,  no  matter  how  small. 

Although  the  two  processes  are  closely  connected  on  the  formal 
side,  they  are  very  different  from  the  semantic  point  of  view.  The  process 
of  generating  numbers  may  be  carried  on  indefinitely  or  ‘infinitely*  and 
has  no  upper  limit,  and  we  cannot  assign  such  a  limit  without  becoming 
tangled  up  in  self-contradiction  in  terms.  Not  so  with  the  process  of 
indefinite  or  infinite  divisibility.  In  this  case,  we  start  with  a  finite. 

ON  THE  NOTION  OF  INFINITY 

Existing  mathematical  symbolism  and  formalism  lead  to  identification 
of  both  fundamentally  different  semantic  processes  and  introduce  a  great 
deal  of  avoidable  confusion.  A  A  orientation  will  allow  us  to  retain 
mathematical  symbolism  and  formalism,  but  will  not  allow  the  identifi¬ 
cation  of  the  semantic  process  of  passing  from  number  to  number,  which 
passing  is  not  a  number,  with  the  result  of  this  process  which,  in  each 
case,  becomes  a  definite  and  finite  number. 

It  becomes  obvious  that  the  A  terminology  and  present  standard 
notions  of  ‘number’  identify  the  semantic  process  with  its  result,  an 
identification  which  must  ultimately  be  disastrous.  The  semantic  process 
is  thus  potentially  infinite,  but  the  passing  from  n  to  n  +  1  characterizes 
the  semantic  process,  not  number;  numbers  representing  only  finite 
results  of  the  indefinitely  extended  semantic  process. 

A  A  analysis  without  identification  discloses,  then,  that  only  the 
semantic  process  can  be  indefinitely  extended,  but  that  the  results  of 
this  process,  or  a  number  in  each  case,  must  be  finite.  To  speak  about 
an  ‘infinite*  or,  as  it  is  called,  ‘transfinite*  ‘number*,  is  to  identify  entirely 
different  issues,  and  involves  very  definite  self-contradictions  in  m.o 
terms.  The  existing  mathematical  terminology  has  been  developed  with¬ 
out  the  realization  of  A  issues  and  the  multiordinality  of  terms  and 
leads  automatically  to  such  identifications.  As  long  as  mathematicians 
do  not  consider  A  issues,  the  problems  of  mathematical  infinity  will 
remain  unsolved  and  hopeless;  and  yet,  without  a  scientific  theory  of 
infinity,  all  of  mathematics  and  most  of  science  would  be  entirely 
impossible.  A  A  clarification  of  these  problems  involves  a  new 
semantic  definition  of  numbers  and  mathematics,  given  in  Chapter 
XVIII,  which  eliminates  a  great  many  mysteries  in  connection  with 
mathematics  and  does  not  allow  these  dangerous  and  befogging 
identifications. 

From  a  A  point  of  view,  we  must  treat  infinity  in  the  first  can- 
torian  sense;  namely,  as  a  variable  finite,  the  term  variable  pertaining 
to  the  semantic  process  but  not  to  number,  the  term  finite  pertaining  to 
both  the  semantic  arrest  of  the  infinite  semantic  process,  and  so  charac¬ 
terizing  also  its  result ;  namely — a  number. 

In  the  meantime,  the  numerical  technique  is  indefinitely  flexible  in 
the  sense  that  no  matter  how  great  a  number  we  take,  we  always  can,  by 
a  semantic  process,  produce  a  greater  number,  and  no  matter  how  small 
the  difference  between  two  numbers  might  be,  we  always  can  find  a 
third  number  which  will  be  greater  than  the  smaller,  and  smaller  than 
the  given  greater  number.  Thus,  we  see  that  the  numerical  technique  is 
such  as  to  correspond  in  flexibility  exactly  to  the  semantic  processes,  but 

208  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

there  is  nothing  flexible  about  a  definite  number  once  it  is  selected. 
What  has  been  already  said  about  a  variable  applies,  also,  to  a  number ; 
namely,  that  a  ‘variable*  does  not  ‘vary*  in  the  ordinary  sense ;  but  this 
term  applies  only  to  the  semantic  processes  of  the  mathematician.  The 
older  intensional  A  definition  of  ‘number*  must  have  led  to  the  older 
identifications.  The  A,  extensional,  and  non-el  semantic  definition  of 
numbers  does  not  allow  such  identifications.  The  A  term  ‘number* 
applied  to  a  definite  number,  but  also  to  an  intensional  definition  of 
numbers.  The  A ,  or  semantic  definition  of  numbers,  is  different  in 
the  sense  that  it  finds  extensional  characteristics  of  each  number,  applic¬ 
able  to  all  numbers,  and  so  helps  not  to  identify  a  definite  number 
with  the  process  of  generating  numbers,  which  the  use  of  one  term  for 
two  entirely  different  entities  must  involve. 

Cantorian  alephs ,  then,  are  the  result  of  identification  or  confusion 
of  entirely  different  issues  and  must  be  completely  eliminated.  The 
rejection  of  alephs  will  require  a  fundamental  revision  of  those  branches 
of  mathematics  and  physics  which  utilize  them ;  yet,  as  far  as  I  know, 
with  a  very  few  exceptions,  the  alephs  are  not  utilized  or  needed, 
although  the  ‘wiw/  is  used,  which  spell-mark  has  become  fashionable  in 
many  mathematical  and  physical  circles.  In  the  case  of  alephs,  history 
may  repeat  itself  and  the  alephs,  like  the  ‘infinitesimal*,  when  their 
self-contradictory  character  becomes  understood,  will  be  eliminated 
without  affecting  the  great  body  of  mathematics,  but  only  the  small 
portions  which  are  built  on  the  alephs. 

As  to  the  existence  of  infinite  processes,  we  know  positively  only 
about  the  semantic  process  of  generating  numbers  and  the  semantic 
process  of  infinite  divisibility.  These  processes  are  evident  in  our 
common  experience.  We  cannot  a  priori  know  if  such  infinite  processes 
can  be  found  in  the  world  which  must  be  discovered  by  investigation  and 
experimentation. 

The  existing  terminology  is  still  A  and  is  based  on,  and  leads 
to,  identification,  and  so  in  my  A  presentation  I  cannot  use  it  and 
expect  to  clear  up  some  of  the  issues  involved.  The  terms  such  as 
‘class*,  ‘aggregate*,  ‘set’.,  imply  a  definite  static  collection.  The  term 
‘infinite*,  in  the  meantime,  can  only  be  correctly  and  significantly  used 
as  applied  to  a  dynamic  semantic  process.  We  cannot  speak  of  ‘infinite’ 
classes,  aggregates,  sets.,  and  evade  the  issues  of  identification  of 
entirely  different  entities.  The  term  ‘series*  has  a  technical  meaning  in 
connection  with  numbers  and  so,  for  a  general  discussion  of  processes, 
is  a  little  too  specific.  The  term  ‘array*  is  more  general,  yet  extensional, 
of  which  ‘series*  would  be  a  special  case.  The  general  term  ‘number* 

ON  Till-;  NOTION  or  INFINITY 

is  multiordinal  and  intensional  and  so,  in  the  A  extensional  system, 
revalued,  and  must  be  used  in  the  plural;  namely,  ‘numbers’.  The 
term  ‘number’  in  the  singular  will  be  used  to  indicate  a  definite  number. 
The  term  ‘denumerable’  has  been  introduced  by  Cantor  and  means  any 
extensional  array  of  terms,  facts,  states,  observables . ,  which  can  be  put 
in  one-to-one  correspondence  with  the  infinite  array  of  positive  integers. 

Let  me  repeat  once  more :  the  semantic  process  may  be  carried  on 
without  limits,  and  the  infinite  series  of  positive  integers  is  an  exten¬ 
sional,  technical,  and  verbal  expression  of  this  semantic  process  and  the 
only  infinite  array  of  which  existence  we  are  certain. 

We  shall  be  able  to  explain,  and  to  give  a  better  definition  of, 
mathematical  infinity  if  we  introduce  an  extremely  useful  structural 
term,  ‘equivalence’.  Two  processes,  arrays . ,  between  which  it  is  possible 
to  set  up,  by  some  law  of  transformation,  a  one-to-one  correspondence 
are  said  to  be  equivalent .  A  process,  array . ,  which  is  equivalent  to  a 
part  of  itself,  is  said  to  be  infinite.  In  other  words,  a  process,  array. , 
which  can  be  put  into  a  one-to-one  correspondence  with  a  part  of  itself 
is  said  to  be  infinite.  We  can  define  a  finite  process,  array.,  (class, 
aggregate.,)  as  one  which  is  not  infinite.  The  following  is  valid  exclu¬ 
sively  because  of  the  use  of  the  ‘etc-’ 

A  few  examples  will  make  this  definition  clearer.  If  we  take  the 
series  of  positive  integers,  1,  2,  3,  4,  ...  etc.,  we  can  always  double 
every  number  of  this  row  provided  we  retain  the  process-character ,  hut 
not  otherwise.  Let  us  write  the  corresponding  row  of  their  doubles  under 
the  row  of  positive  integers,  thus : 

1,  2,  3,  4,  5,  .  .  .  .etc. 

2,  4,  6,  8,  10,  ...etc. 

or  we  can  treble  them,  or  «-ble  them,  thus : 

1,  2,  3,  4,  5,  ....  etc. 

3,  6,  9,  12,  15,  ..etc* 

there  are  obviously  as  many  numbers  in  each  row  below  as  in  the  row 
above,  provided  we  retain  the  ‘etc./,  so  the  numbers  of  numbers  in 
the  two  rows  compared  must  be  equal.  All  numbers  which  appear  in 
each  bottom  row  also  occur  in  the  corresponding  upper  row,  although 
they  only  represent  a  part  of  the  top  row,  again  provided  that  we  retain 
the  ‘etc.’ 

The  above  examples  show  another  characteristic  of  infinite  pro¬ 
cesses,  arrays , .  In  the  first  example,  we  have  a  one-to-one  correspondence 
between  the  natural  numbers  and  the  even  numbers,  which  are  equal  in 
number  at  each  stage.  Yet,  the  second  row  results  from  the  first  row  by 

210  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

taking  away  all  odd  numbers,  which,  itself,  represents  infinite  numbers 
of  numbers. 

This  example  was  used  by  Leibnitz  to  prove  that  infinite  arrays 
cannot  exist,  a  conclusion  which  is  not  correct,  since  he  did  not  realize 
that  both  finite  and  infinite  arrays  depend  on  definitions.  We  should  be 
careful  not  to  approach  infinite  processes,  arrays . ,  with  prejudices,  or 
silent  doctrines  and  assumptions,  or,  in  general  s.r ,  taken  over  from 
finite  processes,  arrays , . 

Thus  we  see  that  the  process  of  generating  natural  numbers  is 
structurally  an  infinite  process  because  its  results  can  be  put  in  a  one-to- 
one  correspondence  with  the  results  of  the  process  of  generating  even 
numbers . ,  which  is  only  a  part  of  itself.  Similarly,  a  line  AB  has 
infinitely  many  points,  since  its  points  can  be  put  into  a  one-to-one 
correspondence  with  the  points  on  a  segment  CD  of  AB.  Another 
*  see  page  xii  example  can  be  given  in  the  Tristram  Shandy  paradox  of  Russell. 

Tristram  Shandy  was  writing  his  autobiography,  and  was  using  one 
year  to  write  the  history  of  one  day.  The  question  is,  would  Shandy 
ever  complete  his  biography  ?  He  would,  provided  he  never  died,  or  he 
lived  infinite  numbers  of  years.  The  hundredth  day  would  be  written  in 
the  hundredth  year,  the  thousandth  in  the  thousandth  year,  etc.  No 
day  of  his  life  would'  remain  unwritten,  again  provided  his  process  of 
living  and  writing  would  never  stop . 

Such  examples  could  be  given  endlessly.  It  is  desirable  to  give  one 
more  example  which  throws  some  light  on  the  problems  of  ‘probability", 
‘chance*, .  The  theory  of  probability  originated  through  consideration  of 
games  of  chance.  Lately  it  has  become  an  extremely  important  branch 
of  mathematical  knowledge,  with  fundamental  structural  application  in 
physics,  general  semantics,  and  other  branches  of  science.  For  instance. 
Boltzman  based  the  second  law  of  thermodynamics  on  considerations  of 
probability.  Boole*s  ‘laws  of  thought*,  and  the  many-valued  ‘logic*  of 
Lukasiewicz  and  Tarski  are  also  closely  related  to  probability;  and  the 
new  quantum  mechanics  uses  it  constantly , . 

The  term  ‘probability*  may  be  defined  in  the  rough  as  follows :  If 
an  event  can  happen  in  a  different  ways,  and  fails  to  happen  in  b  differ¬ 
ent  ways,  and  all  these  ways  are  equally  likely  to  occur,  the  probability  of 

the  happening  of  the  event  is _ _ _ ,  and  the  probability  of  its  failing 

a  +  b 

is  . 
a  -j-  b 

Let  us  assume  that  in  a  certain  city  a  lecture  is  held  each  day,  and 
that,  though  the  listeners  may  change  each  day,  the  numbers  of  listeners 

ON  THK  NOTION  OF  INFINITY 

are  always  equal.  Suppose  that  one  in  each  twenty  inhabitants  of  this 
town  has  M  as  the  first  letter  of  his  name.  What  is  the  probability  that, 
‘by  chance * ,  all  the  names  of  the  audience  would  begin  with  M  ?  Let  us 
call  such  a  happening  the  M-event.  In  the  simplest  case,  when  the  daily « 
number  of  listeners  is  only  one,  the  probability  of  an  M-event  is  1  in  20, 
or  1/20.  The  probability  of  an  M-event  for  an  audience  of  2  is  1  in 
20  X  20  «  400,  or  1/400.  The  probability  that  an  audience  of  three 
members  should  have  all  three  names  begin  with  M  would  decrease 
twenty  times  further.  Only  once  in  8000  lectures,  on  an  average,  would 
an  M-event  happen.  For  five  people  it  would  amount  to  1  in  20  X  20  X 
20  X  20  X  20  =  3,200,000  days,  or  1/3,200,000,  or  once  in  approxi¬ 
mately  9000  years ;  for  ten  people,  about  once  in  thirty  billion  years; 
for  twenty  people,  about  once  in  a  third  of  a  quadrillion  years.  For  one 
hundred  people,  the  recurrence  period  of  the  M-event  would  be  given 
as  once  in  a  number  of  years  represented  by  more  than  a  hundred  figures. 
If  the  town,  in  this  last  example,  should  be  as  old  as  the  solar  system,  and 
if  the  lectures  had  been  delivered  daily  to  an  audience  of  one  hundred 
people  through  this  inconceivably  long  period,  the  probability  is  ex¬ 
tremely  small  that  the  M-event  would  happen  at  all.2 

From  the  human,  anthropomorphic ,  point  of  view,  we  would  say 
that  such  an  event  is  impossible.  But  it  must  be  remembered  that  this  is 
only  an  anthropomorphic  point  of  view,  and  our  judgements  are  coloured 
by  the  temporal  scale  of  our  own  lives.  Of  course,  to  carry  such  an 
anthropomorphic  viewpoint  into  cosmic  speculations  is  simply  silly,  a 
survival  of  the  primitive  structure  of  language  and  its  progeny — meta¬ 
physics  and  mythologies. 

The  theory  of  infinity  throws  considerable  structural  light  on  such 
primitive  speculations.  In  this  external  world,  we  deal  with  processes, 
and,  as  we  measure  ‘length*  by  comparison  with  freely  selected  conve¬ 
nient  units  of  length*,  let  us  say,  an  inch;  or  we  measure  ‘volume*  by 
freely  selected  convenient  units  of  ‘volume*;  so,  also,  we  compare  pro¬ 
cesses  with  some  freely  selected  and  convenient  unit-process .  The  diurnal 
rotation  of  our  earth  is  such  a  process,  and,  if  we  choose,  we  can  use  it 
as  a  measuring  unit  or  as  a  comparison  standard.  Of  late,  we  have 
become  aware  that  the  rotation  of  the  earth  is  not  quite  regular,  and  so, 
for  accurate  measurements,  the  old  accepted  unit-process  of  a  day,  or  its 
subdivision,  a  second,  is  not  entirely  satisfactory.  For  scientific  purposes, 
we  are  trying  to  find  some  better  unit-process,  but  we  have  difficulty,  as 
the  problem  is  naturally  circular.  When  we  speak  in  terms  of  a  ‘number 
of  years*,  or  of  seconds,  we  speak  about  perfectly  good  observational 
experimental  facts,  about  quite  definite  relations,  the  best  we  know  in 

see  page  xii 

212  IV,  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

1933,  We  do  not  make  any  metaphysical  assertions  about  ‘time'  and  we 
should  not  be  surprised  to  find  that  statements  involving  ‘years'  are 
generally  propositions,  but  that  statements  involving  ‘time'  often  are  not. 
It  is  necessary  not  to  forget  this  to  appreciate  fully  what  follows. 

The  theory  of  infinity  will  clear  away  a  troublesome  stumbling- 
block.  We  will  use  the  expression  ‘infinite  numbers  of  years',  remember¬ 
ing  the  definition  of  ‘infinite  number,?'  and  what  was  said  about  the 
unit-process  which  we  call  a  year.  We  have  seen  in  an  example  above 
that  if  only  a  hundred  individuals  attend  a  lecture,  and  all  ‘by  chance' 
have  their  names  begin  with  M,  such  an  event  happens,  on  an  average, 
only  once  in  an  inconceivably  large  number  of  years,  represented  by  a 
number  with  a  hundred  figures.  If  we  would  ask  how  many  times  an 
occurrence  would  happen,  we  would  have  to  state  the  period  in  years  for 
which  we  ask  the  how  many .  It  is  easy  to  see  that  in  infinite  numbers 
of  years,  this  humanly  extremely  rare  occurrence  would  happen  precisely 
infinite  numbers  of  times ,  or,  in  other  words,  ‘just  as  often',  this  last 
statement  being  from  a  non-anthropomorphic  point  of  view.  An  event 
that  appears,  from  our  human,  limited,  anthropomorphic  point  of  view, 
as  ‘rare',  or  as  ‘chance',  when  transposed  from  the  level  of  finite  process, 
arrays . ,  to  that  of  infinite  processes,  arrays . ,  is  as  ‘regular',  as  much  a 
‘law',  involving  ‘order',  as  anything  else.  It  is  the  old  primitive  s.r  to 
suppose  that  man  is  the  only  measure  of  things. 

Here  the  reader  might  say  that  infinite  number?  of  years  is  a  rather 
large  assumption  to  be  accepted  so  easily.  This  objection  is  indeed 
serious,  but  a  method  which  can  dispose  of  it  is  given  later  on.  At  this 
stage,  it  is  sufficient  to  say  that,  on  the  one  hand,  this  problem  is  con¬ 
nected  with  the  semantic  disturbance,  called  identification  (objectifica¬ 
tion  of  ‘time'),  which  afflicts  the  majority  of  us,  excepting  a  few 
younger  einsteinists ;  and  that,  on  the  other  hand,  it  involves  the  struc¬ 
turally  reformulated  law  of  the  ‘conservation  of  energy',  ‘entropy', . 

Before  parting  with  the  problem  of  infinity,  let  me  say  a  word  about 
the  notion  of  ‘continuity',  which  is  fundamental  in  mathematics.  Mathe¬ 
matical  continuity  is  a  structural  characteristic  connected  with  ordered 
series.  The  difficulties  originated  in  the  fact  that  a  ‘continuous'  series 
must  have  infinite  number,?  of  terms  between  any  two  terms.  Accord¬ 
ingly,  these  difficulties  are  concerned  with  infinity.  That  mathematicians 
need  some  kind  of  continuity  is  evident  from  the  example  of  two  inter¬ 
secting  lines.  If  the  lines  have  gaps,  as,  for  instance, - , 

there  would  be  the  possibility  that  two  gaps  would  coincide,  and  the  two 
lines  not  intersect ;  although  in  a  plane  the  first  line  would  pass  to  the 
other  side  of  the  second  line.  At  present,  we  have  two  kinds  of  ‘con- 

ON  T1IK  NOTION  OK  INFINITY 

tinuity’  used  in  mathematics.  One  is  a  supposedly  ‘high-grade’  continuity ; 
the  other,  supposedly,  is  a  ‘low-grade’  continuity,  which  is  called  ‘com¬ 
pactness’  or  ‘density’,  with  the  eventual  possibility  of  gaps.  I  am  pur¬ 
posely  using  rather  vague  language,  since  these  fundamental  notions  are 
now  being  revised,  with  the  probability  that  we  shall  have  to  be  satisfied 
with  ‘dense*  or  ‘compact’  series  and  abandon  the  older,  perhaps  delu¬ 
sional,  ‘high-grade’  continuity.  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  the  differ¬ 
ential  and  integral  calculus  is  supposedly  based  on  the  ‘high-grade 
continuity,  but  the  calculus  will  not  be  altered. if  we  accept  the  ‘low- 
grade’  compactness,  all  of  which  is  a  question  of  an  A  or  A  orientation. 

Vague  feelings  of  ‘infinity’  have  pervaded  human  s.r  as  far  back  as 
records  go.  Structurally,  this  is  quite  natural  because  the  term  infinity 
expresses  primarily  a  most  important  semantic  process.  The  majority  of 
our  statements  can  also  be  reformulated  in  a  language  which  explicitly 
involves  the  term  ‘infinity’.  An  example  has  been  already  given  when  we 
were  speaking  about  the  universal  propositions  which  were  supposed  to 
be  of  permanent  validity,  in  other  language ,  valid  for  ‘infinite  numbers 
of  years*.  We  see  how  the  trick  is  done — a  vague  quasi-qualitative 
expression  like  ‘permanent’  or  ‘universal’  is  translated  into  a  quantitative 
language  in  terms  of  ‘numbers  of  years’.  Such  translation  of  qualitative 
language  into  quantitative  language  is  very  useful,  since  it  allows  us  to 
make  more  precise  and  definite  the  vague,  primitive  structural  assump¬ 
tions,  which  present  enormous  semantic  difficulties.  This  brings  to  our 
attention  more  clearly  the  structural  facts  they  supposedly  state,  and  aids 
analysis  and  revision.  In  many  instances,  such  translations  make  obvious 
the  illegitimacy  of  the  assumptions  of  ‘infinite  velocities’  and  so  clear 
away  befogging  misunderstandings,  and  beneficially  affect  our  s.r . 

CHAPTER  XV 

THE  ‘INFINITESIMAL*  AND  ‘CAUSE  AND  EFFECT’ 

But  we  are  not  likely  to  find  science  returning  to  the  crude  form  of 
causality  believed  in  by  Fijians  and  philosophers,  of  which  the  type  is 
hghtnmg  causes  thunder.”  <457>  bertrand  russell 

The  notion  of  causality  has  been  greatly  modified  by  the  substitution  of 
space-time  for  space  and  time.  .  .  .  Thus  geometry  and  causation  becomes 
inextricably  intertwined.  (457)  bertrand  russell 

In  classical  mechanics,  and  no  less  in  the  special  theory  of  relativity, 
there  is  an  inherent  epistemological  defect  which  was,  perhaps  for  the  first 
time,  clearly  pointed  out  by  Ernst  Mach.  .  .  .  No  answer  can  be  admitted 
as  epistemologically  satisfactory,  unless  the  reason  given  is  an  observable 
fact  of  experience.  The  law  of  causality  has  not  the  significance  of  a  state¬ 
ment  as  to  the  world  of  experience,  except  when  observable  facts  ultimately 
appear  as  causes  and  effects,  (iss)  a.  einstein 

The  chain  of  cause  and  effect  could  be  quantitatively  verified  only  if 
the  whole  universe  were  considered  as  a  single  system — but  then  physics 
has  vanished,  and  only  a  mathematical  scheme  remains.  The  partition  of 
the  world  into  observing  and  observed  system  prevents  a  sharp  formula¬ 
tion  of  the  law  of  cause  and  effect.  (2i5>  w.  Heisenberg 

Of  late,  another  perplexing  semantic  problem  concerning  ‘causality* 
or  ‘non-causality*  has  arisen  in  connection  with  the  newer  quantum 
mechanics.  It  is  possible  to  examine  this  question  by  different  methods. 
The  simpler  one  is  connected  with  vague  feelings  of  ‘infinity*  and  its 
supposed  opposite,  the  ‘infinitesimal* ;  the  more  fundamental  method  is 
based  on  the  orders  of  abstractions  leading  toward  the  oo-valued 
semantics  of  probability. 

Because  of  man*s  natural  tendency  to  speak  in  terms  of  ‘infinity*, 
and  his  further  marked  tendency  of  having  opposites,  such  as  ‘yes*,  ‘no*, 
‘right*,  ‘left*,  ‘positive*,  ‘negative*,  ‘love*,  hate’,  ‘honesty*,  ‘dishonesty*. , 
quite  naturally  the  notion  of  ‘infinity*  carried  with  it  the  tendency  to 
invent  the  ‘infinitesimal*.  Even  mathematicians  have  had  great  semantic 
difficulties  in  breaking  away  from  this  habit.  Analysis  persistently  reveals 
that  structurally  no  matter  how  far  we  go  in  dividing  something,  let  us 
say  an  inch,  whatever  is  left  may  be  extremely  small,  but  yet  it  is  a  per¬ 
fectly  good  finite  quantity.  Thus,  structural  difficulties  were  encountered 
with  the  postulated  infinitesimal*.  The  none  implies  that  they  are  not 
finite,  yet  analysis  shows  only  finites.  Mathematicians  supposed  that  an 
‘infinitesimal*  was  necessary  for  mathematics,  and  so  they  were  reluctant 
to  abandon  it. 

The  ‘infinitesimal*,  like  so  many  other  baffling  suppositions,  was 
invented  by  the  Greeks,  who  regarded  a  circle  as  differing  ‘infinitesimally* 

‘INFINITESIMAL*,  ‘CAUSE*  AND  ‘EFFECT* 

from  a  polygon  with  a  very  large  number  of  very  small  equal  sides.  With 
the  invention  of  the  differential  and  integral  calculus,  ‘infinitesimal  cal¬ 
culus*,  as  it  was  called,  the  importance  of  the  ‘infinitesimal*  increased, 
and  even  mathematicians  used  it  as  a  fundamental  notion.  Finally, 
Weierstrass  succeeded  in  showing  the  meaningless  character  of  the 
‘infinitesimal*,  and  also  that  the  ‘infinitesimal*  was  not  structurally  neces¬ 
sary  for  the  calculus.  Up  to  that  date,  the  problem  was  baffling;  we 
knew  that  the  calculus  required  ‘continuity*,  which,  in  turn,  seemed  to 
require  ‘the  infinitely  little*,  and  yet  no  one  could  tell  what  this  ‘infinitely 
little*  might  represent.  It  was  quite  obviously  not  zero,  because  a  suffi¬ 
cient  number  of  them  was  able  to  make  up  a  finite  whole ;  and  we  knew 
no  fraction  which  was  not  zero  and  yet  not  finite.  The  discovery  by 
Weierstrass  that  the  calculus  does  not  require  the  ‘infinitesimal*,  and 
that  all  deductions  could  be  made  without  it,  abolished  a  very  serious 
structural,  verbal,  metaphysical,  and  semantic  bugaboo.  Common  sense, 
of  course,  is  much  simpler,  although  unreliable  in  such  matters,  and 
was  satisfied  also. 

The  elimination  of  the  ‘infinitesimal*  is  a  great  semantic  step  for¬ 
ward,  and  helps  to  clarify  structurally  some  deeply  rooted,  vague,  falla¬ 
cious  notions,  which  are  overloaded  with  affective  components  and  are 
extremely  vicious  in  their  effects. 

If  there  is  no  ‘infinitesimal*,  there  is  no  ‘next  moment*;  for  the 
interval  between  any  two  moments  must  be  finite,  and  so  there  are 
always  other  moments  in  the  interval  between  them.  Also,  two  moments 
cannot  be  consecutive,  for  between  any  two  there  are  always  other 
moments,  no  matter  how  far  we  go;  similarly,  the  ‘present*  becomes  a 
very  vague  notion. 

For  our  purpose,  the  most  fundamental  semantic  application  of 
what  has  been  said  above  is  in  the  vast  field  embraced  by  the  old  struc¬ 
tural  notions  of  ‘cause*  and  ‘effect*.  These  terms  are  of  great  antiquity, 
of  a  distinctly  pre-scientific  one-,  two-valued  semantic  epoch.  They 
originated  in  the  rough  experience  of  our  race,  and  are  firmly  rooted 
in  the  habits  of  ‘thought*  and  the  structure  of  our  old  two-valued  ‘logic* 
and  language,  and  because  of  that  are  even  now  unduly  baffling.  These 
terms,  in  the  two-valued  sense,  were  and  are  the  structural  assumptions 
of  our  ‘private*  and  ‘official*  ‘philosophies’.  The  unenlightened  use  of 
these  terms  has  done  much  to  prevent  the  formulation  of  a  science  of 
man  and  to  build  up  vicious  anti-scientific  metaphysics  of  various  sorts 
involving  pathological  s.r.  With  the  new  quantum  mechanics,  a  better 
understanding  of  these  notions,  based  on  the  oo-valued  semantics  of 
probability,  becomes  a  paramount  issue  for  all  science.  In  daily  life,  the 

216  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

indiscriminate  use  of  two-valued  'cause'  and  'effect'  leads  structurally  to 
a  great  deal  of  absolutism,  dogmatism,  and  other  harmful  semantic 
disturbances,  which  I  call  confusion  of  orders  of  abstraction. 

We  usually  follow  the  'philosophers*  and  ascribe — or,  rather  feel, 
as  conscious  ascribing  would  not  stand  criticism — some  mysterious  struc¬ 
tural  continuity,  some  mysterious  overlapping  of  'cause*  and  'effect*.  We 
'feel',  and  try  to  ‘think*,  about  'cause  and  effect*  as  contiguous  in  'time*. 
But  'contiguous  in  time*  involves  the  impossible  'infinitesimal*  of  some 
unit  of  'time*.  But,  since  we  have  seen  that  there  is  no  such  thing,  we 
must  accept  that  the  interval  between  ‘cause*  and  'effect*  is  finite.  This 
structural  fact  changes  the  whole  situation.  If  the  interval  between 
'cause*  and  'effect'  is  finite,  then  always  something  might  happen  between, 
no  matter  how  small  the  interval  may  be.  The  'same  cause*  would  not 
produce  the  'same  effect*.  The  expected  result  would  not  follow.  This 
means  only  that  in  this  world,  to  be  sure  of  some  expected  effect,  requires 
that  there  must  be  nothing  in  the  environment  which  can  interfere  with 
the  process  of  passing  from  the  conditions  labelled  'cause*  to  the  condi¬ 
tions  labelled  'effect*.  In  this  world,  with  the  structure  which  it  has,  we 
can  never  suppose  that  a  'cause*,  as  we  know  it,  is  alone  sufficient  to 
produce  the  supposed  'effect*.  When  we  consider  the  ever-changing 
environment,  the  number  of  possibilities  increases  enormously.  If  it  were 
possible  to  take  into  account  the  whole  of  the  environment,  the  probabil¬ 
ity  that  some  event  would  be  repeated,  in  all  details,  thus  exhibiting 
the  assumed  two-valued  relation  of  'cause*  and  'effect',  which  we  took 
for  granted  in  the  old  days,  would  practically  be  nil.  The  principle  of 
non-elementalism,  as  we  see,  requires  an  oo -valued  semantics  of 
probability. 

The  reader  should  not  take  what  is  said  here  as  a  denial  that  in  this 
external  world  some  regularities  of  sequence  occur ;  but  the  above  analy¬ 
sis,  which  is  mainly  due  to  Russell,1  shows  clearly  that  the  verbal  prin¬ 
ciple  of  'same  cause,  same  effect*  is  structurally  untenable.  We  can 
never  manage  to  observe  the  'same  cause*  in  detail.  As  soon  as  the  ante¬ 
cedents  have  been  sufficiently  ascertained,  so  as  to  calculate  the  conse¬ 
quences  with  some  plausible  accuracy  as  to  details,  the  relations  of  these 
antecedents  have  become  so  complex  that  there  is  very  little  probability 
that  they  will  ever  occur  again. 

The  clearing  up  of  the  problems  of  'cause*  and  ‘effect*  is  of  serious 
importance,  because  powerful  semantic  reactions  are  connected  with  it. 
To  begin  with,  we  must  differentiate  between  the  terms  'cause*  and 
'effect',  which,  linked  together,  imply  a  two-term  relation  nowhere  to  be 
found  in  this  world,  and  thus  represent  a  language  and  a  two-valued 

MNKINITKS1MA1/,  ‘CAUSM’  AND  ■KKFKCT* 

‘logic’  of  a  structure  not  similar  to  the  structure  of  the  world,  and  the 
general  oo-valued  notion  of  causality.  This  last  notion  is  the  psycho¬ 
logical  foundation  of  all  explanations  leading  toward  oo-valued  determin¬ 
ism,  and  is  an  exclusive  test  for  structure ;  and  so  of  extreme  semantic 
importance. 

Besides  the  analysis  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  impossible 
‘infinitesimal’,  the  term  ‘cause-effect’  represents  a  two-term  relation, 
and,  as  such,  is  a  primitive  generalization  never  to  be  found  in  this  world, 
as  all  events  are  serially  related  in  a  most  complex  way,  independent  of 
our  way  of  speaking  about  them.  If  we  expand  our  two-term  relation 
‘cause-effect’  into  a  series,  we  pass  from  the  inferential  level  to  the 
descriptive  level,  and  so  can  apply  a  behaviouristic,  functional,  actional 
language  of  order.  In  such  series,  we  could  only  use  the  language  of 
‘cause’  and  ‘effect’  if  we  could  select  neighbouring  factors,  a  selection 
which  is  often  impossible.  Also,  if  we  pass  from  macroscopic  to  micro¬ 
scopic  or  sub-microscopic  levels,  we  could  use  such  language,  but  then 
the  terms  would  have  different  meanings,  supplied  by  the  theory  of 
probability. 

The  semantic  side  of  this  problem  is  of  importance,  because,  in  the 
old  el  way,  it  was  neglected.  General  speculations  about  such  m.o  terms 
as  ‘cause’  and  ‘effect’  are  useless.  Such  statements  are  not  propositions, 
but  involve  variable  meanings  and,  therefore,  generate  propositional 
functions  which  are  neither  true  nor  false.  Our  expanding  of  the  too 
simple,  two-term  relation  ‘cause-effect’  into  a  complex  series  is  closer  to 
the  structure  of  this  world,  as  far  as  we  know  it. 

The  understanding  and  habitual  application  of  what  has  just  been 
said  would  not  only  save  us  from  silly  dogmatizing  and  inappropriate  s.r, 
but  would  teach  us  not  to  disregard  any  regularity,  and  to  investigate 
any  relation  which  might  appear.  Then,  in  a  specific  case ,  we  could  again 
use  the  restricted  principle  of  causality,  based  on  probability  and  aver¬ 
ages.  The  old  absolute  and  objectified  semantic  attitude  toward  ‘cause- 
effect’  was  and  often  is  a  serious  hindrance  in  observing  impartially  the 
sequence  of  events  (order)  and  relations.  Preconceived  notions  and 
old  s.r  played  havoc,  for  it  is  well  known  that  we  usually  find  what  we 
want  to  find.  If  we  approach  a  problem  with  definite  unconscious 
' emotional ’  wants,  and  cannot  satisfy  these  s.r ,  we  become  bewildered, 
down-hearted,  and  perhaps  utter  some  such  non-sense  as  the  ‘finite  mind’, 
or  the  like.  Under  such  semantic  pressure,  our  power  of  observation  and 
analysis  is  reduced  by  a  kind  of  ‘emotional  stupor’.  Such  an  occurrence 
is  harmful  in  science  and  in  life.  ‘Human  knowledge’  depends  on  human 
ingenuity,  power  of  observation,  power  of  abstraction , .  It  is  an  activity 

218  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

of  the  human  nervous  system  inside  of  our  skin  and  can  never  be  the 
events  themselves. 

We  see  that  the  old  two-valued  verbal  structure  of  ‘cause*  and 
‘effect*  is  not  similar  to  the  structure  of  the  world,  but  a  rash  limiting 
generalization  from  probability.  Since  these  expressions  belong  to  the 
class  of  statistical  averages  and  depend  on  the  scale  of  the  events  and 
intervals  dealt  with,  we  must  not  expect  that  such  terms  as  two- valued 
‘causality*,  which  is  a  term  of  statistical  macroscopic  averages,  will  apply 
in  that  sense  to  small-scale  events  when  the  intervals  are  much  smaller 
and  when  entirely  different  conditions  and  ‘causes’  prevail.  Today  we 
have  structural  evidence  that  even  ‘space*  and  ‘time*  represent  statistical 
averages  and  do  not  apply  to  the  smallest  scale  events.  It  is  natural  that 
cause  and  effect  should  join  their  company.  The  above  involves  epis¬ 
temologically  the  passing  from  the  A  two-valued  system  to  a  i 
oo-valued  system.  Psychophysiologically,  it  involves  new  s.r. 

In  mathematics,  the  old  religious  attitude  toward  the  ‘infinitesimal* 
is  rapidly  vanishing.  Many  mathematicians  deliberately,  and  justly,  avoid 
the  use  of  the  word.  A  term  like  ‘indefinitely  small*  or  ‘indefinitesimal* 
is  a  better  descriptive  term,  truer  in  its  implications.  We  even  see  scien¬ 
tists  like  Eddington,  who  had  the  pluck — it  is  still  pluck,  unfortunately — 
to  treat  enormous  stellar  distances  as  ‘infinitesimals  of  second  order*. 
(‘Infinitesimal*  is  used  here  in  a  mathematical  sense  of  indefinitesimal.) 

It  has  been  already  mentioned  that  most  of  the  important  discov¬ 
eries  of  mathematics  were  due  to  a  special  semantic  attitude  on  the  part 
of  those  who  made  them.  This  attitude  was  an  unconscious  or  conscious 
treatment  of  mathematics  as  a  form  of  human  behaviour.  We  see  an 
example  in  the  work  of  Weierstrass  and  his  analysis  of  the  ‘infinitesimal*. 
He  did  not  take  the  ‘infinitesimal*  as  some  objectified  metaphysical  struc¬ 
ture  and  remain  content ;  he  analysed  the  genetic  process  by  which  the 
‘infinitesimal*  was  made  by  Smith  and  Brown,  and  so  treated  mathematics 
structurally  as  a  form  of  human  behaviour.  Any  deepening  of  the  foun¬ 
dations,  or  clarification  of  fundamental  notions,  or  investigation  of 
underlying  assumptions  . ,  must,  by  necessity,  have  this  characteristic.  The 
man  who  does  it  must  take  into  account  how  the  given  process  was  pro¬ 
duced — analyse  its  structure,  and  so  start  with  the  ways  and  methods  of 
production.  In  other  words,  he  must  treat  the  given  problem  as  a  form 
of  human  behaviour.  The  fact  that  this  simple  and  quite  obvious  method 
has  been  formulated  and  structurally  explained  as  desirable  is  helpful. 
It  shows  the  method  and  structure  of  the  path  by  which  advances  can  be 
reached.  We  can  train  the  semantic  reactions  of  students  to  it  and  make 
progress  inevitable;  but  now,  instead,  it  takes  a  genius  to  break,  by  him- 

‘INFINITESIMAL’,  ‘CAUSE’  AND  ‘EFFECT’ 

self,  through  the  old  semantic  habits  which  have  been  produced  by  the 
lack  of  scientific  psycho-logics  and  training. 

The  term  ‘correct  symbolism’  has  already  been  used.  In  this  world 
of  structurally  absolute  individuals,  the  minimum  of  structurally  desir¬ 
able  correct  symbolism  must  provide  for  the  possibility  of  labelling  these 
absolute  individuals  by  separate  names.  For  scientific  purposes,  we  must 
use  terms  built  on  the  pattern  of  mathematical  symbolism;  i.e.,  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  extensional  methods.  We  must  adopt  a  behaviouristic  attitude 
and  habits  in  our  term-making.  As  we  proceed,  we  must  emphasize 
order,  considering  what  comes  first  and  what  next.  This  is  semantically 
important,  for  the  usual  procedure  is  entirely  different:  first,  we  have 
our  structurally  ‘preconceived’  doctrines  and  languages ;  next,  we  observe 
the  structure  of  the  world;  and  then  we  try  to  force  the  observed 
facts  into  the  linguistic  structural  patterns.  But,  in  the  new  way,  we 
start  with  silent  observations,  and  search  empirically  for  structure ;  next, 
we  invent  verbal  structures  similar  to  tjiem;  and,  finally,  we  see  what 
can  be  said  about  the  situation,  and  so  test  the  language.  Experience 
shows  that  the  old  habits  of  labels  first,  objects  next,  instead  of  the 
structurally  natural  order  of  objects  first,  labels  next,  is  semantically 
pernicious  and  harmful.  In  Part  VII,  it  is  shown  that  the  semantic 
structural  reversal  of  the  unnatural  reversed  order  is  crucial  for  sanity. 

From  the  days  of  the  Greeks  an  acute  difficulty  has  made  itself 
felt;  namely,  how  to  reconcile  the  world  of  physics  with  the  world  of 
mathematics.  For  mathematics,  we  need  ‘extensionless*  points;  for 
physics,  we  need  finite-sized  elements.  Whitehead  and  Russell  have 
suggested  different  structures  by  which  this  may  be  accomplished.  It 
seems  possible  to  demand  that  none  of  the  material  dealt  with  shall  be 
smaller  than  an  assigned  finite  size.  That  this  condition  can  be  recon¬ 
ciled  with  mathematical  continuity  seems  to  be  novel.  Whether  this 
device  is  valid  or  not,  it  is  yet  too  early  to  decide.  This  problem  of 
reconciliation  will  become  important  further  on  when  we  come  to  speak 
of  events  as  made  up  from  point-events.* 

CHAPTER  XVI 

ON  THE  EXISTENCE  OF  RELATIONS 

We  cannot  choose  to  do  without  them,  without  seeking  to  choose,  since 
choice  is  action,  and  involves,  for  instance,  the  aforesaid  difference  between 
affirming  and  denying  that  we  mean  to  do  thus  and  thus.  (449) 

JOSIAH  ROYCE 

In  concluding  the  foregoing  remarks,  I  must  explain  one  more 
general  consideration.  This  concerns  an  extremely  profound  structural 
psycho-logical  discovery,  made  by  Prof.  Royce,1  which  underlies  any  and 
all  semantic  problems  of  human  ‘mentality'.  Royce,  although  a  ‘philoso¬ 
pher',  was  a  lover  of  mathematics  and  was  much  interested  in  the  prob¬ 
lems  of  order.  He  was  trying  to  reformulate  ‘logic*  in  terms  of  order. 
We  had  already  encountered  the  inherent  circularity  in  the  structure  of 
human  knowledge,  which  admittedly  is  semantically  disconcerting  if  not 
faced  boldly.  But,  when  recognized,  this  circularity  is  not  only  not 
vicious,  but  even  adds  to  the  interest  and  beauty  of  life  and  makes 
science  more  interesting.  Besides,  the  structure  of  human  knowledge  is 
such  that  there  are  activities  of  man  which  are  not  only  circular  but  also 
‘absolute*,  or  ‘necessary*.  Whatever  we  do,  we  cannot  get  away  from 
them — a  fact  of  serious  semantic  importance.  Except  from  Royce  and  a 
few  of  his  students,  these  problems  have  as  yet  received  little  attention. 

Royce  shows  that  there  are  certain  activities  which  we  reinstate  and 
verify  through  the  very  fact  of  attempting  to  assume  that  these  forms  of 
activity  do  not  exist,  or  that  these  laws  are  not  valid.  If  any  one  attempts 
to  say  that  there  are  no  classes  whatsoever  in  his  world,  he  thereby 
inevitably  classifies.  If  any  one  denies  the  existence  of  relations,  and, 
in  particular,  a  semantic  relation  between  affirmation  and  denial,  or 
affirms  that  ‘yes*  and  ‘no*  have  one  meaning,  in  that  breath  he  affirms  and 
denies.  He  makes  a  difference  between  ‘yes*  and  ‘no*,  and  emphatically 
asserts  relational  equivalence  even  in  denying  the  difference  between 
‘yes*  and  ‘no*.  To  use  Royce*s  own  remarkable  words :  ‘In  brief,  what¬ 
ever  actions  are  such,  whatever  types  of  action  are  such,  whatever 
results  of  activity,  whatever  conceptual  constructions  are  such,  that  the 
very  act  of  getting  rid  of  them,  or  of  thinking  them  away,  logically  im¬ 
plies  their  presence,  are  known  to  us  indeed  both  empirically  and  prag¬ 
matically  (since  we  note  their  presence  and  learn  of  them  through 
action)  ;  but  they  are  also  absolute.  And  any  account  which  succeeds  in 
telling  what  they  are  has  absolute  truth.  Such  truth  is  a  “construction'* 

ON  TilM  KXiSTENCK  OK  RELATIONS 

or  “creation”,  for  activity  determines  its  nature.  It  is  “found”,  for  we 
observe  it  when  we  act.’ 

We  see  that  we  have  definite  semantic  guides  in  this  enquiry.  One 
guide  to  follow  is  these  unescapable  characteristics  of  the  structure  of 
human  knowledge,  which  Royce  called  ‘absolute’,  but  which  I  prefer  to 
call  ‘necessary’.  The  other  guide  leads  us  to  avoid  ‘impossible’  or  absurd 
statements,  or  statements  which  have  no  ‘logical  existence’ ;  which,  in  the 
rough,  means  statements  which  abuse  symbolism  and  produce  noises . , 
instead  of  symbols.  As  we  have  already  seen,  both  guides  have  sound 
neurological  justification,  to  be  expressed  in  terms  of  order  and  circu¬ 
larity ,  terms  uniquely  fit  structurally  to  spe£k  about  processes,  stages  of 
processes,  orders  of  abstractions  , .  Obviously,  our  task  of  formulating  a 
theory  of  sanity  can  proceed  along  these  structural  and  semantic  lines. 
It  should  be  noticed  that  mathematics,  considered  as  a  form  of  human 
behaviour,  and  ‘mental’  illnesses,  also  considered  as  definitely  human 
behaviour,  have  yielded  their  share  for  our  structural  guidance. 

Although  many  a  scientist  has  instinctively  proceeded  in  the  way 
indicated,  yet  the  instinctive  successful  procedure  of  an  isolated  scien¬ 
tist  is  usually  not  capable  of  being  transmitted  to  others.  It  is  his  personal 
benefit.  Only  a  methodological  structural  formulation  of  such  private 
routes  to  semantic  success  can  become  a  public  fact,  to  be  analysed, 
criticized,  improved,  and  transmitted  or  rejected. 

It  must  be  noticed  that  terms  like  ‘chance’  or  ‘law’  are  fundamentally 
connected  with  discussions  of  determinism  versus  indeterminism,  and  so 
involve  problems  in  connection  with  ‘necessary’  semantic  processes.  In 
the  example  about  the  probability  of  the  M-event,  it  was  shown  how 
a  ‘chance’  event  on  one  level  may  become  a  ‘law’  on  another.  The  struc¬ 
tural  possibility  of  such  transformations  is  very  interesting  and  of  basic 
semantic  importance.  For  scientific  purposes,  we  must  accept  oo-valued 
determinism  on  the  scientific  level  as  it  is  the  test  of  structure;  but  this 
has  nothing  to  do  with  the  apparent ,  mostly  two- valued  indeterminism  in 
our  daily  lives.  To  solve  a  number  of  equations,  we  must  have  as  many 
equations  as  we  have  unknowns.  If  we  have  fewer  equations  than 
unknowns,  we  do  not  get  definite  values ;  our  unknowns  are  still  undeter¬ 
mined.  The  origin  of  ‘indeterminism’  is  similar ;  we  lack  knowledge ;  the 
number  of  equations  is  less  than  the  number  of  unknowns.  Hence,  it  is 
impossible  to  discover  determined  values  in  all  cases.  This  gives  an 
appearance  of  two-valued  indeterminism,  but  with  the  increase  of  our 
knowledge,  or  with  additional  equations,  the  unknown  may  be  deter¬ 
mined.  Determinism  is  a  more  fundamental  point  of  view  than  indeter¬ 
minism  ;  in  it  we  find  a  test  for  structure .  It  is  also  a  more  general  point 

222  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

of  view,  in  which  indeterminism  is  only  a  particular  case  and  does  not 
allow  of  the  structural  test.  In  a  science  of  man,  in  a  ^-system,  we 
must  start  with  the  more  fundamental  and  general.  Accordingly,  we 
have  to  accept  oo-valued  determinism,  which,  in  1933,  becomes  the  broad 
scientific  point  of  view.  The  unnecessary  semantic  war  between  the 
advocates  of  the  different  points  of  view  has  been  unduly  bitter  and 
necessarily  futile. 

As  words  are  not  the  things  we  speak  about,  and  the  only  link  is 
structural,  the  ‘human  mind*  must  require  linguistic  structural  oo-valued 
determinism  as  a  condition  of  rationality.  As  soon  as  we  find  that  any 
linguistic  issues  are  not  deterministic,  it  is  an  unmistakable  sign  that 
the  language  or  the  ‘logic*  we  are  using  is  not  similar  in  structure  to  the 
empirical  world  and  so  should  be  changed. 

This  statement  seems  to  be  general.  In  application  to  the  new 
quantum  mechanics’  special  problem,  it  would  appear  that  the  old  macro¬ 
scopic  language  of  ‘space’,  ‘time*. ,  is  not  similar  to  the  sub-microscopic 
structure  and  should,  therefore,  be  changed.  Perhaps  the  electrodynamic 
language,  instead  of  the  macro-mechanistic,  would  fare  better. 

CHAPTER  XVII 

ON  THE  NOTIONS  OF  4 MATTER* t  ‘SPACE’,  ‘TIME’ 

Common  sense  starts  with  the  notion  that  there  is  matter  where  we  can 
get  sensations  of  touch,  but  not  elsewhere.  Then  it  gets  puzzled  by  wind, 
breath,  clouds,  etc.,  whence  it  is  led  to  the  conception  of  “spirit” — I  speak 
etymologically.  After  “spirit”  has  been  replaced  by  “gas,”  there  is  a 
further  stage,  that  of  the  aether.  (457)  bertrand  russell 

The  supposition  of  common  sense  and  naive  realism,  that  we  see  the 
actual  physical  object,  is  very  hard  to  reconcile  with  the  scientific  view 
that  our  perception  occurs  somewhat  later  than  the  emission  of  light  by  the 
object;  and  this  difficulty  is  not  overcome  by  the  fact  that  the  time  in¬ 
volved,  like  the  notorious  baby,  is  a  very  little  one.  (457) 

BERTRAND  RUSSELL 

We  have  certain  preconceived  ideas  about  location  in  space  which  have 
come  down  to  us  from  ape-like  ancestors.  (149)  A.  s.  Eddington 

But  it  does  not  seem  a  profitable  procedure  to  make  odd  noises  on  the 
off-chance  that  posterity  will  find  a  significance  to  attribute  to  them. 

(149)  A.  S.  EDDINGTON 

There  is  a  blessed  phrase  “hidden  reserves”;  and  generally  speaking  the 
more  respectable  the  company  the  more  widely  does  its  balance-sheet 
deviate  from  reality.  This  is  called  sound  finance.  .  .  . 

Thanks  to  Minkowski  a  way  of  keeping  accounts  has  been  found  which 
exhibits  realities  (absolute  things)  and  balances .  (i49>  a.  s.  eddington 

The  quest  of  the  absolute  leads  into  the  four-dimensional  world.  (149> 

A.  S.  EDDINGTON 

The  views  of  space  and  time  which  I  wish  to  lay  before  you  have  sprung 
from  the  soil  of  experimental  physics,  and  therein  lies  their  strength.  They 
are  radical.  Henceforth  space  by  itself,  and  time  by  itself,  are  doomed 
to  fade  away  into  mere  shadows,  and  only  a  kind  of  union  of  the  two  will 
preserve  an  independent  reality.  (352)  h.  minkowski 

It  is  a  thing;  not  like  space,  which  is  a  mere  negation;  nor  like  time, 
which  is — Heaven  knows  what!  (149>  A.  s.  eddington 

Newton  objectivises  space.  Since  he  classes  his  absolute  space  together 
with  real  things,  for  him  rotation  relative  to  an  absolute  space  is  also  some¬ 
thing  real,  usu  a.  einstein 

Space  is  only  a  word  that  we  have  believed  a  thing.  (417)  h.  poincar£ 

In  fact,  our  ordinary  description  of  nature,  and  the  idea  of  exact  laws, 
rests  on  the  assumption  that  it  is  possible  to  observe  the  phenomena  with¬ 
out  appreciably  influencing  them.  (215)  w.  Heisenberg 

Even  when  this  arbitrariness  is  taken  into  account  the  concept  “obser¬ 
vation”  belongs,  strictly  speaking,  to  the  class  of  ideas  borrowed  from  the 
experiences  of  everyday  life.  It  can  only  be  carried  over  to  atomic  phenom¬ 
ena  when  due  regard  is  paid  to  the  limitations  placed  on  all  space-time 
descriptions  by  the  uncertainty  principle.  (2i5>  w.  Heisenberg 

224  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

Section  A.  Structural  considerations . 

The  facts  at  hand  in  1933  show  that  the  language  we  use  for  the 
purpose  of  describing  events  is  not  the  events ;  the  representation  sym¬ 
bolizes  what  is  going  on  inside  our  skins;  the  events  are  outside  our 
skins  and  structural  similarity  is  the  only  link  between  them.  Historically, 
as  a  race,  we  learned  sooner  and  more  about  the  events  outside  our 
skins  than  about  the  events  inside  our  skins;  just  as  a  fish  or  a  dog 
‘knows’  a  lot  about  his  world,  lives  sometimes  happily  and  abundantly, 
and  yet  ‘knows*  nothing  about  biology,  or  physiology,  or  psycho-logics. 
Only  recently  did  we  begin  to  study  ourselves  scientifically.  At  some 
stage  of  our  development,  we  introduced  structurally  simple  forms  of 
representation,  such  as  a  language  of  subject-predicate,  of  additivity, . 
We  are  still  perplexed  when  we  find  that  the  events  outside  our  skins 
cannot  be  pressed  into  schemes  which  are  manufactured  inside  our  skins. 
Our  nervous  system,  with  its  ordered  and  cyclic  structure  and  function, 
manufactures  abstractions  of  different  orders,  which  have  quite  distinct 
structure  and  different  characteristics.  On  different  levels,  we  manu¬ 
facture  different  abstractions,  dynamic  and  static,  continuous  and  discon¬ 
tinuous  . ,  which  have  to  take  care  of  our  needs.  If  the  verbal  schemes  we 
invent  do  not  fit  structurally  the  world  around  us,  we  can  always  invent 
new  schemes  of  new  structure  which  will  be  more  satisfactory.  It  is 
not  a  problem  of  the  world  around  us,  for  our  words  cannot  change  that, 
but  of  our  ingenuity.  In  the  meantime,  we  learn  something  very  impor¬ 
tant;  namely,  about  the  world’s  structure ,  which  is  the  only  content 
of  knowledge. 

There  are  good  structural  reasons  why  the  world  should,  or  should 
not,  be  accounted  for  in  terms  of  differential  equations,  or  in  terms  and 
language  of  ‘causality*, .  The  term  order  is  structurally  fundamental  and 
will  help  us  in  a  radical  and  constructive  way,  in  our  quest. 

First,  however,  we  will  investigate  some  further  semantic  problems, 
remembering  that  a  theory  of  sanity,  which  means  a  theory  of  adjust¬ 
ment,  should  emphasize  the  methodological  and  structural  means  for 
such  semantic  adjustment.  The  dynamic-static  translations  are  funda¬ 
mentally  connected  with  different  orders  of  abstractions  and  involve 
psycho-logical  issues  connected  with  ‘emotions’  and  ‘intellect’,  linearity 
versus  non-linearity,  ‘straight’  versus  ‘curved*. ,  explained  in  Parts  VII 
and  VIII. 

In  life,  as  well  as  in  science,  we  deal  with  different  happenings, 
objects,  and  larger  or  smaller  bits  of  materials.  We  have  a  habit  of 
speaking  about  them  in  terms  of  ‘matter’.  Through  a  semantic  disturb - 

‘MATTKR’,  ‘SMACK’,  TIMM* 

ance,  called  identification,  we  fancy  that  such  a  thing  as  ‘matter’  has 
separate  physical  existence.  It  would  probably  be  a  shock  to  be  invited 
seriously  to  give  a  piece  of  ‘matter’  (give  and  not  burst  into  speech)  .  I 
have  had  the  most  amusing  experiences  in  this  field.  Most  people,  scien¬ 
tists  included,  hand  over  a  pencil  or  something  of  this  sort.  But  did  they 
actually  give  ‘matter’  ?  What  they  gave  is  not  to  be  symbolised  simply 
‘matter’.  The  object,  ‘pencil’,  which  they  handed ,  requires  linguistically 
‘space’ ;  otherwise,  there  would  be  no  pencil  but  a  mathematical  point,  a 
fiction.  It  also  requires  verbally  ‘time’;  otherwise,  there  would  be  no 
pencil  but  a  ‘flash’. 

Similarly,  if  any  one  is  invited  to  give  a  piece  of  ‘space’  (again  give 
it,  and  not  burst  into  speech),  the  best  he  could  do  would  be  to  wave 
his  hand  and  try  to  show  ‘space’.  But  the  waving  of  the  hand  referred 
to  what  we  call  air,  dust,  microbes,  gravitational  and  electromagnetic 
fields , .  In  other  words,  structurally,  the  supposed  ‘space’  was  fulness  of 
some  materials  already  ‘in  space’  and  ‘in  time*. 

In  the  case  of  giving  ‘time’,  one  could  show  his  watch.  A  similar 
objection  holds,  also;  namely,  that  he  has  shown  us  so-called  ‘matter’ 
which  is  ‘moving’  in  ‘space’.  It  is  very  important  to  acquire  the  s.r  that 
when  we  use  the  term  ‘matter’  we  refer  to  something,  let  us  say,  the 
pencil,  which,  according  to  the  accepted  el  language ,  also  involves  ‘space’ 
and  ‘time’,  which  we  disregard.  When  we  use  the  term  ‘space*,  we 
refer  to  a  fulness  of  some  materials,  which  exists  in  ‘time’.  But  because 
these  materials  are  usually  invisible  to  the  ‘senses’,  we  again  disregard 
them.  In  using  the  term  ‘time’,  we  refer  to  ‘matter’  moving  in  ‘space’, 
which  again  we  disregard. 

What  is  said  here  and  what  will  follow  is  structurally  uncondi¬ 
tionally  fundamental  for  a  theory  of  sanity,  because  in  most  cases  of 
‘insanity’  and  un-sanity,  there  is  a  disorientation  as  to  ‘space’  and  ‘time’. 
In  identification,  the  semantic  disturbance  which  affects  nearly  all  of  us, 
and  is  at  the  foundation  of  the  majority  of  human  difficulties,  private  or 
public,  there  invariably  appears  a  special  semantic  disorientation  in  our 
feelings  toward  ‘matter’,  ‘space’,  and  ‘time’.  This  is  only  natural,  for 
the  ‘insane*  and  un-sane  are  the  unadjusted ;  the  ‘sane’  are  the  supposedly 
adjusted. 

Adjusted  to  what?  To  the  world  around  us  and  ourselves.  Our 
human  world  differs  from  the  world  of  animals.  It  is  more  complex  and 
the  problems  of  human  adjustment  become  also  more  subtle.  In  animal 
life,  attitudes  toward  the  world  do  not  matter  in  a  similar  sense;  with 
us,  they  become  important ;  hence  the  need  of  analysis  of  the  new  human 
‘semantic  universe’,  which  involves  the  ‘universe  of  discourse’.  This 

226  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

‘universe  of  discourse’  is  strictly  connected  with  the  terms  of  ‘matter’, 
‘space’,  and  ‘time’,  structure,  and  our  semantic  attitude  toward  these 
terms. 

Let  us  return  to  the  analysis  of  our  object  which  we  call  the  ‘pencil1. 
We  have  seen  that  the  object  pencil  is  not  ‘matter’,  nor  ‘space’,  nor 
‘time’.  A  question  arises,  which  has  been  asked  very  often  and  has  never, 
to  my  knowledge,  been  answered  satisfactorily:  what  ‘is’  the  object 
pencil,  and  what  ‘are’  the  terms  ‘matter’,  ‘space’,  and  ‘time’  ?  Here  and 
there  some  one  has  given  fragments  of  answers  or  some  satisfactory 
detached  statements.  But  in  every  case  I  know,  the  semantic  disturb¬ 
ance  called  identification  appears,  and  so  even  the  casual  correct  answer 
is  not  applied  but  remains  enmeshed  in  some  other  identifications.  I  have 
spent  much  ‘time’  and  labour  in  overcoming  my  own  identifications,  and 
now  confront  the  situation  that  nearly  every  work  I  read  from  this  point 
of  view  cannot  be  criticized,  but  requires  rewriting.  This  task  is  impos¬ 
sible  for  me,  technically  and  otherwise.  So,  finally,  I  decided  to  formu¬ 
late  the  present  ^-system,  and  then  see  what  kind  of  reconstruction 
can  be  accomplished  with  the  new  evaluation. 

The  answer  to  the  questions  set  above  is  childishly  simple,  yet  I 
will  carry  it  all  through  and  let  the  semantic  consequences  speak  for 
themselves.  The  chunk  of  nature,  the  specially  shaped  accumulation  of 
materials . ,  which  we  call  a  pencil,  ‘is’  fundamentally  and  absolutely 
un-speakable ,  simply  because  whatever  we  may  say  about  it,  is  not  it .  We 
may  write  with  this  something,  but  we  cannot  write  with  its  name  or  the 
descriptions  of  this  something.  So  the  object  is  not  words .  It  is  impor¬ 
tant  that  the  reader  be  entirely  convinced  at  this  point,  and  it  requires 
some  training,  performed  repeatedly,  before  we  get  our  s.r  adjusted  to 
this  simple  fact.  Our  statement  had  two  parts.  One  was  rather  unprom¬ 
ising;  namely,  that  the  object  was  absolutely  un-speakable,  because  no 
amount  of  words  will  make  the  object.  The  other  was  more  promising, 
for  we  learned  an  extremely  important,  perhaps  crucial,  semantic  fact ; 
namely,  what  the  object  pencil  is  not;  namely,  that  the  object  is  not 
words .  We  must  face  here  an  important  semantic  fact.  If  we  are  told 
that  we  cannot  get  the  moon,  we  stop  worrying  about  it,  and  we  regard 
any  dream  about  getting  the  moon  as  an  infantile  phantasy.  In  this 
example,  we  could  not  even  say  that  such  news  as  the  impossibility  of 
getting  the  moon  was  sad,  or  unpleasant,  news.  We  might  say  so, 
jokingly,  to  an  infant,  but  the  majority  of  the  grown-ups  would  not 
have  their  s.r  perturbed  by  it.  A  similar  situation  arises  with  the  object 
called  pencil.  The  object  is  not  words.  There  is  nothing  sad  or  depress¬ 
ing  about  this  fact.  We  accept  it  as  a  fact  and  stop  worrying  about  it,  as 

‘MATTER’,  ‘SPACE’,  ‘TIME’ 

an  infant  would.  The  majority  of  the  old  ‘philosophical’  speculations 
about  this  subject  belong  to  the  semantic  period  of  our  infancy,  when 
we  live  in  phantasies  and  structurally  gamble  on  words  to  which  we 
affectively  ascribe  objective  existence , .  This  represents  full-fledged 
un-sanity  due  to  identification.  The  answer  to  the  question,  what  ‘are’ 
the  terms  ‘matter’,  ‘space’,  and  ‘time’,  is,  as  usual,  given  in  the  properly 
formulated  question.  They  ‘are’  terms, — ‘ Modi  considerandi* ,  as  Leibnitz 
called  them  without  fully  realizing  the  semantic  importance  of  his  own 
statement.  Incidentally,  it  must  be  noticed  that  it  was  the  psycho-logical 
characteristic  of  Leibnitz  who  was  capable  of  such  a  statement,  that 
was  probably  responsible  for  his  whole  work,  as  will  become  more 
apparent  later  on.  When  we  abandon  primitive  standards  of  evaluation, 
geniuses  will  be  made  by  a  semantic  education  which  relieves  the  race 
from  the  older  blockages. 

So  we  see  clearly  that  outside  of  our  skins  there  is  something  going 
on,  which  we  call  the  world,  or  a  pencil,  or  anything,  which  is  indepen¬ 
dent  of  our  words  and  which  is  not  words.  Here  we  come  across  a  very 
fundamental  irreversible  process.  We  can  say  that  in  this  world  a  man 
and  his  words  have  happened.  There  is  a  ‘causal’  eventual  complex 
series  between  the  world,  us,  and  our  words,  but  in  unaided  nature  this 
process  is,  in  the  main,  irreversible,  a  fact  unknown  to  primitives  who 
believe  in  the  magic  of  words.  Through  our  ingenuity  we  can  make  this 
process  partially  reversible ;  namely,  we  can  produce  gramophones,  tele¬ 
phones  in  all  their  developments,  electromechanical  men  who  obey 
orders , . 

We  know  in  1933  that  in  the  semantic  world  this  process  is  dra¬ 
matically  effective.  Words  are  the  result  of  the  activity  of  one  organism, 
and  they,  in  turn,  activate  other  organisms.  On  the  macroscopic  level  of 
ordinary  behaviour,  this  last  was  known  long  ago,  but  only  in  the  last 
few  years  has  psychiatry  discovered  what  kind  of  semantic  and  psycho- 
physiological  disasters  words  and  their  consequences  may  produce  in  the 
human  organism.  These  last  are  already  on  sub-microscopic  levels,  not 
obvious  and,  therefore,  only  recently  discovered. 

The  structure  of  the  language  of  ‘matter’,  ‘space’,  and  ‘time’  is 
ancient.  The  primitive  saw  something,  ate  something,  was  hurt  by  some¬ 
thing  , .  Here  was  an  occasion  for  a  grunt  of  satisfaction,  or  of  pain. 
The  equivalents  of  words  like  ‘matter’,  ‘substance’. ,  originated.  Neither 
he,  nor  the  majority  of  us,  realized  that  the  small  or  large  bits  of  mate¬ 
rials  we  deal  with  appear  as  extremely  complex  processes  (explained  in 
Part  X).  For  him,  as  for  most  of  us,  these  bits  of  materials  ‘are’  ‘con¬ 
crete’,  whatever  that  means,  and  he  might  know  ‘all  about  them’,  which 

228  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

must  have  led  to  identification . ,  and  other  delusional  evaluations.  Of 
course,  these  were  phantasies  of  human  infancy,  and,  in  lives  lived  in  a 
world  of  phantasies,  adjustment,  and,  therefore,  sanity,  is  impossible. 
Since  he  did  not  see  or  feel,  or  know  about  the  material  he  was  im¬ 
mersed  in,  the  fulness  he  was  living  in,  he  invented  the  term  ‘space’,  or 
its  equivalent,  for  the  invisible  materials  which  were  present.  Knowing 
nothing  of  fulness,  he  objectified  what  appeared  to  him  to  be  empty 
‘space’  into  ‘absolute  emptiness’,  which  later  became  ‘absolute  space’, 
‘absolute  nothingness’,  by  ‘definition’. 

There  are  several  important  remarks  which  can  be  made  about 
this  ‘absolute  emptiness’  and  ‘absolute  nothingness’.  First  of  all,  we  now 
know,  theoretically  and  empirically,  that  such  a  thing  does  not  exist. 
There  may  be  more  or  less  of  something,  but  never  an  unlimited  ‘perfect 
vacuum’.  In  the  second  place,  our  nervous  make-up,  being  in  accord 
with  experience,  is  such  that  ‘absolute  emptiness’  requires  ‘outside  walls’. 
The  question  at  once  arises,  is  the  world  ‘finite’  or  ‘infinite’?  If  we  say 
‘finite’,  it  has  to  have  outside  walls,  and  then  the  question  arises :  What 
is  ‘behind  the  walls’?  If  we  say  it  is  ‘infinite’,  the  problem  of  the  psycho¬ 
logical  ‘walls’  is  not  eliminated,  and  we  still  have  the  semantic  need  foi 
walls,  and  then  ask  what  is  beyond  the  walls.  So  we  see  that  such  a 
world  suspended  in  some  sort  of  an  ‘absolute  void’  represents  a  nature 
against  human  nature ,  and  so  we  had  to  invent  something  supernatural 
to  account  for  such  assumed  nature  against  human  nature.  In  the  third 
place,  and  this  remark  is  the  most  fundamental  of  all,  because  a  symbol 
must  stand  for  something  to  be  a  symbol  at  all,  ‘ absolute  nothingness 9 
cannot  be  objective  and  cannot  be  symbolised  at  all .  This  ends  the  argu¬ 
ment,  as  all  we  may  say  about  it  is  neither  true  nor  false,  but  non-sense . 
We  can  make  noises,  but  say  nothing  about  the  external  world.  It  is  easy 
to  see  that  ‘absolute  nothingness’  is  a  label  for  a  semantic  disturbance, 
for  verbal  objectification,  for  a  pathological  state  inside  our  skin,  for  a 
fancy,  but  not  a  symbol,  for  a  something  which  has  objective  existence 
outside  our  skin. 

Some  other  imaginary  consequences  of  this  semantic  disturbance 
are  far-fetched  and  very  gloomy.  If  our  world  and  all  other  worlds 
(island  universes)  were  somehow  suspended  in  such  an  ‘absolute  void’, 
these  universes  would  radiate  their  energy  into  this  ‘infinite  void’,  what¬ 
ever  that  means,  and  so  sooner  or  later  would  come  to  an  end,  their 
energy  being  exhausted.  But,  fortunately,  when  we  eliminate  this 
pathological  semantic  state  by  proper  education  all  these  gloomy  symp¬ 
toms  vanish  as  mere  fancies.  It  must  be  noticed  that  this  ‘absolute  space’, 
‘absolute  void’,  ‘absolute  nothingness’  with  its  difficulties,  which  are  due 

‘MATT ICR’,  ‘SrAtTi’,  ‘T1MK' 

to  very  primitive  structural  speculations  on  words,  and  to  some  un-sane 
ascribing  of  objectivity  to  words,  can  be  abolished  quite  simply  if  we 
decide  to  investigate  and  re-educate  our  s.r. 

What  we  know  positively  about  ‘space’  is  that  it  is  not  ‘emptiness*, 
but  ‘fulness’,  or  a  ‘plenum*.  Now  ‘fulness’  or  a  ‘plenum’,  first  of  all,  is 
a  term  of  entirely  different  non-el  structure.  When  we  have  a  plenum 
or  fulness,  it  must  be  a  plenum  of  ‘something’,  ‘somewhere*,  at  ‘some 
time’,  and  so  the  term  implies,  at  least,  all  three  of  our  former  elemen- 
talistic  terms .  Furthermore,  fulness  by  some  psycho-logical  process  does 
not  require  ‘outside  walls’.  If  we  ask  if  such  a  universe  of  fulness  is 
‘finite’  or  ‘infinite*,  without  any  psycho-logical  difficulties,  we  may  reply 
that  we  do  not  know,  but  if  we  study  enough  of  the  materials  of  this 
universe  we  may  know,  A  universe  of  fulness  may  be  assumed  to  have 
boundaries,  and  then  we  may  ask  again  the  annoying  question :  What  is 
beyond?  With  the  proper  use  of  language,  this  difficulty  is  again 
eliminated. 

Without  going  into  unnecessary  details,  we  see  that  a  boundary, 
or  a  limit,  or  a  wall,  is  something  by  definition,  beyond  which  we  cannot 
go.  If  there  is  nothing  to  restrict  our  progress,  there  are  no  boundaries . 
Let  us  fancy  some  cosmic  traveller  with  some  extraordinary  flying 
machine,  and  let  us  assume  that  he  flies  without  stopping  in  a  ‘definite 
direction*.  If  he  never  encounters  any  boundary,  he  is  surely  entitled  to 
say  that  his  universe  is  unbounded.  The  question  may  arise:  Is  such 
an  unbounded  universe  finite  or  infinite  in  size?  Again  let  us  apply 
correct  language  and  a  little  analogy.  A  traveller  on  a  sphere,  like  our 
own  earth,  could  travel  endlessly  without  ever  coming  to  a  boundary, 
and  yet  we  know  that  the  sphere,  our  earth,  is  of  finite  size.  Mathema¬ 
ticians  have  worked  out  this  point,  and  it  is  embodied  in  the  Einstein 
theory.  The  universe  is  unbounded,  an  answer  which  satisfies  our  feel¬ 
ings  ;  yet  it  is  finite  in  size,  although  very  large,  an  answer  which  satisfies 
our  rationality  *  The  visualization  of  such  a  universe  is  quite  difficult. 
It  should  not  be  visualized  as  a  sphere,  but,  at  a  later  stage,  we  will  see 
that  it  can  be  visualized  satisfactorily.  The  condition  for  visualization 
is  to  eliminate  identification,  that  semantic  disturbance  which  is  strictly 
connected  with  primitive  ways  of  ‘thinking*. 

The  problems  of  ‘time*  are  similar,  although  they  have  a  different 
neurological  background.  The  rough  materials  we  deal  with  mostly 
affect  our  sight,  touch , .  Invisible  materials,  like  air . ,  affect  these  ‘senses* 

*1  do  not  introduce  here  the  latest  speculations  in  this  field,  because,  from  a 
non^ ari stole lian  point  of  view,  they  appear  meaningless. 

230  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

less,  but  more  the  kinesthetic  ‘senses’  by  which  muscular  movements  are 
appreciated,  and  so  ‘space’  and  ‘time’  have  different  neurological  back¬ 
grounds.  ‘Time’  seemingly  represents  a  general  characteristic  of  all 
nervous  tissue  (and,  perhaps,  living  tissue  in  general)  connected  with 
summarizing  or  integrating.  What  we  have  to  deal  with  in  this  world 
and  in  ourselves  appears  as  periods  and  periodicity,  pulsations , .  We  are 
made  up  of  very  long  chains  of  atomic  pulsating  clocks,  on  the  sub- 
microscopic  level.  On  the  macroscopic  level,  we  have  also  to  deal  with 
periodic  occurrences,  of  hunger,  sleep,  breathing,  heart-beats,.  We 
know  already  that,  beyond  some  limits,  discontinuous  ti mes,  when  rapid 
enough,  are  blended  into  continuous  feelings  of  pressure,  or  warmth, 
or  light , .  On  objective  levels  we  deal  with  timer,  and  we  feel  ‘time’, 
when  the  timer  are  rapid  enough. 

Again,  the  moving  pictures  are  a  good  illustration.  The  normal 
moving-picture  film  shows  sixteen  pictures  a  second.  The  film  gives  us 
static  pictures  with  finite  differences.  When  we  put  it  on  the  projector, 
the  differences  vanish.  Our  nervous  system  has  summarized  and  inte¬ 
grated  them,  and  we  see  ‘continuous  motion’.  If  pictures  are  taken  at  the 
rate  of  eight  a  second  and  theQ  run  on  the  normal  projector  for  the 
speed  of  sixteen  a  second,  we  summarize  and  integrate  again,  but  we 
see  a  fast  moving  picture,  If  the  pictures  are  taken  at  the  rate  of  128 
exposures  a  second  and  run  on  the  normal  projector  of  sixteen  pictures 
to  a  second,  we  have  what  is  called  a  slow  moving  picture.  It  should  be 
noticed  that  the  order  of  the  semantic  rhythmic  processes  is  fourfold ; 
it  involves  order  not  only  in  ‘space’  (three  dimensions)  but  in  ‘time’ 
also.  Periods  of  contraction  alternate  with  periods  of  rest,  and  this 
occurs  at  nearly  regular  intervals. 

This  rhythmic  tendency  is,  indeed,  so  fundamental  and  so  inherent 
in  living  tissue  that  we  can,  at  pleasure,  make  voluntary  muscles;  for 
example,  exhibit  artificially  induced  rhythmic  contractions  by  immers- 
ing  them  in  special  saline  solutions,  as,  for  instance,  a  solution  of  sodium 
chloride.  We  should  also  not  wonder  why  modern  science  assumes  that 
life  may  have  originated  in  the  sea.  The  physico-chemical  conditions  of 
saline  solutions  are  such  that  they  favour  rhythmic  processes ;  they  not 
only  may  originate  them,  but  may  also  keep  them  up,  and  life  seemingly 
is  very  closely  connected  with  autonomous  rhythmic  processes. 

Such  rhythmic  processes  are  felt  on  lower  orders  of  abstraction  as 
continuous  time ,  probably  because  of  the  rapidity  and  overlapping  of 
periods.  On  higher  order  abstractions,  when  structurally  proper  lin¬ 
guistic  and  extra-neural  means  are  developed,  they  appear  as  timer. 

‘MATTER*,  ‘SPACE*,  ‘TIME’ 

Perhaps,  neurologically,  animals  feel  similarly  as  we  do  about 
‘time’,  but  they  have  no  neurological  means  to  elaborate  linguistic  and 
extra-neural  means  which  alone  allow  us  to  extend  and  summarize  the 
manifold  experience  of  many  generations  (time-binding).  They  can¬ 
not  pass  from  ‘time’  to  ‘times’.  Obviously,  if  we  do  not,  we  then  re¬ 
nounce  our  human  characteristics,  and  copy  animals  in  our  evaluating 
processes,  a  practice  which  must  be  harmful. 

In  nature  the  visible  and  invisible  materials  seemingly  consist  of 
recurring  pulsations  of  extremely  minute  and  rapid  periods,  which,  in 
some  instances,  become  macroscopic  periods.  In  the  first  case,  we  cannot 
see  them  or  feel  them,  so  we  talk  about  ‘concreteness*, .  In  the  second 
case,  we  see  the  periodic  movements,  as  of  the  earth  around  the  sun . ,  or 
we  feel  our  heart-beats , .  We  see  that  the  visible  or  invisible  materials  in 
nature  are  compounded  of  periodic  pulsations  and  are  simply  two  aspects 
of  one  process.  The  splitting  of  these  processes  into  ‘matter’,  ‘space’, 
and  ‘time’  is  a  characteristic  function  of  our  nervous  system.  These 
abstractions  are  inside  our  skins,  and  are  methods  of  representation  for 
ourselves  to  ourselves,  and  are  not  the  objective  world  around  us. 

It  must  be  realized  that  under  such  circumstances  we  cannot  speak 
about  ‘finiteness’  or  ‘infiniteness’  of  ‘matter’,  ‘space’,  and  ‘time’,  as  all 
the  old  ‘philosophers*  have  done,  Leibnitz  included,  because  these  terms 
‘finite’  and  ‘infinite’,  though  they  may  be  conceivably  applied  to  numbers 
of  aspects  of  objective  entities,  have  no  meaning  if  applied  to  linguistic 
issues,  that  is,  to  forms  of  representation  outside  of  numbers.  Of  course, 
if,  through  a  semantic  pathological  disturbance  (objectification),  we  do 
ascribe  some  delusional  objective  existence  to  verbal  terms,  we  can  then 
talk  about  anything,  but  such  conversations  have  no  more  value  than  the 
deliria  of  the  ‘mentally’  ill.  The  terms  ‘finite’  or  ‘infinite’  are  only  legiti¬ 
mately  applied  to  numerical  problems,  and  so  we  can  speak  legitimately 
of  a  finite  or  infinite  numbers  of  inches,  or  pounds,  or  hours,  or  similar 
entities,  but  statements  about  the  ‘finite  mind’  or  the  ‘understanding  of 
the  infinite’. ,  have  no  meanings  and  only  reveal  the  pathological  semantic 
disturbance  of  the  patient. 

The  objectification  of  our  feeling  of  ‘time’  has  had,  and  has  at  pres¬ 
ent,  very  tragic  consequences  strictly  connected  with  our  un-sanity.  It 
must  be  remembered  that  particularly  in  ‘mental*  and  nervous  difficulties 
the  patient  seldom  realizes  the  character  of  his  illness.  He  may  feel 
pains,  he  may  feel  very  unhappy,  and  what  not,  but  he  usually  does  not 
understand  their  origin.  This  is  particularly  true  with  semantic  disturb¬ 
ances.  One  may  explain  endlessly,  but,  in  most  cases,  it  is  perfectly 
hopeless  to  try  to  help.  Only  a  very  few  benefit.  Here  lies,  also,  the 

232  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

main  difficulty  in  writing  this  book.  Readers  who  identify,  that  is,  who 
believe  unconsciously  with  all  their  affective  impulses  in  the  objectivity 
of  matter*,  ‘space*,  and  ‘time*,  will  have  difficulty  in  modifying  their  s.r 
in  this  field. 

Let  us  see  now  what  consequences  the  objectification  of  ‘time*  will 
have  for  us.  If  we  do  not  objectify,  and  feel  instinctively  and  perma¬ 
nently  that  words  are  not  the  things  spoken  about,  then  we  could  not 
speak  about  such  meaningless  subjects  as  the  ‘beginning*  or  the  ‘end* 
of  ‘time*.  But,  if  we  are  semantically  disturbed  and  objectify,  then,  of 
course,  since  objects  have  a  beginning  and  an  end,  so  also  would  ‘time* 
have  a  beginning*  and  an  ‘end*.  In  such  pathological  fancies  the  universe 
must  have  a  ‘beginning  in  time*  and  so  must  have  been  made . ,  and  all 
of  our  old  anthropomorphic  and  objectified  mythologies  follow,  including 
the  older  theories  of  entropy  in  physics.  But,  if  ‘time*  is  only  a  human 
form  of  representation  and  not  an  object,  the  universe  has  no  ‘beginning 
in  time’  and  no  ‘end  in  time’ ;  in  other  words,  the  universe  is  ‘time*-less. 
It  was  not  made,  it  just  ‘was,  is,  and  will  be*.  The  moment  we  realize,  feel 
permanently,  and  utilize  these  realizations  and  feelings  that  words  are 
not  things,  then  only  do  we  acquire  the  semantic  freedom  to  use  different 
forms  of  representation.  We  can  fit  better  their  structure  to  the  facts 
at  hand,  become  better  adjusted  to  these  facts  which  are  not  words,  and 
so  evaluate  properly  m.o  realities,  which  evaluation  is  important  for 
sanity. 

According  to  what  we  know  in  1933,  the  universe  is  ‘time’-less; 
in  other  words,  there  is  no  such  object  as  ‘time*.  In  terms  of  periods, 
or  years,  or  minutes,  or  seconds,  which  is  a  different  language,  we  may 
have  infinite  numbers  of  such  times.  This  statement  is  another  form  of 
stating  the  principle  of  conservation  of  energy,  or  whatever  other  fun¬ 
damental  higher  abstraction  physicists  will  discover. 

Because  ‘time*  is  a  feeling,  produced  by  conditions  of  this  world 
outside  and  inside  our  skins,  which  can  be  said  to  represent  times,  the 
problem  of  ‘time*  becomes  a  neuro-mathematical  issue.  It  must  also  be 
noticed  that  times,  as  a  term,  implies  times  of  something,  somewhere, 
and  so,  as  with  plenum  or  fulness,  it  is  structurally  a  non-ely  A  term. 

Times  has  also  many  other  most  important  implications.  It  implies 
numbers  of  times,  it  implies  periods,  waves,  vibrations,  frequencies, 
units,  quanta,  discontinuities,  and,  indeed,  the  whole  structural  appa¬ 
ratus  of  modern  science. 

Euclidean  ‘space’  had  the  semantic  background  of  ‘emptiness*.  In 
it  we  moved  our  figures  from  place  to  place  and  always  assumed  that 
this  could  be  done  quite  safely  and  accurately.  Newtonian  mechanics 

'MATTER*,  ‘SPACE’,  'TIME’ 

also  followed  this  path  and  even  postulated  an  'absolute  space’  (empti¬ 
ness).  All  of  which  harks  back  to  the  old  aristotelianism. 

N,  and  A  systems  have  the  semantic  background  of  fulness  or 
plenum,  although,  unfortunately,  this  background  is,  as  yet,  mainly 
unrealized,  not  fully  utilized ;  it  has  not,  as  yet,  generally  affected  our  s.r . 

A  simple  illustration  will  make  the  difference  clear.  Imagine  that 
in  one  part  of  a  large  room  we  have  an  open  umbrella  which  we  would 
like  to  compare  with  another  'unit’  open  umbrella.  Let  us  imagine  that 
the  room  has  the  air  pumped  out  and  also  that  all  other  eventual  dis¬ 
turbing  factors  are  eliminated.  We  can  move  our  open  'unit’  umbrella 
from  one  part  of  the  room  to  another,  and  this  movement  will  not  con¬ 
siderably  distort  our  'unit*  umbrella.  Now  let  us  perform  a  similar 
experiment  in  two  houses,  separated  some  distance,  during  a  storm,  a 
storm  implying,  of  course,  fulness.  Can  we  transport  our  'unit*  umbrella 
through  the  storm  and  preserve  its  shape . ,  in  a  fulness,  without  taking 
the  fulness  into  account?  Of  course  not.  We  see  what  serious  differ¬ 
ence  it  makes  if  our  theories  presuppose  'emptiness*  or  'fulness*. 

This  shows  also  why  the  non-euclidean  geometries  which  deal  with 
a  plenum  are  structurally  preferable  and  semantically  sounder  and  more 
in  accord  with  the  structure  of  the  world,  than  the  language  of  euclidean 
'emptiness*,  to  which  there  is  nothing  in  nature  to  correspond.  Should 
we  wonder  that  modern  linguists  (mathematicians)  work  in  the  direction 
of  fulness  and  of  fusing  geometry  with  physics.  It  is  obviously  the  only 
thing  to  do.  Differential  geometry  is  the  foundation  of  this  new  outlook, 
but,  even  in  this  geometry,  lines  could  legitimately  be  transported  over 
great  distances.  Weyl  introduced  a  semantic  improvement  of  this  point 
of  view  by  assuming  that  for  a  differential  geometry  it  is  illegitimate 
to  use  comparisons  at  large  distances,  but  that  all  operations  should  be 
between  indefinitely  near  points.1 

It  should  be  noticed  that  scientists,  in  general,  disregard  almost 
completely  the  verbal  and  semantic  problems  explained  here,  a  fact  which 
leads  to  great  and  unnecessary  confusion,  and  makes  modern  works  inac¬ 
cessible  to  the  layman.  Take,  for  instance,  the  case  of  the  'curvature  of 
space-time*.  Mathematicians  use  this  expression  very  often  and,  inside 
their  skins,  they  know  mostly  what  they  are  talking  about.  Millions 
upon  millions  of  even  intelligent  readers  hear  such  an  expression  as  the 
'curvature  of  space-time’.  Owing  to  nursery  mythology  and  primitive 
s.r ,  'space’  for  them  is  'emptiness’,  and  so  they  try  to  understand  the 
'curvature  of  emptiness*.  After  severe  pains,  they  come  to  a  very  true , 
yet,  for  them,  hopeless,  conclusion ;  namely,  that  'curvature  of  emptiness’ 
is  either  non-sense  or  ‘beyond  them*,  with  the  semantic  result  that  either 

234  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

they  have  contempt  for  the  mathematicians  who  deal  with  non-sense  or 
feel  hopeless  about  their  own  capacities— both  undesirable  semantic 
results. 

The  truth  is  that  ‘curvature  of  emptiness'  has  no  meanings,  no  mat¬ 
ter  who  might  say  it,  but  curvature  of  fulness  is  entirely  different.  Let 
the  reader  look  at  the  cloud  of  smoke  from  his  cigarette  or  cigar,  and 
he  will  at  once  understand  what  ‘curvature  of  fulness*  means.  Of  course, 
he  will  realize,  as  well  as  the  mathematicians  do,  that  the  problem  may 
be  difficult,  but,  at  least,  it  has  sense  and  represents  a  problem.  It  is  not 
non-sense. 

Similar  remarks  apply  to  higher  dimensions  in  ‘space*.  Higher 
dimensions  in  ‘emptiness*  is  also  non-sense;  and  the  layman  is  right  in 
refusing  to  accept  it.  But  higher  dimensions  in  fulness  is  entirely  a 
different  problem.  A  look  at  the  cloud  of  smoke  from  our  cigarette  will 
again  make  it  completely  plain  to  everybody  that  to  give  an  account  of 
fulness,  we  may  need  an  enormous  number  of  data  or,  as  we  say 
roughly,  of  dimensions.  This  applies,  also,  to  the  new  four-dimensional 
world  of  Minkowski.  It  is  a  fulness  made  up  of  world  lines,  a  network 
of  events  or  intervals . ,  and  it  is  not  non-sense. 

Lately,  there  has  appeared  an  excellent  book  by  Bertrand  Russell, 
published  by  the  International  Library  of  Psychology,  Philosophy  and 
Scientific  Method ;  and  yet  the  title  is  The  Analysis  of  Matter,  without 
any  quotation  marks. 

This  book  is  really  an  unusually  fine  and  fundamental  work  which 
has  no  defects  which  could  be  implied  by  the  title.  This  title  simply  dis¬ 
regards  the  issues  explained  here ;  it  should  be  The  Analysis  of  ‘ Matter \ 

It  is  with  some  pleasure  that  one  sees  such  an  authority  as  Edding¬ 
ton,  in  his  The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Relativity,  on  p.  158,  making 
the  statement :  ‘In  using  the  word  “space**  it  is  difficult  to  repress  irrele¬ 
vant  ideas ;  therefore  let  us  abandon  the  word  and  state  explicitly  that 
we  are  considering  a  network  of  intervals’ . 

For  the  reasons  already  given,  I  do  not  use  the  terms  ‘matter*, 
‘space*,  or  ‘time*  without  quotation  marks;  and,  wherever  possible,  shall 
use,  instead,  the  terms  ‘materials*,  ‘plenum*,  ‘fulness*,  ‘spread’,  and 
‘ times’ ,  (say  seconds).  Indeed,  these  semantic  problems  are  so  serious 
that  they  should  be  brought  to  the  attention  of  International  Mathemati¬ 
cal  and  Physical  Congresses,  so  that  a  new  and  structurally  correct 
terminology  could  be  established.  It  is  not  desirable  that  science  should 
structurally  mislead  the  layman  and  disturb  his  s.r.  It  is  easier  for 
trained  specialists  to  change  their  terminology  than  to  re-educate  seman¬ 
tically  the  rest  of  the  race.  I  would  suggest  that  terms  ‘matter’,  ‘sub- 

‘MATTER’,  ‘SPACE’,  ‘TIME’ 

stance’,  ‘space’,  and  ‘time’  should  be  completely  eliminated  from  science, 
because  of  their  extremely  wide-spread  and  vicious  structural  and  so 
semantic  implications,  and  that  the  terms  ‘events’,  ‘space-time’,  ‘material’, 
‘plenum’,  ‘fulness*,  ‘spreads’,  ‘time/. ,  be  used  instead.  These  terms  not 
only  do  not  have  the  old  structural  and  semantic  implications,  but,  on 
the  contrary,  they  convey  the  modern  structural  notions  and  involve  new 
s.r.  The  use  of  the  old  terms  drags  in,  unconsciously  and  automatically, 
the  old  primitive  metaphysical  structure  and  s.r  which  are  entirely  con¬ 
tradicted  by  experience  and  modern  science.  I  venture  to  suggest  that 
such  a  change  in  terminology  would  do  more  to  render  the  newer  works 
intelligible  than  scores  of  volumes  of  explanations  using  the  old  ter¬ 
minology. 

Before  summarizing  in  Parts  IX  and  X  what  modern  science 
has  to  tell  about  the  structure  of  the  world  around  us,  it  will  be  profitable 
to  enquire  what  are  the  means  by  which  we  can  recognize  this  structure. 

Section  B.  The  neurological  function  of  abstracting . 

Protoplasm,  even  in  its  simplest  form,  is  sensitive  to  different 
mechanical  and  chemical  stimulations ;  and,  indeed,  undifferentiated  pro¬ 
toplasm  has  already  all  the  potentialities  of  the  future  nervous  system. 
If  we  take  an  undifferentiated  bit  of  protoplasm,  and  some  stimulation 
is  applied  to  some  point,  the  stimulus  does  not  spread  somehow  ‘all  over 
at  once’,  with  some  mysterious  ‘infinite’  velocity,  but  propagates  itself 
with  finite  velocity  and  a  diminishing  gradient  from  one  end  of  our  bit 
of  protoplasm  to  the  opposite  end. 

Because  of  the  finite  velocity  of  propagation  and  the  fact  that  the 
action  is  by  contact  in  a  plenum ,  the  impulse  has  a  definite  direction  and 
diminishing  intensity,  or,  as  we  say,  the  bit  of  protoplasm  acquires  a 
temporal  polarity  (head-end).  Such  polarity  conditions  produce  a  di¬ 
rected  wave  of  excitement  of  diminishing  intensity,  which  Child  calls  a 
dynamic  gradient.  If  such  a  stimulation  were  applied  to  one  spot  for  a 
considerable  length  of  ‘time*,  some  kind  of  polarization  may  become  last¬ 
ing.  In  some  such  way  those  dynamic  gradients  have  become  structural - 
ised  in  the  forms  of  our  nervous  system,  which  represent  the  preferred 
paths  by  which  the  nervous  impulses  travel. 

The  bodies  of  most  organisms  are  protected  from  outside  stimula¬ 
tion  by  some  kind  of  membrane  or  cuticle  and  the  parts  of  the  surface 
have  developed  so  as  to  be  sensitive  to  one  form  of  stimulation  and  not 
to  others.  For  instance,  the  eye  registers  the  stimulations  of  light  waves, 
while  it  is  insensitive  to  sound . ,  and,  even  if  hit,  it  gives  only  the  feeling 
of  light.  Each  ‘sense-organ’  has  also  the  nervous  means  of  concentrating 

236  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

stimuli,  intensifying  them . ,  and  so  of  effecting  the  most  efficient  response 
of  the  corresponding  end-organ. 

In  our  school  days  we  were  taught  that  we  have  five  ‘senses’.  Mod¬ 
ern  researches  show  that  there  are  more  than  twenty  different  ‘senses’. 
Besides,  as  far  as  ‘Smith’  is  concerned,  we  know  that  ‘senses’  and  ‘mind’ 
cannot  be  divided. 

The  main  stimulations  which  we  find  in  the  outside  world  may  be 
divided  into  three  groups.  The  first  are  connected  with  the  roughest 
macroscopic  manifestations  of  the  outside  world ;  they  are  mechanical 
impacts  which  we  abstract  as  ‘tactile  sensations’,  which  range  from  a 
single  mechanical  contact  to  rhythmically  repeated  contacts  with  our  skin 
as  frequently  as  1552  vibrations  per  second.  Above  this  limit  ‘time?’ 
begin  to  be  registered  as  a  ‘duration* ;  that  is,  the  individuality  of  ‘time/ 
is  lost,  and  we  feel  pressure.  At  this  level  we  deal  with  gross  macro 
scopic  manifestations,  which  are  not  only  felt  but  can  also  be  seen. 

The  second  group  of  manifestations  is,  in  the  main,  no  more  on  the 
gross  level.  Here  belong  the  vibratory  manifestations  which  are  no  more 
visible  to  the  unaided  eye.  We  may  speak  of  them  as  on  the  microscopic 
level.  They  are  mechanical  vibrations  of  the  air . ,  and  we  become 
acquainted  with  them  in  the  form  of  sound.  The  vibrations  which  the 
average  ear  is  able  to  register  range  from  about  30  (sometimes  even  12) 
to  about  30,000  or  even  50,000  vibrations  a  second.  The  ear  does  not 
register  any  other  vibrations.* 

The  third  group  of  vibratory  manifestations  belongs  to  a  still  subtler 
level.  They  are  electromagnetic  waves  of  an  enormous  variety  of  wave¬ 
lengths  and  number  of  vibrations  per  second.  The  lower  members  of 
this  series  are  the  Hertzian  electric  waves,  the  higher  members  are  the 
X-,  or  Rontgen-rays.  Our  nervous  systems  are  capable  of  registering 
only  a  very  limited  range  of  these  vibrations ;  namely,  the  waves  called 
radiant  heat,  the  light  waves,  and  the  ultra-violet  rays,  these  last  only  on 
a  chemical  level.  It  seems  that  we  have  no  organ  which  responds  directly 
to  electric  waves,  ultra-violet  rays,  X-rays,  and  the  many  other  rays 
which  we  know  from  laboratory  work. 

Similarly,  the  chemical  ‘senses’  of  taste  and  smell  register  only  a 
very  small  number  of  actual  excitations  to  which  they  are  exposed. 

Animals  have  different  limits  of  nervous  susceptibility,  but  we  can 
have  no  idea  how  the  world  looks  to  them  unless  their  nervous  system 
is  quite  similar  to  our  own.  The  above  statements  will  become  clearer 
if  we  tabulate  some  of  them.  The  following  table  is  taken  from  An 
Introduction  to  Neurology  by  Professor  C.  Judson  Herrick,  p.  85  (Fifth 
Edition)  : 

♦Latest  researches  seem  to  modify  these  data. 

MATTER',  'SPACE',  ‘TIME’ 

Table  of  Physical  Vibrations* 

Physical 

process. 

Wave 

length. 

Number  of  vibrations 
per  second. 

Recep¬ 

tor. 

Sensa¬ 

tion. 

Mechanical 

contact. 

From  very  slow 
to 

1552  per  second. 

Skin. 

Touch 

and 

pressure. 

Above  12,280  mm. 

Below  30  per  second. 

None. 

None. 

Waves  in 

material 

media. 

12,280  mm. 
to 

13  mm. 

30  per  second 
to 

30,000  per  second. 

Internal 

ear. 

Tone. 

Below  13  mm. 

Above  30,000  per  second. 

None. 

None. 

oo  to  .2  mm. 
(electric  waves) . 

0  to  1500  billion 
(1.5  X  1018). 

None. 

None. 

.1  mm. 
to 

.0004  mm. 

3000  billion  (3  X  10”) 
to 

800,000  billion  (8  X  1014). 

Skin. 

Radiant 

heat 

.0008  mm. 
to 

.0004  mm. 

400,000  billion 
(4  X  1014) 
to 

800,000  billion 
(8  X  1014). 

Retina. 

Light 

and 

color. 

Ether 

waves. 

.0004  mm. 
to 

.000008  mm. 
(ultra-violet 
rays). 

800,000  billion 
(8  X  W*) 
to 

40,000,000  billion 
(4X101*). 

None. 

None. 

.00002  mm. 
to 

.00000001  mm. 
(jr-rays). 

15,000,000  billion 
(1.5  X  10”) 
to 

30,000,000,000  billion 
(30  X  10”). 

None. 

None. 

.00000014  mm. 
to 

.0000000005  mm. 
(7-rays). 

2  billion  billion 
(2  X  10”) 
to 

600  billion  billion 
(6  X  10"). 

None. 

None. 

.00000000005  mm. 
to 

.000000000008  mm. 
(cosmic  rays). 

6,000  billion  billion 
(6  X  10”) 
to 

40,000  billion  billion 
(4  X  10”). 

None. 

None. 

*The  use  of  names  for  large  numbers  is  not  uniform  in  different  countries,  and 
so  I  give,  in  brackets,  the  United  States  and  French  equivalents  to  the  English 
names. 

Million  1,000,000  =  10*;  (million). 

Milliard  1,000,000,000  =  10*;  (billion  or  milliard). 

Billion  10*  X  10*  =  10“ ;  (trillion). 

In  this  table  1  billion  =  10*. 

238  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

As  a  further  illustration  of  the  mechanism  of  abstracting,  we  may 
suggest  the  observation  of  Weber  that  if,  for  instance,  a  room  is  lighted 
with  100  candles,  and  if  one  more  candle  is  brought  in,  the  increased 
illumination  will  be  appreciated  very  slightly.  But  not  so  if  we  had  a 
room  illuminated  with  1000  candles.  In  this  case,  we  should  not  appre¬ 
ciate  the  addition  of  one  candle  at  all.  Ten  candles  should  be  introduced 
to  make  an  appreciable  difference  in  our  perceptions.  The  Weber  law, 
as  it  is  called,  stated  that  in  the  above  case  1/100  of  the  original  strength 
of  the  stimulus  is  needed  to  make  a  change  appreciable.  For  light,  the 
fraction  is  about  1/100;  for  noise,  about  1/3;  for  pressure,  it  varies 
between  1/30  and  1/10;  for  weight,  between  1/70  and  1/40  in  various 
parts  of  the  body. 

If  we  use  compasses  and  experiment  with  pricks,  we  find  that  in 
different  parts  of  the  body  the  limit  of  the  distance  apart  of  the  points 

when  we  feel  one  prick  and  yet  have  two,  is  different. 

On  the  tip  of  the  tongue  this  limit  is .  1  mm. 

On  the  palmar  surface  of  third  phalanx  of  forefinger . 2  mm. 

On  the  palmar  surface  of  second  phalanges  of  fingers .  4  mm. 

On  the  palm  of  the  hand . 10  mm. 

On  the  dorsal  surface  of  first  phalanges  of  fingers . 14  mm. 

On  the  back  of  hand . 25  mm. 

On  the  upper  and  lower  parts  of  forearm . 37  mm. 

On  the  middle  thigh  and  back . 62  mm.2 

A  ‘sensation’  requires  appreciable  ‘time’  (timer  by  a  clock)  for  its 
development.  Part  of  the  ‘time’  is  spent  at  the  end-organ,  part  in  con¬ 
veying  the  nervous  impulse  along  the  nerves  to  the  brain  and  part  in  the 
brain.  A  ‘sensation’  usually  outlasts  the  stimulus,  and  often  a  single 
stimulus  produces  a  whole  series  of  ‘after-sensations*. 

As  compared  with  the  ‘sensations’  obtained  from  pain  spots,  touch 
is  quicker  in  its  development  and  persistence.  With  a  vibrating  string, 
1500  vibrations  a  second  are  recognizable  by  touch  as  vibrations.  At, 
over  1552  vibrations  a  second,  the  vibratory  character  is  lost,  and  we 
feel  only  continuous  pressure.  A  toothed  revolving  wheel  gives  the 
feeling  of  smoothness  (and  ‘continuity’)  when  the  teeth  meet  the  skin 
at  the  rate  of  from  480  to  680  per  second.3 

The  above  given  tables  and  facts  are  deeply  significant.  We  see, 
first  of  all,  that  structurally  we  are  immersed  in  a  world  full  of  energy 
manifestations,  out  of  which  we  abstract  directly  only  a  very  small  por¬ 
tion,  these  abstractions  being  already  coloured  by  the  specific  functioning 
and  structure  of  the  nervous  system — the  abstractors.  Very  probably, 
there  are  many  more  energy  manifestations  which,  as  yet,  we  have  not 

‘MATTER’,  ‘SPACE’,  ‘TIME’ 

discovered.  Every  few  years  we  discover  some  new  form  of  energy 
manifestation,  and,  at  present,  our  knowledge  is  already  so  advanced 
that  it  is  highly  probable  that  the  list  is  much  longer.  Finally,  and  here 
the  whole  ‘structure  of  human  knowledge’  begins  to  play  its  role;  for 
sanity  we  have  to  know  and  evaluate  this  world  around  us,  if  we  want 
to  adjust  ourselves  satisfactorily  to  it. 

Section  C.  Problems  of  adjustment . 

Is  the  problem  of  adjustment  in  the  animal  world  similar  to  that  in 
the  human  world?  No,  it  is  entirely  different.  Animals  do  not  alter 
their  environment  so  rapidly,  nor  to  such  an  extent  as  humans  do.  Ani¬ 
mals  are  not  time-binders;  they  have  not  the  capacity  by  which  each 
generation  can  start  where  the  former  left  off.  Neurologically,  animals 
have  no  means  for  extra-neural  extensions,  which  extensions  involve 
the  complex  mechanism  with  which  we  are  dealing  throughout  this  work. 

The  example  of  the  caterpillar,  already  cited,  shows  clearly  how 
organisms  not  adapted  to  their  environment  perish  and  do  not  propagate 
their  special,  non-survival  characteristics.  Similar  remarks  apply  to 
hens,  their  eggs,  and  chicks  which  are  kept  in  buildings  without  sunlight 
or  with  ordinary  glass  windows ;  these,  also,  do  not  survive,  and  so  pass 
out  of  the  picture. 

With  humans,  the  situation  is  entirely  different.  We  are  able  to 
produce  conditions  which  do  not  exist  in  unaided  nature.  We  produce 
artificial  conditions  and  so  our  numbers  and  distribution  are  not  regu¬ 
lated  by  unaided  nature  alone.  Animals  cannot  over-populate  the  globe, 
as  they  do  not  produce  artificially.  We  do  over-populate  this  globe  be¬ 
cause  we  produce  artificially.  With  animals ,  selfishness  comes  before 
altruism,  and  the  non- selfish  perish .  An  animal  has  to  live  first,  then  act . 
With  man,  the  reverse  is  true.  The  selfish  may  produce  such  conditions 
that  they  are  destroyed  by  them.  We  can  over-populate  the  globe  because 
of  artificial  production,  and  so  we  are  actually  born  nowadays  into  a 
world  where  we  must  act  first  before  we  can  live .  As  I  have  already 
shown  in  my  Manhood  of  Humanity  (p.  72),  the  old  animalistic,  falla¬ 
cious  generalizations  have  been,  and  are,  the  foundation  of  our  ‘philoso¬ 
phies*,  ‘ethics’,  systems . ,  and  naturally  such  animalistic  doctrines  must 
be  disastrous  to  us.  Neurologically,  we  build  up  conditions  which  our 
nervous  systems  cannot  stand;  and  so  we  break  down,  and,  perhaps, 
shall  not  even  survive. 

Animals  have  no  ‘doctrines*  in  our  meaning  of  the  term ;  thus,  doc¬ 
trines  are  no  part  of  their  environment,  and,  accordingly,  animals  can¬ 
not  perish  through  false  doctrines.  We  do  have  them,  however,  and, 

240  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

since  they  are  the  most  vital  environmental  semantic  conditions  regu¬ 
lating  our  lives,  if  they  are  fallacious,  they  make  oyr  lives  unadjusted 
and  so,  ultimately,  lead  to  non-survival. 

So  we  see  that  ‘human  adjustment'  is  quite  a  different  and  much 
more  complex  affair  than  ‘animal  adjustment’.  The  ‘world’  of  ‘man’  is 
also  a  different  and  much  more  complex  ‘world’  than  that  of  the  animal. 
There  seems  to  be  no  escape  from  this  conclusion.  We  see,  also,  that 
what  we  used  to  call  ‘senses’  supply  us  with  information  about  the 
world  that  is  very  limited  in  quantity,  specific  in  quality,  an  abstraction 
of  low  order,  never  being  ‘it’.  Being  often  unaffected,  our  ‘senses’  are 
not  able  to  abstract,  obviously,  some  of  the  most  fundamental  manifesta¬ 
tions  of  energy  to  be  found  in  the  external  world.  If  we  speak  of  the 
older  so-called  ‘sense  perceptions’  as  lower  order  abstractions,  then  we 
find  that  we  learn  about  the  other  subtler  manifestations  of  energy 
through  science,  higher  neural  and  extra-neural  means,  which  we  may 
call  higher  order  abstractions.  In  the  older  days,  we  called  this  kind  of 
knowledge  ‘inferential  knowledge’.  The  animals  do  not  have  these 
higher  order  abstractions  in  that  sense,  and  so  their  world  is  for  them 
devoid  of  these  extra-sensible  manifestations  of  energy. 

It  must  be  remembered  that  these  higher  order  abstractions  and  the 
‘inferential  knowledge’  of  the  old  theories  (they  are  not  equivalent  by 
definition)  have  a  very  similar  status.  Organisms  work  as-a- whole,  and 
to  separate  completely  higher  and  lower  order  abstractions  is  impossible. 
All  that  is  said  here  justifies  the  new  terminology.  Our  nervous  system 
does  abstract,  does  summarize,  does  integrate  on  different  levels  and  in 
different  orders,  and  the  result  of  a  stimulus  is  not  the  stimulus  itself. 
The  stone  is  not  the  pain  produced  by  the  stone  dropping  on  our  foot ; 
neither  is  the  flame  we  see,  nor  the  burn  we  feel.  The  actual  process 
goes  on  outside  of  our  skin,  as  represented  by  the  ‘realities’  of  modem 
science. 

We  have  already  spoken  frequently  of  the  different  order  abstrac¬ 
tions,  their  special  characteristics,  dynamic  versus  static . ,  and  the  means 
of  translation  of  lower  orders  into  higher,  and  vice  versa.  Events  which 
are  going  on  and  for  which  we  have  no  direct  ‘senses’  of  abstraction,  as, 
for  instance,  electric  waves,  Rontgen-rays,  wireless  waves . ,  we  know 
only  through  extra-neural  extensions  of  our  nervous  system  given  by 
science  and  scientific  instruments.  Naturally,  we  should  expect  that  the 
structure  of  our  abstracting  mechanism  would  be  also  reflected  in  these 
higher  order  abstractions.  Facts  show  this  to  be  true;  and  practically 
all  modern  science  proves  it  directly  or  indirectly.  This  is  why,  for 
instance,  we  have  the  mathematical  methods  for  passing  from  dynamic 

•MATTER’,  ‘SPACE’,  ‘TIME’ 

to  static,  and  vice  versa ;  why  we  have  quantum  theories  and  conditions ; 
and  why  we  have  problems  of  continuity  versus  discontinuity,  atomic 
theories , . 

The  above  is  not  a  plea  for  certain  old-fashioned  ‘idealistic  phil¬ 
osophies'  and  still  less  for  ‘solipsism’.  Far  from  it.  The  object  of  this 
present  work  is  to  face  hard  structural  experimental  m.o  facts,  analyse 
these  facts  in  a  language  of  a  similar  structure  (A),  and  so  to  reach 
tentatively  new  conclusions  which  again  can  be  verified  by  experiments. 
Once  more  the  reader  must  be  warned  against  carelessly  translating  the 
structurally  new  terms  into  the  old  terms.  The  complete  structural, 
psycho-logical,  semantic,  and  neurological  analysis  of  one  single  such 
new  term  would  afford  material  for  several  volumes  and  so  is  impossible 
in  this  work.  The  usefulness  of  the  old  terms  has  been  exhausted.  The 
structural  consequences  of  the  old  terms  have  been  practically  all  worked 
out,  and,  as  a  rule,  we  cannot  have  much  quarrel  with  the  older  con¬ 
clusions  in  the  old  language .  If  we  reach  different  conclusions,  or  get 
some  new  emphasis,  it  will  be  due  to  the  use  of  the  structurally  new 
language.  If  we  translate  the  new  into  the  old,  the  old  conclusions  are 
usually  truer  than  the  new  ones.  The  reverse  is  also  true ;  the  old  con¬ 
clusions  become  false  or,  at  best,  only  gain  emphasis  because  of  the 
structure  of  the  new  language.  The  problem  of  all  theories,  old  or  new, 
is  to  give  a  structural  account  of  the  facts  known,  to  account  for  excep¬ 
tions,  and  to  predict  new  experimental  structural  facts  which  again  may 
be  verified  empirically. 

Section  D.  Semantic  considerations. 

We  speak  much  and  vaguely  about  the  ‘structure’  of  language,  but 
extremely  little  work  has  been  done  in  this  field.  In  the  present  work, 
we  not  only  tackle  this  problem  as  best  we  can,  theoretically,  but  we 
also  use  a  language  of  a  new  non-el ,  functional  structure,  and  the  results, 
whatever  their  value,  are  actually  the  results  of  such  procedure. 

A  short  while  ago  we  did  not  even  know  that  such  problems  existed. 
Dreams,  alone,  about  such  problems  did  not  help,  for,  before  the  struc¬ 
tures  of  two  different  entities  can  be  compared,  these  entities  must  first 
be  produced.  Then,  and  only  then,  can  we  compare  and  evaluate  them. 
Before  we  could  compare  the  A,  the  E,  and  the  N  systems  with  A,  E, 
and  $  systems  the  last  had  to  be  produced,  no  matter  how  imperfect  they 
might  be  at  the  beginning. 

Something  similar  can  be  said  about  languages.  Before  we  can 
speak  of  them  in  the  plural  and  compare  them,  we  must  have  more  than 
one  for  comparison.  Mathematics  has  pointed  out  this  problem  for  us  in 

242  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

geometry.  For  instance,  we  have  to  deal  with  different  frames  or  refer¬ 
ences,  or  different  systems  of  co-ordinates.  We  find  that  they  represent 
different  languages  and  that  they  may  introduce  purely  verbal  statements 
which  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  subject  of  our  analysis  (extrinsic 
characteristics).  We  have  also  found  that  some  characteristics  may 
appear  m  one  form  of  representation  and  not  appear  so  readily  in  an¬ 
other.  For  instance,  we  know  that  every  line,  except  the  X  axis  through 
a  point  0  which  is  the  intersection  of  a  parabola  with  its  X  axis,  cuts 
the  curve  a  second  time.  This  fact,  important  for  us  to  know,  appears 
c  early  m  the  polar  co-ordinate  form  of  representation,  but  does  not 
appear  in  the  rectangular  form  of  equations,  although,  when  once  a 
characteristic  of  a  curve  is  discovered,  it  can  be  usually  translated  into 
the  other  co-ordinate  languages.  In  such  cases  as  this,  a  language  of 
new  structure  has  a  kind  of  creative  character,  in  that  it  makes  some 
structural  discoveries  easier. 

But  the  co-ordinate  methods  were  not  quite  satisfactory.  They 
introduced,  too  easily,  too  many  extraneous,  extrinsic  characteristics, 
belonging  to  the  language  and  not  to  the  subject.  Mathematicians  de¬ 
cided  to  get  away  from  these  metaphysical  ‘outside’  references  by  refer¬ 
ring  the  entity  to  itself  to  become  more  experimental.  They  invented  the 
internal  theory  of  surfaces,  a  vector  language  where  they  refer  the 
entity  to  itself,  its  curvature,  its  length  and  direction.  Finally,  in  the 
extension  of  the  vector  language  which  is  called  the  tensor  calculus, 
they  achieved  a  still  larger  kind  of  independence.  Having  invented  three 
languages  in  which  we  can  speak  about  one  issue,  we  are  now  able  to 
meet  the  problem  of  comparison  of  these  languages.  At  once,  most  im- 
portant  structural  and  methodological  problems  arise. 

The  newer  quantum  mechanics  are  also  an  epoch-making  linguistic 
structural  innovation,  not  only  in  physics,  but  also  in  methodology.  We 
have,  at  present,  three,  or,  perhaps,  more,  quantum  mechanics  which 
speak  about  one  subject,  but  in  entirely  different  languages.  I  say  ‘three 
or  more ,  because,  from  a  methodological  point  of  view,  it  is  very  hard, 
at  present,  to  be  precise,  as  the  problems  are  too  new  and,  as  yet,  too 
little  analysed.  Similar  remarks  apply  to  systems.  Before  two  systems 
can  be  compared,  a  second  system  must  be  produced.  Then  we  can 
compare  them. 

In  our  brief  verbal  analysis  of  ‘space*,  and  ‘time*,  and  ‘matter*,  we 
have  seen  that  these  represent  terms ,  or  linguistic  means ,  not  objects . 
We  have  seen,  also,  that  these  antique  forms  of  representation  have 
very  unsatisfactory  structural  implications.  They  introduce  a  verbal 
elementalism  structurally  absent  in  nature,  and  by  a  process  of  objecti- 

‘MATTER’,  ‘SPACE’,  ‘TIME* 

lication  lead  to  many  kinds  of  fanciful  semantically  harmful  meta¬ 
physics.  Since  Einstein  and  Minkowski,  the  excellent  term  ‘event’  has 
keen  introduced  into  scientific  literature.  It  is  a  term  of  such  epoch- 
making  semantic  importance  that  it  should  become  a  term  of  daily  use 
and  should  be  introduced  into  elementary  schools.  Teachers  do  not  per¬ 
form  their  duties  honestly  or  intelligently  if  they  disregard  such  struc¬ 
tural,  linguistic,  and  semantic  issues,  which,  as  we  have  seen,  are  the 
central  problem  of  all  possible  education. 

Likewise,  we  have  already  seen  that  the  chunk  of  nature  which  we 
call  a  ‘pencil’  is  not  ‘matter’  nor  ’space’  nor  ‘time’,  the  terms  being  only 
terms.  Is  such  el  language  structurally  appropriate  for  the  purpose  of 
speaking  about  the  world  around  us?  It  seems  undeniable  that  such 
language  is  quite  out-dated  and  very  unsatisfactory.  It  introduces  struc¬ 
turally  an  artificial  elementalism  of  a  verbal  character,  in  spite  of  the 
fact  that  even  the  most  elementary  consideration  shows  that  structurally 
the  opposite  is  true ;  namely,  that  ‘matter’,  ‘space’,  and  ‘time’  can  never 
be  experimentally  divided.  The  term  ‘event’  is  precisely  the  term  which 
does  away  with  this  old  and  vicious  elementalism. 

All  that  we  deal  with  in  the  outside  world  involves  indivisibly  ‘mat¬ 
ter’,  ‘space’,  and  ‘time’.  Using  the  old  language,  there  cannot  be  some¬ 
thing  somewhere  at  ‘no  time’,  or  something  at  some  ‘time’  and  ‘no 
where’  or  ‘nothing’  ‘somewhere’  at  ‘some  time’.  Everything  which  hap¬ 
pens  must  be  structurally  represented  as  something,  somewhere,  at'  some 
‘time’.  If  the  structure  of  the  world  happened  to  be  such  that  ‘nothing’ 
would  happen  ‘nowhere’  at  ‘no  time’,  then  we  should  have  nothing  to 
talk  about,  and  all  we  would  or  could  say  would  deal  with  our  fancies. 
The  four-dimensional  language,  which  describes  happenings  structurally 
more  nearly  as  we  experience  them,  is  precisely  the  language  of  ‘events’. 
It  should  be  remembered  that  in  daily  life  we  live  by  four-dimensional 
event-conditions.  That  is,  the  events  which  interest  us  are  something, 
somewhere,  and  some  ‘time’.  If  we  want  two  of  our  friends  to  become 
acquainted  with  each  other,  we  invite  them  to  our  home.  The  appoint¬ 
ment  is  in  three  dimensions  in  ‘space’  (to  the  left  or  to  the  right,  for¬ 
ward  or  backward,  up  or  down),  and  at  a  given  hour.  So  we  see  that 
our  daily  life  is  lived  in  a  four-dimensional  space-time  manifold,  and 
we  begin  to  appreciate  the  fact  that  science  has  lately  caught  up  with 
such  fundamental  structural  ‘realities’.  It  must  be  noticed  that  the  new 
four-dimensional  space-time  language  does  not,  or  should  not,  use  the 
term  ‘matter’  as  we  used  it  in  the  old  way.  In  the  new  language,  the  bits 
of  materials  we  deal  with  are  connected  analytically  with  the  ‘curvature'' 
of  this  space-time  manifold. 

244  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

The  reader  should  realize  that  the  structurally  new  language  is  simi¬ 
lar  to  the  structure  of  our  experience,  and  involves  profound  methodo¬ 
logical  and,  therefore,  psycho-logical,  semantic  factors.  It  has  entirely 
different  semantic  values;  and,  perhaps,  because  of  this  fact,  it  is  an 
irreversible  advance,  no  matter  how  details  may  be  altered. 

The  newtonians,  for  the  most  part,  overlook  the  fact  that  all 
theories,  their  own  included,  are  a  semantic  product  of  the  functioning 
of  the  nervous  system,  and  so  involve  some  ‘logic*  and  ‘psychology*.  In 
the  new  theories,  a  kind  of  physical  subjectivity  always  appears  which 
ought  to  be  taken  care  of.  We  know,  for  instance,  that  if  we  immerse  a 
part  of  a  straight  stick  in  water,  the  stick  appears  to  be  broken,  although 
actually  it  has  not  been  broken.  A  photographic  camera  gives  a  similar 
record.  So  we  see  that,  besides  the  psycho-logical  subjectivity,  there  is 
a  most  important  physical  subjectivity,  which  is  introduced  by  the  use 
of  instruments.  The  main  difficulties  in  modern  science  are  precisely  in 
the  elimination  of  this  physical  subjectivity,  particularly  when  we  deal 
with  such  minute  entities  that  the  light  waves  miss  them.  In  the  case  of 
an  hypothetical  gamma-ray  microscope,  for  instance,  the  rays  would 
produce  what  is  called  a  Compton  effect,*  and  so  the  results  of  the 
experiment  would  be  altered  by  the  instrument  and  procedure. 

We  ought  not  to  be  surprised  that  the  old  systems  of  ‘motion’  and 
‘emotion*  in  science  (Newton)  and  ‘philosophy*  (Bergson)  should 
result  from  speculations  on  the  old  A  el  language  and  the  introduction  of 
fanciful  and  fallacious  assumptions  of  an  ‘infinity*  somewhere,  and  other 
fancies.  The  realization  of  this  marks  a  new  semantic  epoch  in  our 
lives.  It  is  to  the  credit  of  these  two  men  that  they  have  summarized 
these  old  tendencies  in  such  a  masterly  way  that  we  are  enabled  to  go 
beyond  them.  We  shall  return  to  this  subject  when  we  analyse  the  four¬ 
dimensional  ‘world*  of  Minkowski,  and,  then,  we  shall  summarize  briefly 
what  we  now  know  about  ‘space*,  ‘time*,  and  ‘matter*  (see  Parts  IX 
and  X). 

♦Compton  discovered,  in  1923,  that  the  generation  of  secondary  continuous 
Rontgen  radiation  by  a  primary  radiation  is  accomplished  by  an  increase  in  the 
wave-length. 

PART  V 

ON  THE  NON-ARISTOTELIAN  LANGUAGE 
CALLED  MATHEMATICS 

Once  a  statement  is  cast  into  mathematical  form  it  may  be  manipulated 
in  accordance  with  these  rules  and  every  configuration  of  the  symbols  will 
represent  facts  in  harmony  with  and  dependent  on  those  contained  in  the 
original  statement.  Now  this  comes  very  close  to  what  we  conceive  the 
action  of  the  brain  structures  to  be  in  performing  intellectual  acts  with  the 
symbols  of  ordinary  language.  In  a  sense,  therefore,  the  mathematician 
has  been  able  to  perfect  a  device  through  which  a  part  of  the  labor  of  logical 
thought  is  carried  on  outside  the  central  nervous  system  with  only  that 
supervision  which  is  requisite  to  manipulate  the  symbols  in  accordance 
with  the  rules.  <583)  horatio  b.  williams 

The  toughminded  suggest  that  the  theory  of  the  infinite  elaborated  by 
the  great  mathematicians  of  the  Nineteenth  and  Twentieth  Centuries, 
without  which  mathematical  analysis  as  it  is  actually  used  today  is  im¬ 
possible,  has  been  committing  suicide  in  an  unnecessarily  prolonged  and 
complicated  manner  for  the  past  half  century.  (22)  e.  t.  bell 

The  solution  goes  on  famously;  but  just  as  we  have  got  rid  of  the  other 
unknowns,  behold!  V  disappears  as  well,  and  we  are  left  with  the  indis¬ 
putable  but  irritating  conclusion — 

This  is  a  favourite  device  that  mathematical  equations  resort  to,  when 
we  propound  stupid  questions.  (149)  A.  s.  eddington 

Who  shall  criticize  the  builders?  Certainly  not  those  who  have  stood 
idly  by  without  lifting  a  stone.  (23)  E*  T.  bell 

...  let  me  remind  any  non-mathematicians  .  .  .  that  when  a  mathema¬ 
tician  lays  down  the  elaborate  tools  by  which  he  achieves  precision  in  his 
own  domain,  he  is  unprepared  and  awkward  in  handling  the  ordinary  tools 
of  language.  This  is  why  mathematicians  always  disappoint  the  expecta¬ 
tion  that  they  will  be  precise  and  reasonable  and  clear-cut  in  their  state¬ 
ments  about  everyday  affairs,  and  why  they  are,  in  fact,  more  fallible  than 
ordinary  mortals.  (529)  OSWALD  veblen 

CHAPTER  XVIII 

MATHEMATICS  AS  A  LANGUAGE  OF  A  STRUCTURE  SIMILAR 
TO  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  THE  WORLD 

To-day  there  are  not  a  few  physicists  who,  like  Kirchhof?  and  Mach, 
regard  the  task  of  physical  theory  as  being  merely  a  mathematical  descrip¬ 
tion  (a.5  economical  as  possible)  of  the  empirical  connections  between  ob¬ 
servable  quantities,  i.  e.  a  description  which  reproduces  the  connection, 
as  far  as  possible,  without  the  intervention  of  unobservable  elements. 
(466)  E.  SCHrOdINGER 

But  in  the  prevalent  discussion  of  classes,  there  are  illegitimate  transi¬ 
tions  to  the  notions  of  a  ‘nexus’  and  of  a  ‘proposition.*  The  appeal  to  a 
class  to  perform  the  services  of  a  proper  entity  is  exactly  analogous  to  an 
appeal  to  an  imaginary  terrier  to  kill  a  real  rat.  (578)  A.  N.  whitehead 

Roughly  it  amounts  to  this:  mathematical  analysis  as  it  works  today 
must  make  use  of  irrational  numbers  (such  as  the  square  root  of  two) ;  the 
sense  if  any  in  which  such  numbers  exist  is  hazy.  Their  reputed  mathe¬ 
matical  existence  implies  the  disputed  theories  of  the  infinite.  The  para¬ 
doxes  remain.  Without  a  satisfactory  theory  of  irrational  numbers,  among 
other  things,  Achilles  does  not  catch  up  with  the  tortoise,  and  the  earth 
cannot  turn  on  its  axis.  But,  as  Galileo  remarked,  it  does.  It  .would  seem 
to  follow  that  something  is  wrong  with  our  attempts  to  compass  the  in¬ 
finite.  (22)  E.  T.  BELL 

The  map  is  not  the  thing  mapped .  When  the  map  is  identified  with  the  thing 
mapped  we  have  one  of  the  vast  melting  pots  of  numerology.  <604)  e.  t.  bell 
Tne  theory  of  numbers  is  the  last  great  uncivilized  continent  of  mathe¬ 
matics.  It  is  split  up  into  innumerable  countries,  fertile  enough  in  them¬ 
selves,  but  all  more  or  less  indifferent  to  one  another’s  welfare  and  without 
a  vestige  of  a  central,  intelligent  government.  If  any  young  Alexander  is 
weeping  for  a  new  world  to  conquer,  it  lies  before  him.  (23)  e.  t.  bell 

The  present  work — namely,  the  building  of  a  non-aristotelian  sys¬ 
tem,  and  an  introduction  to  a  theory  of  sanity  and  general  semantics — 
depends,  fundamentally,  for  its  success  on  the  recognition  of  mathematics 
as  a  language  similar  in  structure  to  the  world  in  which  we  live. 

The  maze  of  often  unconnected  knowledge  we  have  gathered  in 
the  fields  with  which  this  part  is  dealing  is  so  tremendous  that  it  would 
require  several  volumes  to  cover  the  field  even  partially.  Under  such 
conditions,  it  is  impossible  to  deal  with  the  subject  in  any  other  way 
than  by  very  careful  selection,  and  so  I  shall,  therefore,  say  only  as 
much  as  is  necessary  for  my  present  semantic  purpose. 

It  is  a  common  experience  of  our  race  that  with  a  happy  generaliza¬ 
tion  many  unconnected  parts  of  our  knowledge  become  connected ;  many 
'mysteries*  of  science  become  simply  a  linguistic  issue,  and  then  the 
mysteries  vanish.  New  generalizations  introduce  new  attitudes  (evalua¬ 
tion)  which,  as  usual,  seriously  simplify  the  problems  for  a  new  generation. 
In  the  present  work,  we  are  treating  problems  from  the  point  of  view  of 
such  a  generalization,  of  wide  application;  namely,  structure,  which  is 
forced  upon  us  by  the  denial  of  the  ‘is’  of  identity. ;  so  that  structure  be¬ 
comes  the  only  link  between  the  objective  and  verbal  levels.  The  next  con¬ 
sequence  is  that  structure  alone  is  the  only  possible  content  of  knowledge. 

V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANGUAGE 

Investigating  structure,  we  have  found  that  structure  can  be  defined 
in  terms  of  relations ;  and  the  latter,  for  special  purposes,  in  terms  of 
multi-dimensional  order.  Obviously,  to  investigate  structure,  we  must 
look  for  relations,  and  so  for  multi-dimensional  order.  The  full  applica¬ 
tion  of  the  above  principles  becomes  our  guide  for  future  enquiry. 

In  the  recent  past,  we  have  become  accustomed  to  such  arguments 
as,  for  instance,  that  the  theory  of  Einstein  has  to  be  accepted  on 
'epistemological'  grounds.  Naturally,  the  scientist  or  the  layman  who 
has  heard  the  last  term,  but  never  bothered  to  ascertain  that  it  means 
'according  to  the  structure  of  human  knowledge',  would  recognize  no  neces¬ 
sity  to  accept  something  which  violates  all  his  habitual  s,r ,  for  reasons 
about  which  he  does  not  know  or  care.  But  if  we  say  that  the  Einstein 
theory  has  to  be  accepted,  for  the  'time'  being,  at  least,  as  an  irreversible 
structural  linguistic  progress ,  this  statement  carries  for  many  quite  a 
different  verbal  and  semantic  implication,  and  one  worth  considering. 

Mathematics  has,  of  late,  become  so  extremely  elaborate  and  com¬ 
plex  that  it  takes  practically  a  lifetime  to  specialize  in  even  one  of  its 
many  fields.  Here  and  there  notions  of  extreme  creative  generality 
appear,  which  help  us  to  see  relations  and  dependence  between  formerly 
non-connected  fields.  For  instance,  the  arithmetization  of  mathematics, 
or  the  theory  of  groups,  or  the  theory  of  aggregates,  has  each  become 
such  a  supreme  generalization.  At  present,  there  is  a  general  tendency 
among  all  of  us,  scientists  included,  to  confuse  orders  of  abstractions. 
This  results  in  a  psycho-logical  semantic  blockage  and  in  the  impossi¬ 
bility  of  seeing  broader  issues  clearly. 

Some  of  the  structural  issues  are  still  but  little  understood,  and,  in 
writing  this  chapter,  I  lay  myself  open  to  a  reproach  from  the  layman 
that  I  have  given  too  much  attention  to  mathematics,  and  from  the  pro¬ 
fessional  mathematician  that  I  have  given  too  little.  My  reply  is  that 
what  is  said  here  is  necessary  for  rounding  up  the  semantic  foundations 
of  the  system,  and  that  I  explain  only  enough  to  carry  the  main  points 
of  structure  and  as  semantic  suggestions  for  further  semantic  researches. 

I  have  found  that  among  some  physicists  and  some  mathematicians 
the  thesis  that  mathematics  is  the  only  language  which,  in  1933,  is  simi¬ 
lar  in  structure  to  the  world,  is  not  always  acceptable.  As  to  the  second 
thesis,  the  similarity  of  its  structure  to  our  nervous  system,  some  even 
seem  to  feel  that  this  statement  borders  on  the  sacrilegious!  These 
objectors,  apparently,  believe  that  I  ascribe  more  to  mathematics  than 
is  just.  Some  physicists  point  out  to  me  the  non-satisfactory  develop¬ 
ment  of  mathematics,  and  they  seem  to  confuse  the  inadequacy  of  a 
given  mathematical  theory  with  the  general  m.o  structure  of  mathematics. 
Thus,  if  some  physical  experimental  investigation  is  conducted — for 

MATHEMATICS  AND  THE  WORLD 

instance,  on  high  pressure — and  the  older  theories  predict  a  behaviour 
exemplified  by  the  curve  (A),  while 
the  experimental  new  data  show  that 
the  actual  curve  is  (B),  such  a  result 
would  show  unmistakably  that  the  first 
theory  is  not  structurally  correct.  But, 
in  itself,  this  result  does  not  affect  the 
correctness  of  a  statement  about  the  general  structure  of  mathematics 
which  can  account  for  both  curves . 

Until  very  lately,  we  had  a  very  genuine  problem  in  physics  with 
the  quantum  phenomena  which  seem  to  proceed  by  discrete  steps,  while 
our  mathematics  is  fundamentally  based  on  assumptions  of  continuity. 
Here  we  had  seemingly  a  serious  structural  discrepancy,  which,  however, 
has  been  satisfactorily  overcome  by  the  wave  theory  of  the  newer 
quantum  mechanics,  explained  in  Part  X,  where  the  discontinuities  are 
accounted  for,  in  spite  of  the  use  of  differential  equations  and,  therefore, 
of  continuous  mathematics. 

But,  if  we  start  with  fundamental  assumptions  of  continuity,  we 
always  can  account  for  discontinuities  by  introducing  wave  theories  or 
some  similar  devices.  Therefore,  it  is  impossible,  in  our  case,  to  argue 
from  the  wave  theory  (for  instance)  to  the  structure  of  mathematics,  or 
vice  versa,  without  a  fundamental  and  independent  general  structural 
analysis,  which  alone  can  elucidate  the  problem  at  hand. 

Mathematicians  may  object  on  the  ground  that  the  new  revision  of 
the  foundation  of  mathematics,  originated  by  Brouwer  and  Weyl,  chal¬ 
lenges  the  ‘existence*  of  irrational  numbers . ,  and,  therefore,  destroys  the 
very  foundations  of  continuity  and  the  legitimacy  of  existing  mathe¬ 
matics. 

In  answer  to  such  a  criticism,  we  should  notice,  first,  that  the  cur¬ 
rent  ‘continuity*  is  of  two  kinds.  One  is  of  a  higher  grade,  and  is  usually 
called  by  this  name;  the  other  continuity  is  of  a  lower  grade  and  is 
usually  called  ‘compactness*.  The  new  revision  challenges  the  higher 
continuity,  but  does  not  affect  compactness,  which,  as  a  result,  will,  per¬ 
haps,  have  to  suffice  in  the  future  for  all  mathematics,  since  compactness 
is  sufficient  to  meet  all  psycho-logical  requirements,  once  the  problems 
of  ‘infinity*  are  properly  understood. 

A  structural  independent  analysis  of  mathematics,  treated  as  a 
language  and  a  form  of  human  behaviour,  establishes  the  similarity  of 
this  language  to  the  undeniable  structural  characteristics  of  this  world 
and  of  the  human  nervous  system.  These  few  and  simple  structural 
foundations  are  arrived  at  by  inspection  of  known  data  and  may  be 
considered  as  well  established. 

B 

Fig.  1. 

V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANGUAGE 

The  existing  definitions  of  mathematics  are  not  entirely  satisfactory. 
They  are  either  too  broad,  or  too  narrow,  or  do  not  emphasize  enough 
the  main  characteristics  of  mathematics.  A  semantic  definition  of  mathe¬ 
matics  should  be  broad  enough  to  cover  all  existing  branches  of  mathe¬ 
matics  ;  should  be  narrow  enough  to  exclude  linguistic  disciplines  which 
are  not  considered  mathematical  by  the  best  judgement  of  specialists,  and 
should  also  be  flexible  enough  to  remain  valid,  no  matter  what  the  future 
developments  of  mathematics  may  be. 

I  have  said  that  mathematics  is  the  only  language,  at  present,  which 
in  structure,  is  similar  to  the  structure  of  the  world  and  the  nervous  sys¬ 
tem.  For  purposes  of  exposition,  we  shall  have  to  divide  our  analysis 
accordingly,  remembering,  in  the  meantime,  that  this  division  is,  in  a 
way,  artificial  and  optional,  as  the  issues  overlap.  In  some  instances,  it 
is  really  difficult  to  decide  under  which  division  a  given  aspect  should  be 
analysed.  The  problems  are  very  large,  and  for  full  discussion  would 
require  volumes ;  so  we  have  to  limit  ourselves  to  a  suggestive  sketch  of 
the  most  important  aspects  necessary  for  the  present  investigations 

From  the  point  of  view  of  general  semantics,  mathematics,  having 
symbols  and  propositions,  must  be  considered  as  a  language.  From  the 
psychophysiological  point  of  view,  it  must  be  treated  as  an  activity  of 
the  human  nervous  system  and  as  a  form  of  the  behaviour  of  the  organ¬ 
isms  called  humans. 

All  languages  are  composed  of  two  kinds  of  words :  ( 1 )  Of  names 
for  the  somethings  on  the  un-speakable  level,  be  they  external  objects . , 
or  internal  feelings ,  which  admittedly  are  not  words,  and  (2)  of  rela¬ 
tional  terms ,  which  express  the  actual,  or  desired,  or  any  other  relations 
between  the  un-speakable  entities  of  the  objective  level. 

When  a  ‘quality’  is  treated  physiologically  as  a  reaction  of  an  organ¬ 
ism  to  a  stimulus,  it  also  becomes  a  relation.  It  should  be  noticed  that 
often  some  words  can  be,  and  actually  are,  used  in  both  senses ;  but,  in 
a  given  context,  we  can  always,  by  further  analysis,  separate  the  words 
used  into  these  two  categories.  Numbers  are  not  exceptions;  we  can 
use  the  labels  ‘one’,  ‘two’. ,  as  numbers  (of  which  the  character  will  be 
explained  presently)  but  also  as  names  for  anything  we  want,  as,  for 
instance,  Second  or  Third  Avenue,  or  John  Smith  I  or  John  Smith  II. 
When  we  use  numbers  as  names,  or  labels  for  anything,  we  call  them 
numerals ;  and  this  is  not  a  mathematical  use  of  ‘one’,  ‘two’. ,  as  these 
names  do  not  follow  mathematical  rules.  Thus,  Second  Avenue  and  Third 
Avenue  cannot  be  added  together,  and  do  not  give  us  Fifth  Avenue  in 
any  sense  whatever. 

Names  alone  do  not  produce  propositions  and  so,  by  themselves, 
say  nothing.  Before  we  can  have  a  proposition  and,  therefore,  meanings, 

MATHEMATICS  AND  THE  WORLD 

the  names  must  be  related  by  some  relation-word,  which,  however,  may 
be  explicit  or  implied  by  the  context,  the  situation,  by  established  habits 
of  speech , .  The  division  of  words  into  the  above  two  classes  may  seem 
arbitrary,  or  to  introduce  an  unnecessary  complication  through  its  sim¬ 
plicity  ;  yet,  if  we  take  modern  knowledge  into  account,  we  cannot  fol¬ 
low  the  grammatical  divisions  of  a  primitive-made  language,  and  such  a 
division  as  I  have  suggested  above  seems  structurally  correct  in  1933. 

Traditionally,  mathematics  was  divided  into  two  branches:  one  was 
called  arithmetic,  dealing  with  numbers ;  the  other  was  called  geometry, 
and  dealt  with  such  entities  as  ‘line',  ‘surface’,  ‘volume’, .  Once  Descartes, 
lying  in  bed  ill,  watched  the  branches  of  a  tree  swaying  under  the  in¬ 
fluence  of  a  breeze.  It  occurred  to  him  that  the  varying  distances  of  the 
branches  from  the  horizontal  and  vertical  window  frames  could  be 
expressed  by  numbers  representing  measurements  of  the  distances.  An 
epoch-making  step  was  taken:  geometrical  relations  were  expressed  by 
numerical  relations ;  it  meant  the  beginning  of  analytical  geometry  and 
the  unification  and  arithmetization  of  mathematics. 

Further  investigation  by  the  pioneers  Frege,  Peano,  Whitehead, 
Russell,  Keyser,  and  others  has  revealed  that  ‘number’  can  be  expressed 
in  ‘logical  terms’ — a  quite  important  discovery,  provided  we  have  a  valid 
‘logic’  and  structurally  correct  non-el  terms. 

Traditionally,  too,  since  Aristotle,  and,  in  the  opinion  of  the  major¬ 
ity,  even  today,  mathematics  is  considered  as  uniquely  connected  with 
quantity  and  measurement.  Such  a  view  is  only  partial,  because  there 
are  many  most  important  and  fundamental  branches  of  mathematics 
which  have  nothing  to  do  with  quantity  or  measurement — as,  for  in¬ 
stance,  the  theory  of  groups,  analysis  situs,  projective  geometry,  the 
theory  of  numbers,  the  algebra  of  ‘logic’, . 

Sometimes  mathematics  is  spoken  about  as  the  science  of  relations, 
but  obviously  such  a  definition  is  too  broad.  If  the  only  content  of 
knowledge  is  structural,  then  relations,  obvious,  or  to  be  discovered, 
are  the  foundation  of  all  knowledge  and  of  all  language,  as  stated  in  the 
division  of  words  given  above.  Such  a  definition  as  suggested  would 
make  mathematics  co-extensive  with  all  language,  and  this,  obviously, 
is  not  the  case. 

Before  offering  a  semantic  definition  of  mathematics,  I  introduce 
a  synoptical  table  taken  from  Professor  Shaw’s  The  Philosophy  of 
Mathematics ,  which  he  calls  only  suggestive  and  ‘doubtless  incomplete 
in  many  ways*.  I  use  this  table  because  it  gives  a  modern  list  of  the 
most  important  mathematical  terms  and  disciplines  necessary  for  the 
purpose  of  this  work,  indicating,  also,  in  a  way,  their  evolution  and 
structural  interrelations. 

QUALITATIVE  STUDY  OF  STRUCTURE 

V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANGUAGE 

Central  Principles  of  Mathematics* 

f 

WORLDS  g 

MORPHOLOGY 

INVARIANCY 

FUNCTION¬ 

ALITY 

IDEALITY 

Rhythm  Patterns — 
Arithmetic 

Integers 
Rationals 
Irrationals  « 
Ensembles  jg 

Atomicity 

Integers 

Ensemble  theory 
Literal  arithmetic 
Complexes 

Point  geometries 
Functional  spaces 

Congruences 
Arithmetic  invari¬ 
ants 

Modular  geometry 

Arithmetic  func¬ 
tions 

Algebraic  functions 

Functions  of  real 
variable 

Infinitesimal  cal¬ 
culus 

General  analysis 

Arithmetic  ideals 
Galois  ideals 

Higher  number 
theory 

Picard-Vessiot 

theory 

Space  Patterns — 
Geometry 

Points 

Lines 

Surfaces  g 

Varieties  s 

Higher  .& 

elements  ^ 

Continuity 

Point  space  of  two 
or  more  dimen¬ 
sions 

Line  geometry 
Surface  geometry 
Absolute  geometry 
Higher  elements 
Expansions 

Geometric  invari¬ 
ants 

Algebraic  invari¬ 
ants 

Symmetric  and  al¬ 
ternating  forms 

Modular  systems 

Real  functions  of 
N  variables 
Vector  fields 
Functions  of  lines 
Partial  derivatives 
Differential 
geometry 

Systems  of  differ¬ 
ential  equations 
Mathematical 
physics 

Relativity  Theory 

Design  Pat¬ 
terns — Tactic 

Arrange¬ 

ments 

Configura-  « 
tions  | 

Conatella-  5 
tions  w 

Design 

Combinatory 
analysis 
Stereochemistry 
Theory  of  symbols 
Poincare's  theory 
of  differential 
equations 

Stable  systems 
Irreducibles 

Functions  of  ar¬ 
rangements, 
configurations, 
constellations, 
and  structures 

Ideal  elements  of 
construction 
Mathematical 
ohemistry 

\ 

Idea  Patterns 
— Logistic 

Concepts  g 

Relatives  .o 

CONSISTBNCTft 

Foundations 

Postutational 

systems 

Calculus  of  classes, 
or  of  relatives 

Equivalent  sys¬ 
tems 

Logical  invariants 

Classes  functions 
of  classes 
Functions  of  rela¬ 
tives 

Implications 

Ideal  classes  or 
relatives 
Clasdficatory 
schemes 

Mutation  Motridties— 
Operators 

Substitu¬ 

tions 

Transforma¬ 

tions 

Groups  J 

Mutation 

Theory  of  finite  or 
infinite  groups 
Calculus  of  opera¬ 
tions 

Projective  geome- 
„  try  . 

Inversion  geometry 
Differential  and  in¬ 
tegral  invariants 
Analysis  situs 

Geometric  trans¬ 
formations 
Homomorphuma 
Transmutations 

Automorphic  func¬ 
tions 

Functional  equa¬ 
tions 

Calculus  of  varia¬ 
tions 

Functional  analysis 

Integral  equations 

Difference  equa¬ 
tions 

Differential  equa¬ 
tions 

n 

.JL  B 

If 

sj 

.81 

Negatives 
Imaginaries 
Hyper-  « 

numbers  -2 
>. 

Quality 

linear  algebras 
Functional  trans¬ 
formations 

Invariant  equa¬ 
tions 

Invariants  of  ex¬ 
pressions 

Functions  of  com¬ 
plex  and  hyper- 
complex  vari¬ 
ables 

General  function 
theory 

Hyperideals 

Routes 

Displace-  « 

menta  f 

Combina-  8 

tions  £ 

Action 

Composite  actions 
Actional  structures 

Equivalents  of 
actions 
Invariants  of 
processes 

Processes  depen¬ 
dent  on  processes 
Functions  of 
action 

Ideal  processes 

Transpoai- 
tions  j| 

Syllogisms  g 
Implications  ^ 

Deduction 

Syllogisms 

Calculus  of  de¬ 
duction 

Laws  of  inference 
Equivalent  de¬ 
ductions 
Invariants 

Functions  of  in¬ 
ferences 

Ideal  entities  that 
satisfy  inferences 
Scientific  theories 

♦This  table  differs  slightly  from  the  one  printed  in  The  Philosophy  of  Mathe¬ 
matics .  The  corrections  have  been  made  by  Professor  Shaw  and  kindly  communi¬ 
cated  to  me  by  letter. 

MATHEMATICS  AND  THE  WORLD 

A  semantic  definition  of  mathematics  may  run  somehow  as  follows : 
Mathematics  consists  of  limited  linguistic  schemes  of  multiordinal  rela¬ 
tions  capable  of  exact  treatment  at  a  given  date. 

After  I  have  given  a  semantic  definition  of  number,  it  will  be 
obvious  that  the  above  definition  covers  all  existing  disciplines  consid¬ 
ered  mathematical.  However,  these  developments  are  not  fixed  affairs. 
Does  that  definition  provide  for  their  future  growth?  By  inserting  as  a 
fundamental  part  of  the  definition  ‘exact  treatment  at  a  given  date’,  it 
obviously  does.  Whenever  we  discover  any  relations  in  any  fields  which 
will  allow  exact  ‘logical’  treatment,  such  a  discipline  will  be  included  in 
the  body  of  linguistic  schemes  called  mathematics,  and,  at  present,  there 
are  no  indications  that  these  developments  can  ever  come  to  an  end.  When 
‘logic’  becomes  an  oo -valued  ‘structural  calculus’,  then  mathematics  and 
‘logic*  will  merge  completely  and  become  a  general  science  of  m.o  rela¬ 
tions  and  multi-dimensional  order,  and  all  sciences  may  become  exact. 

It  is  necessary  to  show  that  this  definition  is  not  too  broad,  and 
that  it  eliminates  notions  which  are  admittedly  non-mathematical,  with¬ 
out  invalidating  the  statement  that  the  content  of  all  knowledge  is 
structural,  and  so  ultimately  relational.  The  word  ‘exact’  eliminates  non- 
mathematical  relations.  If  we  enquire  into  the  meaning  of  the  word 
‘exact’,  we  find  from  experience  that  this  meaning  is  not  constant,  but 
that  it  varies  with  the  date,  and  so  only  a  statement  ‘exact  at  a  given 
date’  can  have  a  definite  meaning. 

We  can  analyse  a  simple  statement,  ‘grass  is  green’  (the  ‘is’  here  is 
the  ‘is’  of  predication,  not  of  identity),  which,  perhaps,  represents  an  ex¬ 
treme  example  of  a  non-mathematical  statement ;  but  a  similar  reasoning 
can  be  applied  to  other  examples.  Sometimes  we  have  a  feeling  which 
we  express  by  saying,  ‘grass  is  green*.  Usually,  such  a  feeling  is  called 
a  ‘perception*.  But  is  such  a  process  to  be  dismissed  so  simply,  by  just 
calling  it  a  name,  ‘perception’  ?  It  is  easy  to  ‘call  names  under  provoca¬ 
tion’,  as  Santayana  says  somewhere ;  but  does  that  exhaust  the  question  ? 

If  we  analyse  such  a  statement  further,  we  find  that  it  involves 
comparison,  evaluation  in  certain  respects  with  other  characters  of 
experience . ,  and  the  statement  thus  assumes  relational  characteristics. 
These,  in  the  meantime,  are  non-exact  and,  therefore,  non-mathematical. 
If  we  carry  this  analysis  still  further,  involving  data  taken  from  chem¬ 
istry,  physics,  physiology,  neurology . ,  we  involve  relations  which  become 
more  and  more  exact,  and,  finally,  in  such  terms  as  ‘wave-length*,  ‘fre¬ 
quency*.  ,  we  reach  structural  terms  which  allow  of  exact  1933  treatment. 
It  is  true  that  a  language  of  ‘quality’  conceals  relations,  sometimes  very 
effectively ;  but  once  ‘quality’  is  taken  as  the  reaction  of  a  given  organism 

V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANGUAGE 

to  a  stimulus,  the  term  used  for  that  ‘quality’  becomes  a  name  for  a  very 
complex  relation.  This  procedure  can  be  always  employed,  thus  estab¬ 
lishing  once  more  the  fundamental  character  of  relations. 

These  last  statements  are  of  serious  structural  and  semantic  im¬ 
portance,  being  closely  connected  with  the  A ,  fundamental,  and  unde¬ 
niable  negative  premises.  These  results  can  be  taught  to  children  very 
simply;  yet  this  automatically  involves  an  entirely  new  and  modern 
method  of  evaluation  and  attitude  toward  language,  which  will  affect 
beneficially  the,  as  yet  entirely  disregarded,  s.r. 

We  must  consider,  briefly,  the  terms  ‘kind’  and  ‘degree*,  as  we  shall 
need  them  later.  Words,  symbols . ,  serve  as  forms  of  representation  and 
belong  to  a  different  universe — the  ‘universe  of  discourse* — since  they 
are  not  the  un-speakable  levels  we  are  speaking  about.  They  belong  to 
a  world  of  higher  abstractions  and  not  to  the  world  of  lower  abstractions 
given  to  us  by  the  lower  nerve  centres. 

Common  experience  and  scientific  investigations  (more  refined 
experience)  show  us  that  the  world  around  us  is  made  up  of  absolute 
individuals,  each  different  and  unique,  although  interconnected.  Under 
such  conditions  it  is  obviously  optional  what  language  we  use.  The  more 
we  use  the  language  of  diverse  ‘kind*,  the  sharper  our  definitions  must 
be.  Psychologically,  the  emphasis  is  on  difference.  Such  procedure  may 
be  a  tax  on  our  ingenuity,  but  by  it  we  are  closer  to  the  structural  facts 
of  life,  where,  in  the  limit,  we  should  have  to  establish  a  ‘kind*  for  every 
individual. 

In  using  the  term  ‘degree*,  we  may  be  more  vague.  We  proceed 
by  similarities,  but  such  a  treatment  implies  a  fundamental  intercon¬ 
nection  between  different  individuals  of  a  special  kind.  It  implies  a 
definite  kind  of  metaphysics  or  structural  assumptions— as,  for  instance, 
a  theory  of  evolution.  As  our  ‘knowledge’  is  the  result  of  nervous 
abstracting,  it  seems,  in  accordance  with  the  structure  of  our  nervous 
system,  to  give  preference  to  the  term  ‘degree*  first,  and  only  when  we 
have  attained  a  certain  order  of  verbal  sharpness  to  pass  to  a  language 
of  ‘kind*,  if  need  arises. 

The  study  of  primitive  languages  shows  that,  historically,  we  had 
a  tendency  for  the  ‘kind*  language,  resulting  in  over-abundance  of  names 
and  few  relation-words,  which  makes  higher  analysis  impossible.  Science, 
on  the  other  hand,  has  a  preference  for  the  ‘degree’  language,  which, 
ultimately,  leads  to  mathematical  languages,  enormous  simplicity  and 
economy  of  words,  and  so  to  better  efficiency,  more  intelligence,  and  to 
the  unification  of  science.  Thus,  chemistry  became  a  branch  of  physics ; 
physics,  a  branch  of  geometry;  geometry  merges  with  analysis,  and 

MATHEMATICS  AND  THE  WORLD 

analysis  merges  with  general  semantics ;  and  life  itself  becomes  a  physico¬ 
chemical  colloidal  occurrence.  The  language  of  ‘degree’  has  very  im¬ 
portant  relational,  quantitative ,  and  order  implications,  while  that  of 
‘kind’  has,  in  the  main,  qualitative  implications,  often,  if  not  always, 
concealing  relations,  instead  of  expressing  them. 

The  current  definition  of  ‘number’,  as  formulated  by  Frege  and 
Russell,  reads :  ‘The  number  of  a  class  is  the  class  of  all  those  classes 
that  are  similar  to  it’.1  This  definition  is  not  entirely  satisfactory :  first, 
because  the  multiordinality  of  the  term  ‘class’  is  not  stated ;  second,  it 
is  At  as  it  involves  the  ambiguous  (as  to  the  order  of  abstractions)  term 
‘class’.  What  do  we  mean  by  the  term  ‘class’  ?  Do  we  mean  an  extensive 
array  of  absolute  individuals,  un-speakable  by  its  very  character,  such  as 
some  seen  aggregate,  or  do  we  mean  the  spoken  definition  or  description 
of  such  un-speakable  objective  entities?  The  term  implies,  then,  a  fun¬ 
damental  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions,  to  start  with— the  very 
issue  which  we  must  avoid  most  carefully,  as  positively  demanded  by  the 
non-identity  principle.  Besides,  if  we  explore  the  world  with  a  ‘class  of 
classes’.,  and  obtain  results  also  of  ‘class  of  classes’,  such  procedure 
throws  no  light  on  mathematics,  their  applications  and  their  importance 
as  a  tool  of  research.  Perhaps,  it  even  increases  the  mysteries  surround¬ 
ing  mathematics  and  conceals  the  relations  between  mathematics  and 
human  knowledge  in  general. 

We  should  expect  of  a  satisfactory  definition  of  ‘number’  that  it 
would  make  the  semantic  character  of  numbers  clear.  Somehow, 
through  long  experience,  we  have  learned  that  numbers  and  measure¬ 
ment  have  some  mysterious,  sometimes  an  uncanny,  importance.  This 
is  exemplified  by  mathematical  predictions,  which  are  verified  later  em¬ 
pirically.  Let  me  recall  only  the  discovery  of  the  planet  Neptune  through 
mathematical  investigations,  based  on  its  action  upon  Uranus,  long 
before  the  astronomer  actually  verified  this  prediction  with  his  telescope. 
Many,  a  great  many,  such  examples  could  be  given,  scientific  literature 
being  full  of  them.  Why  should  mathematics  and  measurement  be  so 
extremely  important?  Why  should  mathematical  operations  of  a  given 
Smith,  which  often  seem  innocent  (and  sometimes  silly  enough)  give 
such  an  unusual  security  and  such  undeniably  practical  results  ? 

Is  it  true  that  the  majority  of  us  are  born  mathematical  imbeciles  r 
Why  is  there  this  general  fear  of,  and  dislike  for,  mathematics?  Is 
mathematics  really  so  difficult  and  repelling,  or  is  it  the  way  mathematics 
is  treated  and  taught  by  mathematicians  that  is  at  fault?  If  some  light 
can  be  thrown  on  these  perplexing  semantic  problems,  perhaps  we  shall 
face  a  scientific  revolution  which  might  deeply  affect  our  educational 

V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANGUAGE 

system  and  may  even  mark  the  beginning  of  a  new  period  in  standards 
of  evaluation,  in  which  mathematics  will  take  the  place  which  it  ought  to 
have.  Certainly,  there  must  be  something  the  matter  with  our  epis¬ 
temologies  and  'psychologies’  if  they  cannot  cope  with  these  problems. 

A  simple  explanation  is  given  by  a  new  A  analysis  and  a  semantic 
definition  of  numbers.  What  follows  is  written,  in  the  main,  for  non¬ 
mathematicians,  as  the  word  'semantic’  indicates,  but  it  is  hoped  that 
professional  mathematicians  (or  some,  at  least)  may  be  interested  in 
the  meanings  of  the  term  ‘number’,  and  that  they  will  not  entirely  dis¬ 
regard  it.  As  semantic,  the  definition  seems  satisfactory ;  but,  perhaps, 
it  is  not  entirely  satisfactory  for  technical  purposes,  and  the  definition 
would  have  to  be  slightly  re-worded  to  satisfy  the  technical  needs  of  the 
mathematicians.  In  the  meantime,  the  gains  are  so  important  that  we 
should  not  begrudge  any  amount  of  labour  in  order  to  produce  finally  a 
mathematical  and,  this  time,  A  semantic  definition  of  numbers. 

As  has  already  been  mentioned,  the  importance  of  notation  is  para¬ 
mount.  Thus  the  Roman  notation  for  number — I,  II,  III,  IV,  V,  VI . , — 
was  not  satisfactory  and  could  not  have  led  to  modern  developments  in 
mathematics,  because  it  did  not  possess  enough  positional  and  structural 
characteristics.  Modem  mathematics  began  when  it  was  made  possible 
by  the  invention  or  discovery  of  positional  notation.  We  use  the  symbol 
T  in  1,  10,  100,  1000. ,  in  which,  because  of  its  place,  it  had  different 
values.  In  the  expression  T,  the  symbol  means  'one  unit*;  in  10,  the 
symbol  T  means  ten  units;  in  100,  the  symbol  T  means  one  hundred 
units , . 

To  have  a  positional  notation,  we  need  a  symbol  'O’,  called  zero, 
to  indicate  an  empty  column  and,  at  least,  one  symbol  T.  The  number 
of  special  symbols  for  'number*  depends  on  what  base  we  accept.  Thus, 
in  a  binary  system,  with  the  base  2,  our  1  is  represented  by  1 ;  our  2, 
by  a  unity  in  the  second  place  and  a  zero  in  the  first  place,  thus  by  10 ; 
our  3,  by  11 ;  our  4,  by  a  unity  in  the  third  place  and  two  zeros  in  the 
first  and  second  places ;  namely,  100;  our  5,  by  101 ;  our  6,  by  110;  7,  by 
111 ;  8,  by  1000;  9,  by  1001 ;..  .  15,  by  1111 ;  16,  by  10000, .  In  a  binary 
system,  we  needed  only  the  two  symbols,  1  and  0.  For  a  system  with  the 
base  3,  we  would  need  three  symbols,  1,  2,  0:  our  1  would  be  represented 
by  1 ;  our  2,  by  2 ;  3,  by  10 ;  4,  by  1 1 ;  5,  by  12 ;  6,  by  20 , .  In  our  decimal 
system,  obviously,  we  need  10  symbols,  1,  2,  3,  4,  5,  6,  7,  8?  9,  0. 

For  more  details  on  notation,  the  interested  reader  is  referred  to 
the  fascinating  and  elementary  book  of  Professor  Danzig,  Number  the 
Language  of  Science .  Here  we  only  emphasize  what  is  necessary  for 
our  purpose.  Every  system  has  its  advantages  and  drawbacks.  Thus,  in 

MATHEMATICS  AND  THE  WORLD 

the  binary  system,  still  used  by  some  savage  tribes,  of  which  we  retain 
traces  when  we  speak  of  couples,  or  pairs,  or  braces,  we  get  an  enor¬ 
mous  simplicity  in  operations  by  using  only  two  symbols,  1  and  0.  It 
should  be  remembered  that,  in  every  system,  the  tables  of  addition  and 
multiplication  must  be  memorized.  In  the  binary  system,  these  tables 
are  reduced  to  1  +  1  10  and  1  X  1  —  1,  while  in  our  decimal  system, 

each  table  has  100  entries.  But  what  we  gain  in  simplicity  by  a  low  base- 
number  is  offset  very  seriously  by  the  cumbersomeness  of  the  notation. 

As  Danzig  tells  us,  our  number  4096  is  represented  in  a  binary  system 
by  1,000,000,000.  That  we  adopted  the  decimal  system  is  probably  a  *  see  page  xii 
physiological  accident,  because  we  have  ten  fingers.  The  savage,  with 
his  binary  system,  did  not  reach  even  the  finger  stage ;  he  is  still  in  the 
fist  stage. 

For  practical  purposes,  it  is  simpler  to  have  a  base  which  has  many 
divisors,  as,  for  instance,  12.  We  still  use  this  duodecimal  system  when 
we  divide  a  foot  into  twelve  inches,  or  a  shilling  into  twelve  pennies,  or 
count  by  dozens  or  gross.  It  seems  that  mathematicians  would  probably 
select  a  prime  number  for  a  base,  but  the  gain  would  be  so  slight  and 
the  difficulty  of  offsetting  a  physiological  habit  so  tremendous,  that  this 
will  probably  never  happen.2 

From  what  was  said  already,  it  is,  perhaps,  clear  that  mathematics 
requires  a  positional  notation  in  which  we  must  have  a  symbol  for  ‘1’ 
and  zero,  at  least.  For  these  and  other  reasons,  the  two  numbers  1  and 
0  are  somehow  unusually  important.  Even  in  our  decimal  system  we 
generate  numbers  by  adding  1  to  its  predecessor.  Thus  1  +  1—2, 

2  +  1  3 . ,  and  we  must  enquire  into  the  semantic  character  of  these 

numbers. 

The  notions  of  matching,  comparing,  measuring,  quantity,  equality. , 
are  all  interwoven  and,  by  necessity,  involve  a  circularity  in  definitions 
and  implications  if  the  analysis  is  carried  far  enough.  The  interested 
reader  may  be  referred  to  the  chapter  on  equality  in  Whitehead’s  The 
Principle  of  Relativity  to  learn  more  on  this  subject. 

In  the  evolution  of  mathematics,  we  find  that  the  notions  of 
'greater’,  'equal’,  and  ‘less’  precede  the  notion  of  numbers.  Comparison 
is  the  simplest  form  of  evaluation ;  the  first  being  a  search  for  relations ; 
the  second,  a  discovery  of  exact  relations.  This  process  of  search  for 
relations  and  structure  is  inherent  and  natural  in  man,  and  has  led  not 
only  to  the  discovery  of  numbers,  but  also  has  shaped  their  two  aspects ; 
namely,  the  cardinal  and  the  ordinal  aspects.  For  instance,  to  ascertain 
whether  the  number  of  persons  in  a  hall  is  equal  to,  greater  than,  or 
less  than  the  number  of  seats,  it  is  enough  to  ascertain  if  all  seats  are 

V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANGUAGE 

occupied  and  there  are  no  empty  seats  and  no  persons  standing;  then 
we  would  say  that  the  number  of  persons  is  equal  to  the  number  of  seats, 
and  a  symmetrical  relation  of  equality  would  be  established.  If  all  seats 
were  occupied  and  there  were  some  persons  standing  in  the  hall,  or  if  we 
found  that  no  one  was  standing,  yet  not  all  seats  were  occupied,  we 
would  establish  the  asymmetrical  relation  of  greater  or  less. 

In  the  above  processes,  we  were  using  an  important  principle; 
namely,  that  of  one-to-one  correspondence.  In  our  search  for  relations, 
we  assigned  to  each  seat  one  person,  and  reached  our  conclusions  with¬ 
out  any  counting.  This  process,  based  on  the  one-to-one  correspondence, 
establishes  what  is  called  the  cardinal  number.  It  gives  us  specific  rela¬ 
tional  data  about  this  world ;  yet  it  is  not  enough  for  counting  and  for 
mathematics.  To  produce  the  latter,  we  must,  first  of  all,  establish  a 
definite  system  of  symbolism,  based  on  a  definite  relation  for  generating 
numbers;  for  instance,  1  +  1  —  2,  2+1  —  3.,  which  establishes  a 
definite  order .  Without  this  ordinal  notion,  neither  counting  nor  tnathe- 
matics  would  be  possible;  and,  as  we  have  already  seen,  order  can  be 
used  for  defining  relations,  as  the  notions  of  relation  and  order  are 
interdependent.  Order,  also,  involves  asymmetrical  relations. 

If  we  consider  the  two  most  important  numbers,  0  and  1,  we  find 
that  in  the  accepted  symbolism,  if  a  —  b,  a — =  0;  and  if  a  =  6, 
a/b  —  b/b  =  1 ;  so  that  both  fundamental  numbers  express,  or  can  be 
interpreted  as  expressing,  a  symmetrical  relation  of  equality. 

If  we  consider  any  other  number — and  this  applies  to  all  kinds  of 
numbers,  not  only  to  natural  numbers — we  find  that  any  number  is  not 
altered  by  dividing  it  by  one,  thus,  2/1—2,  3/1  —  3.,  in  general, 
N/\  —  N ;  establishing  the  asymmetrical  relation,  unique  and  specific 
in  a  given  case  that  N  is  N  times  more  than  one. 

If  we  consider,  further,  that  2/1  —  2,  3/1  —  3,  and  so  on,  are  all 
different ,  specific ,  and  unique,  we  come  to  an  obvious  and  A  semantic 
definition  of  number  in  terms  of  relations,  in  which  0  and  1  represent 
unique  and  specific  symmetrical  relations  and  all  other  numbers  also 
unique  and  specific  asymmetrical  relations.  Thus,  if  we  have  a  result  ‘5’, 
we  can  always  say  that  the  number  ‘5  is  five  times  as  many  as  one. 
Similarly,  if  we  introduce  apples.  Five  apples  are  five*. times  as  many 
as  one  apple.  Thus,  a  number  in  any  form,  ‘pure’  or  ‘applied’,  can  always 
be  represented  as  a  relation,  unique  and  specific  in  a  given  case ;  and  this 
is  the  foundation  of  the  exactness  of  dealing  with  numbers.  For  in¬ 
stance,  to  say  that  a  is  greater  than  b  also  establishes  an  asymmetrical 
relation,  but  it  is  not  unique  and  specific;  but  when  we  say  that  a  is  five 

MATHEMATICS  AND  THE  WORLD 

times  greater  than  b,  this  relation  is  asymmetrical ,  exact,  unique,  and 
specific , 

The  above  simple  remarks  are  not  entirely  orthodox.  That  5/1  =  5 
is  very  orthodox,  indeed ;  but  that  numbers,  in  general,  represent  indefi¬ 
nitely  many  exact,  specific,  and  unique,  and,  in  the  main,  asymmetrical 
relations  is  a  structural  notion  which  necessitates  the  revision  of  the 
foundations  of  mathematics  and  their  rebuilding  on  the  basis  of  new 
semantics  and  a  future  structural  calculus.  When  we  say  ‘indefinitely 
many*,  this  means,  from  the  reflex  point  of  view,  ‘indefinitely  flexible’, 
or  ‘fully  conditional’  in  the  semantic  field,  and,  therefore,  a  prototype  of 
human  semantic  reactions  (see  Part  VI) .  The  scope  of  the  present  work 
precludes  the  analysis  of  the  notion  of  the  lately  disputed  ‘irrational’; 
but  we  must  state  that  this  revision  requires  new  psycho-logical  and 
structural  considerations  of  fundamental  ‘logical’  postulates  and  of  the 
problems  of  ‘infinity’.  If,  by  an  arbitrary  process,  we  postulate  the  exist¬ 
ence  of  a  ‘number’  which  alters  all  the  while,  then,  according  to  the 
definition  given  here,  such  expressions  should  be  considered  as  functions, 
perhaps,  but  not  as  a  number,  because  they  do  not  give  us  unique  and 
specific  relations. 

These  few  remarks,  although  suggestive  to  the  mathematician,  do 
not,  in  any  way,  exhaust  the  question,  which  can  only  be  properly  pre¬ 
sented  in  technical  literature  in  a  postulational  form. 

It  seems  that  mathematicians,  no  matter  how  important  the  work 
which  they  have  produced,  have  never  gone  so  far  as  to  appreciate  fully 
that  they  are  willy-nilly  producing  an  ideal  human  relational  language 
of  structure  similar  to  that  of  the  world  and  to  that  of  the  human 
nervous  system.  This  they  cannot  help,  in  spite  of  some  vehement 
denials,  and  their  work  should  also  be  treated  from  the  semantic  point 
of  view. 

Similarly  with  measurement.  From  a  functional  or  actional  and 
semantic  point  of  view,  measurement  represents  nothing  else  but  a  search 
for  empirical  structure  by  means  of  extensional,  ordered,  symmetrical, 
and  asymmetrical  relations.  Thus,  when  we  say  that  a  given  length 
measures  five  feet,  we  have  reached  this  conclusion  by  selecting  a  unit 
called  ‘foot’,  an  arbitrary  and  un-speakable  affair,  then  laying  it  end  to 
end  five  times  in  a  definite  extensional  order  and  so  have  established  the 
asymmetrical,  and,  in  each  case,  unique  and  specific  relation,  that  the 
given  entity  represents,  in  this  case,  five  times  as  many  as  the  arbitrarily 
selected  unit. 

Objection  may  be  raised  that  the  formal  working  out  of  a  definition 
of  numbers  in  terms  of  relations,  instead  of  classes,  would  be  very 

V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANGUAGE 

laborious,  and  would  also  involve  a  revision  of  the  foundations  of  mathe¬ 
matics.  This  can  hardly  be  denied ;  but,  in  the  discussions  of  the  founda¬ 
tions,  the  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions  is  still  very  marked, 
thereby  resulting  in  the  manufacture  of  artificial  semantic  difficulties . 
Moreover,  the  benefits  of  such  a  definition,  in  eliminating  the  mysteries 
about  mathematics,  are  so  important  that  they  by  far  outweigh  the 
difficulties. 

As  the  only  possible  content  of  knowledge  is  structural,  as  given 
in  terms  of  relations  and  multiordinal  and  multi-dimensional  order ; 
numbers,  which  establish  an  endless  array  of  exact,  specific,  and,  in  each 
case,  unique,  relations  are  obviously  the  most  important  tools  for  explor- 
ing  the  structure  pf  the  world,  since  structure  can  always  be  analysed 
in  terms  of  relations.  In  this  way,  all  mysteries  about  the  importance 
of  mathematics  and  measurement  vanish.  The  above  understanding  will 
give  the  student  of  mathematics  an  entirely  different  and  a  very  natural 
feeling  for  his  subject.  As  his  only  possible  aim  is  the  study  of  structure 
of  the  world,  or  of  whatever  else,  he  must  naturally  use  a  relational  tool 
to  explore  this  complex  of  relations  called  ‘structure’.  A  most  spectacu¬ 
lar  illustration  of  this  is  given  in  the  internal  theory  of  surfaces,  the 
tensor  calculus . ,  described  in  Part  VIII. 

In  all  measurements,  we  select  a  unit  of  a  necessary  kind,  for  a 
given  case,  and  then  we  find  a  unique  and  specific  relation  as  expressed 
by  a  number,  between  the  given  something  and  the  selected  unit.  By 
relating  different  happenings  and  processes  to  the  same  unit-process,  we 
find,  again,  unique  and  specific  interrelations,  in  a  given  case,  between 
these  events,  and  so  gather  structural  (and  most  important,  because 
uniquely  possible)  wisdom,  called  ‘knowledge’,  ‘science’, . 

If  we  treat  numbers  as  relations,  then  fractions  and  all  operations 
become  relations  of  relations,  and  so  relations  of  higher  order,  into  the 
analysis  of  which  we  cannot  enter  here,  as  these  are,  of  necessity, 
technical. 

It  should  be  firmly  grasped,  however,  that  some  fundamental  human 
relations  to  this  world  have  not  been  changed.  The  primitive  may  have 
believed  that  words  were  things  (identification)  and  so  have  established 
what  is  called  the  ‘magic  of  words’  (and,  in  fact,  the  majority  of  us  still 
have  our  s.r  regulated  by  some  such  unconscious  identifications)  ;  but, 
in  spite  of  this,  the  primitive  or  ‘civilized’  man’s  words  are  not ,  and 
never  could  be,  the  things  spoken  about,  no  matter  what  semantic  dis¬ 
turbances  we  might  have  accompanying  their  use,  or  what  delusions  or 
illusions  we  may  cherish  in  respect  to  them. 

MATHEMATICS  AND  THE  WORLD 

At  present,  of  all  branches  of  mathematics  the  theory  of  numbers 
is  probably  the  most  difficult,  obscure . ,  and  seemingly  with  the  fewest 
applications.  With  a  new  A  definition  of  numbers  in  terms  of  relations, 
this  theory  may  become  a  relational  study  of  very  high  order,  which, 
perhaps,  will  some  day  become  the  foundation  for  epistemology  and  the 
key  for  the  solution  of  all  the  problems  of  science  and  life.  In  the  fields 
of  cosmology  many,  if  not  the  majority,  of  the  problems,  by  necessity, 
cannot  be  considered  as  directly  experimental,  and  so  the  solution  must 
be  epistemological. 

At  present,  in  our  speculations,  we  are  carried  away  by  words,  dis¬ 
regarding  the  simple  fact  that  speaking  about  the  ‘radius  of  the  universe*, 
for  instance,  has  no  meaning ,  as  it  cannot  possibly  be  observed.  Perhaps, 
some  day,  we  shall  discover  that  such  conversations  are  the  result  of  our 
old  stumbling  block,  identification,  which  leads  to  our  being  carried  away 
by  the  sounds  of  words  applicable  to  terrestrial  conditions  but  meaning¬ 
less  in  the  very  small,  as  discovered  lately  in  the  newer  quantum 
mechanics,  and,  in  the  very  large,  as  applied  to  the  cosmos.  An  important 
illustration  of  the  retardation  of  scientific  progress,  blocked  by  the  con¬ 
fusion  of  orders  of  abstractions,  is  shown  in  the  fact  that  the  newer 
quantum  mechanics  were  slow  in  coming,  and  though  astronomers  prob¬ 
ably  know  about  it,  yet  they  still  fail  to  grasp  that  expressions  such  as 
the  ‘radius  of  the  universe’,  the  ‘running  down  of  the  universe*. ,  are 
meaningless  outside  of  psychopathology. 

In  this  connection,  we  should  notice  an  extremely  interesting  and 
important  semantic  characteristic ;  namely,  that  the  term  ‘relation*  is  not 
only  multiordinal  but  also  non~el}  as  it  applies  to  ‘senses*  and  ‘mind*. 
Relations  are  usually  found  empirically;  so  in  a  language  of  relations 
we  have  a  language  of  similar  structure  to  the  world  and  a  unique  means 
for  predictability  and  rationality. 

Let  me  again  emphasize  that,  from  time  immemorial,  things  have 
not  been  words;  the  only  content  of  knowledge  has  been  structural; 
mathematics  has  dealt,  in  the  main,  with  numbers;  no  matter  whether 
we  have  understood  the  character  of  numbers  or  not,  numbers  have 
expressed  relations  and  so  have  given  us  structural  data  willy-nilly,. 
This  explains  why  mathematics  and  numbers  have,  since  time  imme¬ 
morial,  been  a  favorite  field,  not  only  for  speculations,  but  also  why,  in 
history,  we  find  so  many  religious  semantic  disturbances  connected  with 
numbers.  Mankind  has  somehow  felt  instinctively  that  in  numbers  we 
have  a  potentially  endless  array  of  unique  and  specific  exact  relations , 
which  ultimately  give  us  structure,  the  last  being  the  only  possible  con¬ 
tent  of  knowledge,  because  words  are  not  things. 

V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANGUAGE 

As  relations,  generally,  are  empirically  present,  and  as  man  and 
his  ‘knowledge’  is  as  'natural*  as  rocks,  flowers,  and  donkeys,  we  should 
not  be  surprised  to  find  that  the  unique  language  of  exact . ,  relations 
called  mathematics  is,  by  necessity,  the  natural  language  of  man  and 
similar  in  structure  to  the  world  and  our  nervous  system. 

As  has  already  been  stated,  it  is  incorrect  to  argue  from  the  struc¬ 
ture  of  mathematical  theories  to  the  structure  of  the  world,  and  so  try 
to  establish  the  similarity  of  structure;  but  that  such  enquiry  must  be 
independent  and  start  with  quite  ordinary  structural  experiences,  and 
only  at  a  later  stage  proceed  to  more  advanced  knowledge  as  given  by 
science.  Because  this  analysis  must  be  independent,  it  can  also  be  made 
very  simple  and  elementary.  All  exact  sciences  give  us  a  wealth  of 
experimental  data  to  establish  the  first  thesis  on  similarity  of  structure ; 
and  it  is  unnecessary  to  repeat  it  here.  I  will  restrict  myself  only  to  a 
minimum  of  quite  obvious  facts,  reserving  the  second  thesis— about  the 
similarity  of  structure  with  our  nervous  system — for  the  next  chapter. 

If  we  analyse  the  silent  objective  level  by  objective  means  available 
in  1933,  say  a  microscope,  we  shall  find  that  whatever  we  can  see, 
handle . ,  represents  an  absolute  individual ,  and  different  from  anything 
else  in  this  world .  We  discover,  thus,  an  important  structural  fact  of 
the  external  world ;  namely,  that  in  it,  everything  we  can  see,  touch . , 
that  is  to  say,  all  lower  order  abstractions  represent  absolute  individuals, 
different  from  everything  else. 

On  the  verbal  level,  under  such  empirical  conditions,  we  should  then 
have  a  language  of  similar  structure;  namely,  one  giving  us  an  indefinite 
number  of  proper  names,  each  different.  We  find  such  a  language 
uniquely  in  numbers,  each  number  1,  2,  3 . ,  being  a  unique,  sharply  dis¬ 
tinguishable,  proper  name  for  a  relation,  and,  if  we  wish,  for  anything 
else  also. 

Without  some  higher  abstractions  we  cannot  be  human  at  all.  No 
science  could  exist  with  absolute  individuals  and  no  relations;  so  we  pass 
to  higher  abstractions  and  build  a  language  of  say  xis  (i=  1,  2,  3,  . . .  «), 
where  the  x  shows,  let  us  say,  that  we  deal  with  a  variable  x  with  many 
values,  and  the  number  we  assign  to  i  indicates  the  individuality  under 
consideration.  From  the  structural  point  of  view,  such  a  vocabulary  is 
similar  to  the  world  around  us ;  it  accounts  for  the  individuality  of  the 
external  objects,  it  also  is  similar  to  the  structure  of  our  nervous  sys¬ 
tem,  because  it  allows  generalizations  or  higher  order  abstractions, 
emphasizes  the  abstracting  nervous  characteristics , .  The  subscript  em¬ 
phasizes  the  differences ;  the  letter  x  implies  the  similarities. 

MATHEMATICS  AND  THE  WORLD 

In  daily  language  a  similar  device  is  extremely  useful  and  has  very 
far-reaching  psycho-logical  semantic  effects.  Thus,  if  we  say  ‘pencil  i\ 
‘pencils’,  .  .  .  ‘pendin',  we  have  indicated  structurally  two  main  charac¬ 
teristics:  (1)  the  absolute  individuality  of  the  object,  by  adding  the 
indefinitely  individualizing  subscript  1,  2,  .  .  .  n ;  and  (2)  we  have  also 
complied  with  the  nervous  higher  order  abstracting  characteristics,  which 
establish  similarity  in  diversity  of  different  ‘pencils’.  From  the  point  of 
view  of  relations ,  these  are  usually  found  empirically ;  besides,  they  may 
be  invariant,  no  matter  how  changing  the  world  may  be. 

In  general  terms,  the  structure  of  the  external  world  is  such  that 
we  deal  always  on  the  objective  levels  with  absolute  individuals,  with 
absolute  differences.  The  structure  of  the  human  nervous  system  is  such 
that  it  abstracts,  or  generalizes,  or  integrates . ,  in  higher  orders,  and  so 
finds  similarities,  discovering  often  invariant  (sometimes  relatively 
invariant)  relations.  To  have  ‘similar  structure’,  a  language  should  com¬ 
ply  with  both  structural  exigencies,  and  this  characteristic  is  found  in 
the  mathematical  notation  of  which  can  be  enlarged  to  the  daily  lan¬ 
guage  as  ‘Smith*’,  ‘Fido*’. ,  where  1,  2,  3,  .  . .  n. 

Further  objective  enquiry  shows  that  the  world  and  ourselves  are 
made  up  of  processes,  thus,  *Smith190o’  is  quite  a  different  person  from 
‘SmithiBss’.  To  be  convinced,  it  is  enough  to  look  over  old  photographs 
of  ourselves,  the  above  remark  being  structurally  entirely  general.  A 
language  of  ‘similar  structure’  should  cover  these  facts.  We  find  such  a 
language  in  the  vocabulary  of  ‘function’,  ‘propositional  function’,  as 
already  explained,  involving  also  four-dimensional  considerations. 

As  words  are  not  objects — and  this  expresses  a  structural  fact — we 
see  that  the  ‘is’  of  identity  is  unconditionally  false,  and  should  be  entirely 
abolished  as  such.  Let  us  be  simple  about  it.  This  last  semantic  require¬ 
ment  is  genuinely  difficult  to  carry  out,  because  the  general  el  structure 
of  our  language  is  such  as  to  facilitate  identification.  It  is  admitted  that 
in  some  fields  some  persons  identify  only  a  little ;  but  even  they  usually 
identify  a  great  deal  when  they  pass  to  other  fields.  Even  science  is  not 
free  from  identification,  and  this  fact  introduces  great  and  artificial 
semantic  difficulties,  which  simply  vanish  when  we  stop  identification  or 
the  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions.  Thus,  for  instance,  the  semantic 
difficulties  in  the  foundations  of  mathematics,  the  problems  of  ‘infinity’, 
the  ‘irrational’. ,  the  difficulties  of  Einstein’s  theory,  the  difficulties  of  the 
newer  quantum  theory,  the  arguments  about  the  ‘radius  of  the  universe’, 
‘infinite  velocities’,  the  difficulties  in  the  present  theory.,  .,  are  due,  in 
the  main,  to  semantic  blockages  or  commitment  to  the  structure  of  the 
old  language — we  may  call  it  ‘habit’ — which  says  structurally  very  little, 

V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANGUAGE 

and  which  I  disclose  as  a  semantic  disturbance  of  evaluation  by  showing 
the  physiological ■  mechanism  in  terms  of  order . 

If  we  abolish  the  ‘is’  of  identity,  then  we  are  left  only  with  a  func¬ 
tional,  actional . ,  language  elaborated  in  the  mathematical  language  of 
function.  Under  such  conditions,  a  descriptive  language  of  ordered  hap¬ 
penings  on  the  objective  level  takes  the  form  of  ‘if  so  and  so  happens, 
then  so  and  so  happens’,  or,  briefly,  ‘if  so,  then  so’ ;  which  is  the  proto¬ 
type  of  ‘logical’  and  mathematical  processes  and  languages.  We  see  that 
such  a  language  is  again  similar  in  structure  to  the  external  world 
descriptively ;  yet  it  is  similar  to  the  ‘logical’  nervous  processes,  and  so 
allows  us,  because  of  this  similarity  of  structure,  predictability  and  so 
rationality. 

In  the  traditional  systems,  we  did  not  recognize  the  complete  seman¬ 
tic  interdependence  of  differences  and  similarities,  the  empirical  world 
exhibiting  differences,  the  nervous  system  manufacturing  primarily 
similarities,  and  our  ‘knowledge’,  if  worth  anything  at  all,  being  the 
joint  product  of  both.  Was  it  not  Sylvester  who  said  that  ‘in  mathe¬ 
matics  we  look  for  similarities  in  differences  and  differences  in  similari¬ 
ties’  ?  This  statement  applies  to  our  whole  abstracting  process. 

The  empirical  world  is  such  in  structure  (by  inspection)  that  in  it 
we  can  add,  subtract,  multiply,  and  divide.  In  mathematics,  we  find  a 
language  of  similar  structure.  Obviously,  in  the  physical  world  these 
actions  or  operations  alter  the  relations,  which  are  expressed  as  altered 
unique  and  specific  relations,  by  the  language  of  mathematics.  Further,  as 
the  world  is  full  of  different  shapes,  forms,  curves  . ,  we  do  not  only  find 
in  mathematics  special  languages  dealing  with  these  subjects,  but  we  find 
in  analytical  geometry  unifying  linguistic  means  for  translation  of  one 
language  into  another.  Thus  any  ‘quality’  can  be  formulated  in  terms 
of  relations  which  may  take  the  ‘quantitative’  character  which,  at  present, 
in  all  cases,  can  be  also  translated  into  geometrical  terms  and  methods, 
giving  structures  to  be  visualized. 

It  is  interesting,  yet  not  entirely  unexpected,  that  the  activities  of  the 
higher  nervous  centres,  the  conditional  reflexes  of  higher  order,  the 
semantic  reactions,  time-binding  included,  should  follow  the  exponential 
rules,  as  shown  in  my  Manhood  of  Humanity. 

In  our  experience,  we  find  that  some  issues  are  additive — as,  for 
instance,  if  one  guest  is  added  to  a  dinner  party,  we  will  have  to  add 
plates  and  a  chair.  Such  facts  are  covered  by  additive  methods  and  the 
language  called  ‘linear*  (see  Part  VIII).  In  many  instances — and  these 
are,  perhaps,  the  most  important  and  are  strictly  connected  with  sub- 
microscopic  processes — the  issues  are  not  additive,  one  atom  of  oxygen 

MATHEMATICS  AND  THE  WORLD 

'plus1  two  atoms  of  hydrogen*  under  proper  conditions,  will  produce 
water,  of  which  the  characteristics  are  not  the  sum  of  the  characteristics 
of  oxygen  and  hydrogen  ‘added'  together,  but  entirely  new  characteristics 
emerge.  These  may  some  day  be  taken  care  of  by  non-linear  equations, 
when  our  knowledge  has  advanced  considerably.  These  problems  are 
unusually  important  and  vital,  because  with  our  present  low  development 
and  the  lack  of  structural  researches,  we  still  keep  an  additive  A  lan¬ 
guage,  which  is,  perhaps,  able  to  deal  with  additive,  simple,  immediate, 
and  comparatively  unimportant  issues,  but  is  entirely  unfit  structurally 
to  deal  with  principles  which  underlie  the  most  fundamental  problems  of 
life.  Similarly,  in  physics,  only  since  Einstein  have  we  begun  to  see  that 
the  primitive,  simplest,  and  easiest  to  solve  linear  equations  are  not 
structurally  adequate. 

One  of  the  most  marked  structural  characteristics  of  the  empirical 
world  is  ‘change',  ‘motion',  ‘waves’,  and  similar  dynamic  manifestations. 
Obviously,  a  language  of  similar  structure  must  have  means  to  deal  with 
such  relations.  In  this  respect,  mathematics  is  unique,  because,  in  the 
differential  and  integral  calculus,  the  four-dimensional  geometries  and 
similar  disciplines,  with  all  their  developments,  we  find  such  a  perfect 
language  to  be  explained  more  in  detail  in  the  chapters  which  follow. 

It  will  be  profitable  for  our  purpose  to  discuss,  in  the  next  chapter, 
some  of  the  mathematical  structural  characteristics  in  connection  with 
their  similarity  to  the  human  nervous  system ;  but  here  I  will  add  only 
that,  for  our  purposes,  at  this  particular  point,  we  must  specially  empha¬ 
size  arithmetical  language,  which  means  numbers  and  arithmetical  opera¬ 
tions,  the  theory  of  function,  the  differential  and  integral  calculus 
(language)  and  different  geometries  in  their  two  aspects,  ‘pure’  and 
applied.  Indeed,  Riemann  tells  us  bluntly  that  the  science  of  physics 
originated  only  with  the  introduction  of  differential  equations,  a  state¬ 
ment  which  is  quite  justified,  but  to  which  I  would  add,  that  physics  is 
becoming  scientific  since  we  began  to  eliminate  from  physics  semantic 
disturbances;  namely,  identification  and  elementalism.  This  movement 
was  originated,  in  fact,  although  not  stated  in  an  explicit  form,  by  the 
Einstein  theory  and  the  new  quantum  theories,  the  psycho-logical  trend 
of  which  is  formulated  in  a  general  semantic  theory  in  the  present  work. 

It  is  reasonable  to  consider  that  metric  geometry,  and,  in  particular, 
the  Zi -system,  was  derived  from  touch,  and,  perhaps,  the  ‘kinesthetic 
sense',  and  projective  geometry  from  sight. 

Although  the  issues  presented  here  appear  extremely  simple,  and 
sometimes  even  commonplace,  yet  the  actual  working  out  of  the  verbal 

V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANGUAGE 

schemes  is  quite  elaborate  and  ingenious,  and  impossible  to  analyse  here 
more  fully ;  so  that  only  one  example  can  be  given. 

The  solution  of  mathematical  equations  is  perhaps  to  be  considered 
as  the  central  problem  of  mathematics.  The  word  ‘equation*  is  derived 
from  Latin  aequare ,  to  equalize,  and  is  a  statement  of  the  symmetrical 
relation  of  equality  expressed  as  a=b  or  a  —  b  =  0  or  a/b  =  1.  An 
equation  expresses  the  relation  between  quantities,  some  of  which  are 
known,  some  unknown  and  to  be  found.  By  the  solution  of  an  equation, 
we  mean  the  finding  of  values  for  the  unknowns  which  will  satisfy 
the  equation. 

Linear  equations  of  the  type  ax  =  b  necessitated  the  introduction  of 
fractions.  Linear  equations  with  several  variables  led  to  the  theory  of 
determinants  and  matrices . ,  which  underwent,  later,  a  tremendous  inde¬ 
pendent  development ;  yet  they  originated  in  the  attempt  to  simplify  the 
solution  of  these  equations. 

Quadratic  equations  of  the  type  x1  -}-  ax  +  b  —  0  can  be  reduced 
to  the  form  z2  =  A,  the  solution  of  which  depends  on  the  extraction  of 
a  square  root.  Here,  serious  difficulties  arose,  and  seemingly  necessitated 
the  introduction  of  ‘irrational*  numbers  and  ordinary  complex  numbers, 
involving  the  square  root  of  minus  one  ( \ / — 1 —»«"),  a  notion  which 
revolutionized  mathematics. 

Cubic  equations  of  the  form  x*  +  ax2  +  bx  +  c  —  0  necessitated 
the  extraction  of  cube  roots,  in  addition  to  the  problems  connected  with 
the  solution  of  quadratic  equations,  and  involved  more  difficulties,  which 
have  been  analysed  in  an  extensive  literature. 

Biquadratic  equations  of  the  type  x4  +  ax3  -f-  bx2  +  cx  +  d  —  0 
involve  the  problems  of  quadratic  and  cubic  equations.  When  we  con¬ 
sider  equations  of  a  degree  higher  than  the  fourth,  we  find  that  we 
cannot  solve  them  by  former  methods ;  and  mathematicians  have  had  to 
invent  theories  of  substitutions,  groups,  different  special  functions  and 
similar  devices.  The  solution  of  differential  equations  introduced  further 
difficulties,  allied  with  the  theory  of  function. 

The  linear  transformations  of  algebraic  polynomials  with  two  or 
more  variables  in  connection  with  the  theory  of  determinants,  symmetri¬ 
cal  functions,  differential  operations . ,  necessitated  the  development  of  an 
extensive  theory  of  algebraic  forms  which,  at  present,  is  far  from 
being  complete. 

In  the  above  analysis,  I  have  refrained  from  giving  details,  most 
of  which  would  be  of  no  value  to  the  layman,  and  unnecessary  for  the 
mathematician;  but  it  must  be  emphasized  that  the  theory  of  function 
and  the  theory  of  groups,  with  their  very  extensive  developments, 

MATHEMATICS  AND  THE  WORLD 

involving  the  theory  of  invariance,  and,  in  a  way,  the  theory  of  numbers, 
rapidly  became  a  unifying  foundation  upon  which  practically  the  whole 
of  mathematics  is  being  rebuilt.  Many  branches  of  mathematics  have 
become,  of  late,  nothing  more  than  a  theory  of  invariance  of  special 
groups. 

As  to  practical  applications,  there  is  no  possibility  to  list  them,  and 
the  number  increases  steadily.  But,  without  the  theory  of  analytic  func¬ 
tion,  for  instance,  we  could  not  study  the  flow  of  electricity,  or  heat,  or 
deal  with  two-dimensional  gravitational,  electrostatic,  or  magnetic  attrac¬ 
tions.  The  complex  number  involving  the  square  root  of  minus  one  was 
necessary  for  the  development  of  wireless  and  telegraphy;  the  kinetic 
theory  of  gases  and  the  building  of  automobile  engines  require  geome¬ 
tries  of  n  dimensions;  rectangular  and  triangular  membranes  are  con¬ 
nected  with  questions  discussed  in  the  theory  of  numbers ;  the  theory  of 
groups  has  direct  application  in  crystallography ;  the  theory  of  invariants 
underlies  the  theory  of  Einstein,  the  theory  of  matrices  and  operators 
has  revolutionized  the  quantum  theory ;  and  there  are  other  applications 
in  an  endless  array.* 

In  Part  VIII,  different  aspects  of  mathematics  are  analysed,  but  the 
interested  reader  can  be  referred  also  to  the  above-mentioned  book  of 
Professor  Shaw  for  an  excellent  elementary,  yet  structural,  view  of  the 
progress  of  mathematics. 

CHAPTER  XIX 

MATHEMATICS  AS  A  LANGUAGE  OF  A  STRUCTURE  SIMILAR 
TO  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  THE  HUMAN  NERVOUS  SYSTEM 

In  recent  times  the  view  becomes  more  and  more  prevalent  that  many 
branches  of  mathematics  are  nothing  but  the  theory  of  invariants  of  special 
&oups.  s  UE 

A  natural  law, — if,  strictly  speaking,  there  be  such  a  thing  outside  the 
conception  thereof, — is  fundamentally  nothing  more  nor  less  than  a  con¬ 
stant  connection  among  inconstant  phenomena:  it  is,  in  other  words,  an 
invariant  relation  among  variant  terms.  (264)  cassius  j.  keyser 

Whatsoever  things  are  invariant  under  all  and  only  the  transformations 
of  some  group  constitute  the  peculiar  subject-matter  of  some  (actual  or 
potential)  branch  of  knowledge.  (264)  cassius  j.  keyser 

The  general  laws  of  nature  are  to  be  expressed  by  equations  which  hold 
good  for  all  systems  of  co-ordinates,  that  is,  are  co-variant  with  respect  to 
any  substitutions  whatever  (generally  co-variant),  (iss)  A.  einstein 

i 

The  things  hereafter  called  tensors  are  further  characterized  by  the  fact 
that  the  equations  of  transformation  for  their  components  are  linear  and 
homogeneous.  Accordingly,  all  the  components  in  the  new  system  vanish, 
if  they  all  vanish  in  the  original  system.  If,  therefore,  a  law  of  nature  is 
expressed  by  equating  all  the  components  of  a  tensor  to  zero,  it  is  generally 
covariant.  By  examining  the  laws  of  the  formation  of  tensors,  we  acquire 
the  means  of  formulating  generally  covariant  laws,  (iss)  A.  einstein 

The  thalamus  is  a  centre  of  affective  reactivity  to  sensory  stimuli,  while 
the  cortex  is  an  apparatus  for  discrimination.  (4U>  Henri  pi£ron 

Section  A.  Introductory. 

It  becomes  increasingly  evident  that  we  have  come  to  a  linguistic 
impasse,  reflected  in  our  historical,  cultural,  economic,  social,  doctrinal . , 
impasses,  all  these  issues  being  interconnected.  The  structural  linguistic 
aspect  is  the  most  fundamental  of  them  all,  as  it  underlies  the  others  and 
involves  the  s.r,  or  psycho-logical  responses  to  words  and  other  events  in 
connection  with  meanings. 

One  of  the  benefits  of  building  a  system  on  undeniable  negative 
premises  is  that  many  older  and  controversial  problems  become  relatively 
simple  and  often  uncontroversial,  disclosing  an  important  psycho-logical 
mechanism.  Such  formulations  have  often  the  appearance  of  the  'discov¬ 
ery  of  the  obvious* ;  but  it  is  known,  in  some  quarters,  that  the  discovery 
of  the  obvious  is  sometimes  useful,  not  always  easy,  and  often  much 
delayed ;  as,  for  instance,  the  discovery  of  the  equality  of  gravitational 
and  inertial  mass,  which  has  lately  revolutionized  physics. 

MATHEMATICS  AND  THE  NERVOUS  SYSTEMS  269 

As  words  are  not  the  things  we  are  talking  about,  the  only  possible 
link  between  the  objective  world  and  the  verbal  world  is  structural.  If 
the  two  structures  are  similar,  then  the  empirical  world  becomes  intelli¬ 
gible  to  us — we  ‘understand’,  we  can  adjust  ourselves , .  If  we  carry  out 
verbal  experiments  and  predict,  these  predictions  are  verified  empirically. 

I  f  the  two  structures  are  not  similar,  then  our  predictions  are  not  verified 
— we  do  not  ‘know’,  we  do  not  ‘understand’,  the  given  problems  are 
‘unintelligible’  to  us . ,  we  do  not  know  what  to  do  to  adjust  ourselves , . 

Psychologically,  in  the  first  case  we  feel  security,  we  are  satisfied, 
hopeful . ;  in  the  second  case,  we  feel  insecure,  a  floating  anxiety,  fear, 
worry,  disappointment,  depression,  hopelessness,  and  other  harmful  s.r 
appear.  The  considerations  of  structure  thus  disclose  an  unexpected  and 
powerful  semantic  mechanism  of  individual  and  collective  happiness, 
adjustment . ,  but  also  of  tragedies,  supplying  us  with  physiological  means 
for  a  certain  amount  of  desirable  control,  because  relations  and  structure 
represent  fundamental  factors  of  all  meanings  and  evaluations,  and, 
therefore,  of  all  s.r . 

The  present  increasing  world  unrest  is  an  excellent  example  of  this. 
The  structure  of  our  old  languages  has  shaped  our  s.r  and  suggested  our 
doctrines,  creeds . ,  which  build  our  institutions,  customs,  habits,  and, 
finally,  lead  fatalistically  to*  catastrophes  like  the  World  War.  We  fiave 
learned  long  ago,  by  repeated  sad  experience,  that  predictions  concerning 
human  affairs  are  not  verified  empirically.  Our  doctrines,  institutions, 
and  other  disciplines  are  unable  somehow  to  deal  with  this  semantic 
situation,  and  hence  the  prevailing  depression  and  pessimism. 

We  hear  everywhere  complaints  of  the  stupidity  or  dishonesty  of 
our  rulers,  as  already  defined,  without  realizing  that  although  our  rulers 
are  admittedly  very  ignorant,  and  often  dishonest,  yet  the  most  informed, 
gifted,  and  honest  among  them  cannot  predict  or  foresee  happenings,  if 
their  arguments  are  performed  in  a  language  of  a  structure  dissimilar 
to  the  world  and  to  our  nervous  system.  Under  such  conditions,  calling 
names,  even  under  provocations,  is  not  constructive  or  helpful  enough. 
Arguments  in  the  languages  of  the  old  structure  have  led  fatalistically  to 
systems  which  are  structurally  ‘un-natural*  and  so  must  collapse  and 
impose  unnecessary  and  artificial  stress  on  our  nervous  system.  The  self- 
imposed  conditions  of  life  become  more  and  more  unbearable,  resulting 
in  the  increase  of  ‘mental’  illness,  prostitution,  criminality,  brutality, 
violence,  suicides,  and  similar  signs  of  maladjustment.  It  should  never 
be  forgotten  that  human  endurance  has  limits.  Human  ‘knowledge’ 
shapes  the  human  world,  alters  conditions,  and  other  features  of  the 

270  V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANGUAGE 

environment — a  factor  which  does  not  exist  to  any  such  extent  in  the 
animal  world. 

We  often  speak  about  the  influence  of  heredity,  but  much  less  do 
we  analyse  what  influence  environment,  and  particularly  the  verbal 
environment,  has  upon  us.  Not  only  are  all  doctrines  verbal,  but  the 
structure  of  an  old  language  reflects  the  structural  metaphysics  of  bygone 
generations,  which  affect  the  s.r .  The  vicious  circle  is  complete.  Primi¬ 
tive  mythology  shaped  the  structure  of  language.  In  it  we  have  discussed 
and  argued  our  institutions,  systems . ,  and  so  again  the  primitive  struc¬ 
tural  assumptions  or  mythologies  influenced  them.  It  should  not  be  for¬ 
gotten  that  the  affective  interplay,  interaction,  interchange  is  ever  present 
in  human  life,  excepting,  perhaps,  in  severe  and  comparatively  rare  (not 
in  all  countries)  'mental’  ills.  We  can  stop  talking,  we  can  stop  reading 
or  writing,  and  stop  any  'intellectual’  interplay  and  interaction  between 
individuals,  but  we  cannot  stop  or  entirely  abolish  some  s.r. 

A  structural  linguistic  readjustment  will,  it  is  true,  result  in  making 
the  majority  of  our  old  doctrines  untenable,  leading  also  to  a  funda¬ 
mental  scientific  revision  of  new  doctrines  and  systems,  affecting  all  of 
them  and  our  s.r  in  a  constructive  way.  It  is  incorrect,  for  instance,  to 
use  the  terms  capitalism  as  opposed  to  'socialism’,  as  these  terms  apply 
to  different  non-directly  comparable  aspects  of  the  human  problem.  If 
we  wish  to  use  a  term  emphasizing  the  symbolic  character  of  human  rela¬ 
tions,  we  can  use  the  term  ‘capitalism’,  and  then  we  can  contrast  directly 
individual,  group,  national,  international . ,  capitalisms.  If  we  want  to 
emphasize  the  psycho-logical  aspects,  we  can  speak  of  individualism 
versus  socialism , .  Obviously,  in  life  the  issues  overlap,  but  the  verbal 
implications  remain,  preventing  clarity  and  inducing  inappropriate  s.r 
in  any  discussion. 

In  vernacular  terms,  there  is  at  present  a  ‘struggle’  and  ‘competition* 
between  two  entirely  different  ‘industrialisms*  and  two  different  ‘com¬ 
mercialisms*,  based  ultimately  on  two  different  forms  of  ‘capitalism*. 
One  is  the  ‘individual  capitalism’,  rapidly  being  transformed  into  ‘group 
capitalism*,  in  the  main  advanced  theoretically  to  its  limits  in  the 
United  States  of  America  and  to  a  lesser  extent  in  the  rest  of  the  civil¬ 
ized  world,  and  ‘social  capitalism*,  proclaimed  in  the  United  Socialistic 
Soviet  Republics.  Both  these  extreme  tendencies,  connected  also  with 
semantic  disturbances,  are  due  to  a  verbal  or  doctrinal  ‘declaration  of 
independence*  of  two,  until  lately,  much  isolated  countries.  The  United 
States  of  America  proclaimed  the  doctrine  that  man  is  ‘free  and  inde¬ 
pendent’,  while,  in  fact,  he  is  not  free,  but  is  inherently  interdependent. 
The  Soviets  accepted  uncritically  an  unrevised  antiquated  doctrine  of  the 

M  ATI  I  KM  AT  ICS  AND  TDK  NERVOUS  SYSTEMS  271 

‘dictatorship  of  the  proletarians’,  in  practice,  this  would  mean  the  dic¬ 
tatorship  of  unenlightened  masses,  which,  if  left  actually  to  their  creeds, 
and  deprived  of  the  brain-work  of  scientists  and  leaders,  would  revert 
to  primitive  forms  of  animal  life.  Obviously,  these  two  extreme  creeds 
violate  every  typically  human  characteristic.  We  are  interdependent,  time- 
binders,  and  we  are  interdependent  because  we  possess  the  higher  ner¬ 
vous  centres,  which  complexity  animals  do  not  possess.  Without  these 
higher  centres,  we  could  not  be  human  at  all;  both  countries  seem  to 
disregard  this  fact,  as  in  both  the  brain-work  is  exploited,  yet  the  brain¬ 
workers  are  not  properly  evaluated.  The  ignorant  mob,  with  its  his¬ 
torically  and  psycho-logically  cultivated  animalistic  s.r,  retards  human 
progress  and  agreement.  Leaders  do  not  lead,  but  the  majority  play 
down  to  the  mob  psycho-logics,  in  fear  of  their  heads  or  stomachs. 

In  both  countries,  the  s.r  are  such  that  brain-work,  although  com¬ 
mercially  exploited,  is  not  properly  evaluated,  and  is  still  persecuted 
here  and  there.  For  instance,  in  the  United  States  of  America,  we 
witness  court  trials  and  resolutions  against  the  work  of  Darwin,  in  spite 
of  the  fact  that  without  some  theory  of  evolution  most  of  the  natural 
sciences,  medicine  included,  would  be  impossible.  In  Russia,  we  find 
decrees  against  researches  in  pure  science,  without  which  modern  science 
is  impossible.  Both  countries  seemingly  forget  that  all  ‘material’  progress 
among  humans  is  due  uniquely  to  the  brain-work  of  a  few  mostly  under¬ 
paid  and  overworked  workers,  who  exercise  properly  their  higher  ner¬ 
vous  centres.  With  science  getting  hold  of  problems  of  s.r  and  sanity, 
our  human  relations  and  individual  happiness  will  also  become  the  sub¬ 
ject  matter  of  scientific  enquiry.  If  international  and  interdependent 
brain-workers  produce  discoveries  and  inventions,  any  one,  even  of  the 
lowest  development,  can  use  or  misuse  their  achievements,  no  matter 
what  ‘plan’,  or  ‘no-plan’,  is  adopted.  Both  countries  seem  at  present  not 
to  understand  that  a  great  development  of  mechanical  means  and  the 
application  of  scientific  achievements  exclusively  for  animal  comfort  fail 
to  lead  to  greater  happiness  or  higher  culture,  and  that,  perhaps,  indeed, 
they  lead  in  just  the  opposite  direction.  Personally,  I  have  no  doubt  that 
some  day  they  will  understand  it ;  but  an  earlier  understanding  of  this 
simple  semantic  fact  would  have  saved,  in  the  meantime,  a  great  deal  of 
suffering,  bewilderment,  and  other  semantic  difficulties  to  a  great  num¬ 
ber  of  people,  if  the  rulers  in  both  countries  would  be  enlightened  enough 
and  could  have  foreseen  it  soon  enough. 

The  future  will  witness  a  struggle  between  the  individual  and  group 
capitalism,  as  exemplified  in  the  United  States  of  America,  and  the  collec¬ 
tive  or  social  capitalism,  as  exemplified  in  the  Soviet  Republics.  It  does 

V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANGUAGE 

not  require  prophetic  vision  to  foresee  that  some  trends  of  history  are 
foregone  conclusions  because  of  the  structure  of  the  human  nervous 
system.  As  trusts  or  groups  have  replaced  the  theoretically  ‘individual* 
capitalism  in  the  United  States  of  America,  so  will  the  state  capitalism 
replace  the  trusts,  to  be  replaced  in  its  turn  by  international  capitalism. 

We  are  not  shocked  by  the  international  character  of  science.  We 
are  not  TOO  per  cent  patriotic*  when  it  comes  to  the  use  in  daily  life  of 
discoveries  and  inventions  of  other  nations.  Science  is  a  semantic  prod¬ 
uct  of  a  general  human  symbolic  characteristic ;  so,  naturally,  it  must  be 
general  and,  therefore,  ‘international*.  But  ‘capitalism*  is  also  a  unique 
and  general  semantic  product  of  symbolism ;  it  is  also  a  unique  product 
of  the  human  nervous  system,  dependent  on  mathematics,  and,  as  such, 
by  its  inherent  character,  must  become  some  day  international.  There  is 
no  reason  why  our  s.r  should  be  disturbed  in  one  case  more  than  in  the 
other.  The  ultimate  problem  is  not  whether  to  ‘abolish  capitalism*  or  not, 
which  will  never  happen  in  a  symbolic  class  of  life,  but  to  transfer  the 
control  from  private,  socially  irresponsible,  uncontrolled,  and  mostly 
ignorant,  leaders  to  more  responsible,  professionally  trained ,  and  socially 
controlled  public  servants ,  not  bosses.  If  a  country  cannot  produce 
honest,  intelligent,  and  scientifically  trained  public  men  and  leaders,  that 
is,  of  course,  very  disastrous  for  its  citizens ;  but  this  is  not  to  be  pro¬ 
claimed  as  a  rule,  because  it  is  an  exception.  Thus,  in  the  Soviet  Repub¬ 
lics,  graft  is  practically  non-existent  in  the  sense  that  it  exists  in  the 
United  States;  but  the  mentality  of  the  public  men  is  practically  at  a 
similar  standstill  because  of  a  deliberate  minimizing  of  the  value  of  brain- 
work.  I  wonder  if  it  is  realized  at  all,  in  either  country,  that  any  ‘manual 
worker*,  no  matter  how  lowly,  is  hired  exclusively  for  his  human  brain, 
his  s.r ,  and  not  primarily  for  his  hands ! 

The  only  problem  which  the  rest  of  mankind  has  to  face  is  how  this 
struggle  will  be  managed  and  how  long  it  will  last,  the  outcome  admitting 
of  no  doubt,  as  the  ruthless  elimination  of  individual  capitalism  by  group 
capitalism  (trusts)  in  the  United  States  is  an  excellent  example.  In  the 
Soviet  Republics,  they  simply  have  gone  further,  but  in  a  similar  direc¬ 
tion.  Struggles  mean  suffering ;  and  we  should  reconcile  ourselves  to  that 
fact.  If  we  want  the  minimum  of  suffering,  we  should  stop  the  animal¬ 
istic  methods  of  contest.  Human  methods  of  solving  problems  depend  on 
higher  order  abstractions,  scientific  investigations  of  structure  and  lan¬ 
guage,  revision  of  our  doctrines.,  resulting  in  peaceful  adjustment  of 
living  facts,  which  are  actualities  whether  we  like  it  or  not.  If  we  want 
the  maximum  of  suffering,  let  us  proceed  in  the  stupid,  blind,  animal¬ 
istic  and  unscientific  way  of  trial  and  error,  as  we  are  doing  at  present. 

MATHEMATICS  AND  THE  NERVOUS  SYSTEMS  273 

My  aim  is  not  to  be  a  prophet,  but  to  analyse  different  structural 
and  linguistic  semantic  issues  underlying  all  human  activities,  and  so 
to  produce  material  which  may  help  mankind  to  select  their  lot  con¬ 
sciously.  What  they  will  do  is  not  my  official  concern,  but  it  seems  that 
both  countries,  which  have  so  much  in  common,  and  which  are  bound  to 
play  an  important  role  in  the  future  of  mankind,  owing  to  their  numbers, 
their  areas,  and  their  natural  resources . ,  will  have  to  pay  more  attention 
to  the  so-called  ‘intellectual’  issues,  or,  more  simply,  not  disregard  the 
difference  between  the  reactions  of  infants  and  adults.  Otherwise,  very 
serious  and  disastrous  cultural  results  for  all  of  us  will  follow. 

The  problems  of  the  world  1933  are  acute  and  immediate,  over¬ 
loaded  with  confusion,  bitterness,  hopelessness,  and  other  forms  of 
semantic  disturbances.  Without  some  means — and,  in  this  case,  scien¬ 
tific  and  physiological  means — to  regulate  our  s.rf  we  shall  not  be  able 
to  solve  our  problems  soon  enough  to  avoid  disasters.  The  similarity  in 
structure  of  mathematics,  and  our  nervous  system,  once  pointed  out  and 
applied ,  gives  us  a  unique  means  to  regulate  the  s.r ,  without  which  it 
is  practically  impossible  to  analyse  dispassionately  and  wisely  the  most 
pressing  problems  of  immediate  importance. 

The  present  investigation  shows  that  the  old  languages  which,  in 
structure,  are  not  similar  to  the  world  and  our  nervous  system,  have 
automatically  reflected  their  structure  on  our  doctrines,  creeds,  and  habits, 
s.rt  and  also  on  those  man-made  institutions  which  result  from  verbal 
arguments.  These,  in  turn,  shape  further  s.r  and,  as  long  as  they  last, 
control  our  destinies. 

Four  important  issues  could  be  shown  in  detail,  but,  for  lack  of 
space,  I  give  only  a  suggestive  sketch  of  them  here. 

1)  In  the  ^-system,  all  our  existing  older  sub-systems,  with  all 
their  benefits  as  well  as  shortcomings,  follow  as  an  A  psycho-logical 
structural  semantic  necessity. 

2)  The  tremendous  handicap  for  any  new  and  less  deficient  sys¬ 
tems  consists  in  the  fact  that  such  systems  lack  new  constructive 
oo -valued  semantics,  and  are  carried  on  the  one  side  by  linguistic  two¬ 
valued  arguments  in  the  language  of  old  el  structure  ;  yet  they  aspire 
‘emotionally*  to  something  new  and  better,  while  the  two  cannot  be 
reconciled. 

3)  An  argument  carried  on  in  the  old  el  and  two-valued  way,  no 
matter  how  fundamentally  true  and  eventually  beneficial,  can  be  easily 
defeated  on  verbal  grounds  if  it  follows  the  old  structure  of  language. 
Our  decisions  are  never  well-grounded  psycho-logically,  and  so  can 
never  command  the  respect  or  achieve  the  reliability  of  scientific  reason- 

V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANGUAGE 

ing.  That  is  why  we  are  groping— the  only  method  possible  under  such 
conditions  being  the  animalistic  trial-and-error  methods,  swaying  masses 
by  inflammatory  speeches  because  reason  has  nothing  to  offer,  being  tied 
up  by  the  old  verbal  structure  to  the  older  consequences  based  on  animal¬ 
istic  and  fundamentally  false-for-man  assumptions. 

4)  In  the  old  A,  el,  two-valued  system,  agreement  is  theoretically 
impossible;  so  one  of  the  main,  and  perhaps  revolutionary,  semantic 
departures  from  the  old  system  is  the  fact  that  a  non-el  oo-valued  A- 
system,  based  on  fundamental  negative  premises,  leads  to  a  theory  of 
universal  agreement,  which  is  based  on  a  structural  revision  of  our 
languages,  producing  new  and  undisturbed  s.r ,  which  eliminate  the 
copying  of  animals  in  our  nervous  reactions. 

The  subject  matter  of  this  chapter  divides,  naturally,  into  three 
interconnected  semantic  parts.  In  the  first,  we  shall  recall  a  few  general 
notions,  known  in  the  main  but  seldom  taken  into  consideration,  reformu¬ 
lated  in  a  language  of  different  structure.  In  the  second,  I  shall  indicate 
how  the  most  important  mathematical  disciplines,  which  traditionally 
and,  in  the  opinion  of  the  majority,  could  hardly  be  called  mathematical, 
represent  a  scientific  and  exact  formulation  of  the  general  ‘thinking* 
process.  In  this  connection,  a  few  words  will  be  said  about  the  theory 
of  aggregates,  and  a  little  more  about  the  theory  of  groups.  This  latter 
theory,  with  its  implications  and  applications,  leads  to  a  reformulation 
of  mathematics  on  quite  obvious  psycho -logical  grounds,  bringing  mathe¬ 
matics  into  the  closest  relationship  to  the  general  processes  of  mentation. 
Finally,  in  the  third  part,  I  shall  indicate  the  astonishing  and  quite  unex¬ 
pected  physiological  fact  of  the  similarity  of  the  structure  of  mathematics 
with  the  structure  and  function  of  our  nervous  system. 

The  intelligent  layman  should  be  reminded  that,  although  he  needs 
to  know  about  mathematics,  the  minimum  given  here,  supplemented, 
perhaps,  by  a  few  most  elementary  and  fascinating  books  on  mathemat¬ 
ical  philosophy,  given  in  the  bibliography  to  this  volume,  yet  he  does  not 
need,  and  probably  never  will  need,  more  technical  mathematics  than  is 
given  in  the  high  schools  and  supplemented  by  the  fundamental  notions 
of  the  differential  calculus.  For  directly  we  treat  all  languages,  mathe¬ 
matics  included,  from  a  more  general  (and,  at  present,  perhaps,  the  most 
general)  aspect;  namely,  structure;  the  reader  will  obtain  all  the  essen¬ 
tial  psycho-logical  benefits  of  modern  science  by  absorbing  the  ^-system 
and  habits,  which  will  result  in  completely  novel  standards  of  evaluation 
and  distinctly  modern  and  adult  s,r. 

The  last  is  of  extreme  and  unrealized  importance.  In  fact,  its  impor¬ 
tance  cannot  be  fully  appreciated  until  we  actually  acquire  such  reactions, 

MATHEMATICS  AND  THE  NERVOUS  SYSTEMS  275 

because  only  then  shall  we  have  semantic  disturbances  eliminated,  so  that 
all  problems  can  be  analysed  properly,  and,  therefore,  agreement  must 
be  reached. 

The  future  generations,  of  course,  will  have  no  difficulties  whatso¬ 
ever  in  establishing  the  healthy  s.r ;  neither  at  present  have  very  young 
children.  These  do  not  need  such  treatises  as  the  present  work.  But, 
before  the  grown-up  parents  or  teachers  can  train  their  children,  they 
must  first  unlearn  a  great  deal  and  train  themselves  to  new  habits  involv¬ 
ing  the  A  standards  of  evaluation.  So,  for  them,  such  a  book,  in  order  to 
be  convincing,  must  deal  with  the  foundations  of  their  difficulties.  The 
last  task  is  difficult  for  the  writer  as  well  for  the  reader. 

What  has  been  said  here  does  not  apply,  I  am  sorry  to  say,  to 
professional  'philosophers’,  ‘logicians’,  ‘psychologists’,  psychiatrists,  and 
teachers.  These,  to  be  adequate  at  all  for  their  responsible  and  difficult 
professional  duties,  must  become  thoroughly  acquainted  with  structure 
in  general,  and  with  the  structure  of  mathematics  in  particular,  as  factors 
in  s.r ,  and  must  work  out  the  present  outline  much  further. 

Section  B.  General. 

Mathematics  in  the  twentieth  century  is  characterized  by  an  enor¬ 
mous  productiveness,  by  the  revision  of  its  foundations,  and  the  quest 
for  rigour,  all  of  which  implies  material  of  great  and  unexplored  psycho¬ 
logical  value,  a  result  of  the  activity  of  the  human  nervous  system. 
Branches  of  mathematics,  as,  for  instance,  mathematical  ‘logic’,  or  the 
analytical  theory  of  numbers,  have  been  created  in  this  period ;  others, 
like  the  theory  of  function,  have  been  revised  and  reshaped.  The  theory 
of  Einstein  and  the  newer  quantum  mechanics  have  also  suggested 
further  needs  and  developments. 

Any  branch  of  mathematics  consists  of  propositional  functions 
which  state  certain  structural  relations.  The  mathematician  tries  to  dis¬ 
cover  new  characteristics  and  to  reduce  the  known  characteristics  to  a 
dependence  on  the  smallest  possible  set  of  constantly  revised  and  simplest 
structural  assumptions.  Of  late,  we  have  found  that  no  assumption  is 
ever  ‘self-evident’  or  ultimate. 

To  those  structural  assumptions,  we  give  at  present  the  more  polite 
name  of  postulates.  These  involve  undefined  terms,  not  always  stated 
explicitly,  but  always  present  implicitly.  A  postulate  system  gives  us 
the  structure  of  the  linguistic  scheme .  The  older  mathematicians  were 
less  particular  in  their  methods.  Their  primitive  propositional  functions 
or  postulates  were  less  well  investigated.  They  did  not  start  explicitly 
with  undefined  terms.  The  twentieth  century  has  witnessed  in  this  field 

V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANGUAGE 

a  marked  progress  in  mathematics,  though  much  less  in  other  verbal 
enterprises ;  which  accounts  for  the  long  neglect  of  the  structure  of  lan¬ 
guages.  Without  tracing  down  a  linguistic  scheme  to  a  postulate  system, 
it  is  extremely  difficult  or  impossible  to  find  its  structural  assumptions. 

A  peculiarity  of  modern  mathematics  is  the  insistence  upon  the 
formal  character  of  all  mathematical  reasoning,  which,  with  the  new 
non-el  theory  of  meanings,  ultimately  should  apply  to  all  linguistic 
procedures. 

The  problems  of  ‘formalism*  are  of  serious  and  neglected  psycho¬ 
logical  importance,  and  are  connected  with  great  semantic  dangers  in 
daily  life  if  associated  with  the  lack  of  consciousness  of  abstracting;  or, 
in  other  words,  when  we  confuse  the  orders  of  abstractions.  Indeed,  the 
majority  of  ‘mentally*  ill  are  too  formal  in  their  psycho-logical,  one-, 
two-,  or  few-valued  processes  and  so  cannot  adjust  themselves  to  the 
oo-valued  experiences  of  life.  Formalism  is  only  useful  in  the  search  for, 
and  test  of,  structure ;  but,  in  that  case,  the  consciousness  of  abstracting 
makes  the  attitude  behind  formal  reasoning  oo-valued  and  probable t  so 
that  semantic  disturbances  and  shocks  in  life  are  avoided.  Let  us  be 
simple  about  it:  the  mechanism  of  the  semantic  disturbance,  called 
‘identification*,  or  ‘the  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions*  in  general, 
and  ‘objectification*  in  particular,  is,  to  a  large  extent,  dependent  on  two¬ 
valued  formalism  without  the  consciousness  of  abstracting. 

In  mathematics,  formalism  is  uniquely  useful  and  necessary.  In 
mathematics,  the  formal  point  of  view  is  pressed  so  far  as  to  disclaim 
that  any  meanings,  in  the  ordinary  sense,  have  been  ascribed  to  the 
undefined  terms,  the  emphasis  being  on  the  postulated  relations  between 
the  undefined  terms.  The  last  makes  the  majority  of  mathematicians  able 
to  adjust  themselves,  and  mathematics  extremely  general,  as  it  allows  us 
to  ascribe  to  the  mathematical  postulates  an  indefinite  number  of  mean¬ 
ings  which  satisfy  the  postulates. 

This  fact  is  not  a  defect  of  mathematics ;  quite  the  opposite.  It  is 
the  basis  of  its  tremendous  practical  value.  It  makes  mathematics  a 
linguistic  scheme  which  embodies  the  possibility  of  perfection,  and 
which,  no  doubt,  satisfies  semantically,  at  each  epoch,  the  great  majority 
of  properly  informed  individual  Smiths  and  Browns.  There  is  nothing 
absolute  about  it,  as  all  mathematics  is  ultimately  a  product  of  the  human 
nervous  system,  the  best  product  produced  at  each  stage  of  our  develop- 
ment.  The  fact  that  mathematics  establishes  such  linguistic  relational 
patterns  without  specific  content,  accounts  for  the  generality  of  mathe¬ 
matics  in  applications. 

MATHEMATICS  AND  THE  NERVOUS  SYSTEMS  277 

If  mathematics  had  physical  content  or  a  definite  meaning  ascribed 
to  its  undefined  terms,  such  mathematics  could  be  applied  only  in  the 
given  case  and  not  otherwise.  If,  instead  of  making  the  mathematical 
statement  that  one  and  one  make  two,  without  mentioning  what  the  one 
or  the  two  stands  for,  we  should  establish  that  one  apple  and  one 
apple  make  two  apples,  this  statement  would  not  be  applied  safely  to 
anything  else  but  apples.  The  generality  would  be  lost,  the  validity  of 
the  statement  endangered,  and  we  should  be  deprived  of  the  greatest 
value  of  mathematics.  Such  a  statement  concerning  apples  is  not  a 
mathematical  statement,  but  belongs  to  what  is  called  ‘applied  mathe¬ 
matics*,  which  has  content.  Such  experimental  facts  as  that  one  gallon 
of  water  added  to  one  gallon  of  alcohol  gives  less  than  two  gallons  of 
the  mixture,  do  not  invalidate  the  mathematical  statement  that  one  and 
one  make  two,  which  remains  valid  by  definition.  The  last  mentioned  ex¬ 
periment  with  the  ‘addition*  of  water  to  alcohol  is  a  deep  sub-microscopic 
structural  characteristic  of  the  empirical  world,  which  must  be  discovered 
at  present  by  experiment.  The  most  we  can  say  is  that  we  find  the 
above  mathematical  statement  applicable  in  some  instances,  and  non- 
applicable  in  others. 

Not  assigning  definite  meanings  to  the  undefined  terms,  mathemat¬ 
ical  postulates  have  variable  meanings  and  so  consist  of  propositional 
functions.  Mathematics  must  be  viewed  as  a  manifold  of  patterns  of 
exact  relational  languages,  representing,  at  each  stage,  samples  of  the  best 
working  of  the  human  ‘mind*.  The  application  to  practical  problems 
depends  on  the  ingenuity  of  those  desiring  to  use  such  languages. 

Because  of  these  characteristics,  mathematics,  when  studied  as  a 
form  of  human  behaviour,  gives  us  a  wealth  of  psycho-logical  and 
semantic  data,  usually  entirely  neglected. 

As  postulates  consist  of  propositional  functions  with  undefined 
terms,  all  mathematical  proof  is  formal  and  depends  exclusively  on  the 
form  of  the  premises  and  not  on  special  meanings  which  we  may  assign 
to  our  undefined  terms.  This  applies  to  all  ‘proof*.  ‘Theories*  represent 
linguistic  structures,  and  must  be  proved  on  semantic  grounds  and  never 
by  empirical  ‘facts*.  Experimental  facts  only  make  a  theory  more 
plausible,  but  no  number  of  experiments  can  ‘prove*  a  theory,  A  proof 
belongs  to  the  verbal  level,  the  experimental  facts  do  not;  they  belong  to 
a  different  order  of  abstractions,  not  to  be  reached  by  language,  the 
connecting  link  being  structure,  which,  in  languages,  is  given  by  the 
systems  of  postulates. 

Theories  or  doctrines  are  always  linguistic.  They  formulate  some¬ 
thing  which  is  going  on  inside  our  skin  in  relation  to  what  is  going  on 

V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANGUAGE 

on  the  un-speakable  levels,  and  which  is  not  a  theory.  Theories  are  the 
rational  means  for  a  rational  being  to  be  as  rational  as  he  possibly  can. 
As  a  fact  of  experience,  the  working  of  the  human  nervous  system  is 
such  that  we  have  theories.  Such  was  the  survival  trend ;  and  we  must 
not  only  reconcile  ourselves  with  this  fact,  but  must  also  investigate  the 
structure  of  theories. 

Theories  are  the  result  of  extremely  complex  cyclic  chains  of  nerve 
currents  of  the  human  nervous  system.  Any  semantic  disturbance,  be  it 
a  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions,  or  identification,  or  any  of  their 
progeny,  called  ‘elementalism’,  'absolutism',  'dogmatism',  ‘finalisin'. , 
introduces  some  deviations  or  resistances,  or  semantic  blockages  of  the 
normal  survival  cycles,  and  the  organism  is  at  once  on  the  abnormal 
non-adjustment  path. 

The  structure  of  protoplasm  of  the  simplest  kind,  or  of  the  most 
elaborate  nervous  system,  is  such  that  it  abstracts  and  reacts  in  its  own 
specific  way  to  different  external  and  internal  stimuli. 

Our  ‘experience’  is  based  normally  on  abstractions  and  integrations 
of  different  stimuli  by  different  receptors,  with  different  and  specific 
reactions.  The  eye  produces  its  share,  and  we  may  see  a  stone;  but  the 
eye  does  not  convey  to  us  the  feel  of  weight  of  the  stone,  or  its  tem¬ 
perature,  or  its  hardness,.  To  get  this  new  wisdom,  we  need  other 
receptors  of  an  entirely  different  kind  from  those  the  eye  can  supply. 
If  the  eye  plays  some  role  in  establishing  the  weight,  for  instance,  with¬ 
out  ever  giving  the  actual  feel  of  weight,  it  is  usually  misleading.  If  we 
would  try  to  lift  a  pound  of  lead  and  a  pound  of  feathers,  which  the 
balance  would  register  as  of  equal  weight,  the  pound  of  lead  would  feel 
heavier  to  us  than  the  pound  of  feathers.  The  eye  saw  that  the  pound 
of  lead  is  smaller  in  bulk,  and  so  the  doctrinal,  semantic,  and  muscular 
expectation  was  for  a  smaller  weight,  and  so,  by  contrast,  the  pound 
of  lead  would  appear  unexpectedly  heavy. 

As  the  eye  is  one  of  the  most  subtle  organs,  in  fact,  a  part  of  the 
brain,  science  is  devising  methods  to  bring  all  other  characteristics  of  the 
external  world  to  direct  or  indirect  inspection  of  the  eye.  We  build  bal¬ 
ances,  thermometers,  microscopes,  telescopes,  and  other  instruments,  but 
the  character  and  feel  of  weight,  or  warmth , ,  must  be  supplied  directly 
by  the  special  receptors,  which  uniquely  can  produce  the  special  ‘sensa¬ 
tions'.  The  swinging  of  the  balance,  or  the  rise  of  the  column  of  the 
thermometer,  establishes  most  important  relations ,  but  does  not  give  the 
immediate  specific  and  un-speakable  feel  of  ‘weight’  or  of  ‘warmth’. 
Our  first  and  most  primitive  contact  with  a  stone,  its  feel . ,  is  a  personal 
abstraction  from  the  object,  full  of  characteristics  supplied  by  the 

MATHEMATICS  AND  THE  NERVOUS  SYSTEMS  279 

peculiarities  of  the  special  receptors.  Our  primitive  picture  ‘stone*  is  a 
summary,  an  integration,  of  all  these  separate  ‘sense*  abstractions.  It  is 
an  abstraction  from  many  abstractions,  or  an  abstraction  of  a  higher 
order. 

Theories  are  relational  or  structural  verbal  schemes*  built  by  a 
process  of  high  abstractions  from  many  lower  abstractions,  which  are 
produced  not  only  by  ourselves  but  by  others  (time-binding).  Theories, 
therefore,  represent  the  shortest,  simplest  structural  summaries  and  gen¬ 
eralizations,  or  the  highest  abstractions  from  individual  experience  and 
through  symbolism  of  racial  past  experiences.  Theories  are  mostly  not 
an  individual,  but  a  collective,  product.  They  follow  a  more  subtle  but 
inevitable  semantic  survival  trend,  like  all  life.  Human  races  and  epochs 
which  have  not  revised  or  advanced  their  theories  have  either  perished, 
or  are  perishing. 

The  process  of  abstracting  in  different  orders  being  inherent  in  the 
human  nervous  system,  it  can  neither  be  stopped  nor  abolished  ;  but  it 
can  be  deviated,  vitiated,  and  forced  into  harmful  channels  contrary  to 
the  survival  trend,  particularly  in  connection  with  pathological  s.r.  No 
one  of  us,  even  when  profoundly  ‘mentally*  ill,  is  free  from  theories. 
The  only  selection  we  can  make  is  between  antiquated,  often  primitive- 
made,  theories,  and  modern  theories,  which  always  involve  important 
semantic  factors. 

The  understanding  of  the  above  is  of  serious  importance,  as,  by 
proper  selection  of  theories,  all  wasteful  semantic  disturbances,  which 
lead  even  to  crimes,  and  such  historical  examples  of  human  un-sanity  as 
the  ‘holy  inquisition*,  burning  at  the  stake,  religious  wars,  persecution  of 
science,  the  Tennessee  trial . ,  could  have  been  avoided. 

Whenever  any  one  says  anything ,  he  is  indulging  in  theories.  A 
similar  statement  is  true  of  writing  or  ‘thinking*.  We  must  use  terms, 
and  the  very  selection  of  our  terms  and  the  structure  of  the  language 
selected  reflect  their  structure  on  the  subject  under  discussion.  Besides, 
words  are  not  the  events.  Even  simple  ‘descriptions*,  since  they  involve 
terms,  and  ultimately  undefined  terms,  involve  structural  assumptions, 
postulates,  and  theories,  conscious  or  unconscious — at  present,  mostly 
the  latter. 

It  is  very  harmful  to  sanity  to  teach  a  disregard  for  theories  or 
doctrines  and  theoretical  work,  as  we  can  never  get  away  from  them  as 
long  as  we  are  humans.  If  we  disregard  them,  we  only  build  for  our¬ 
selves  semantic  disturbances.  The  difference  between  morbid  and  not  so 
obviously  morbid  confusions  of  orders  of  abstractions  is  not  very  clear. 
The  strong  affective  components  of  such  semantic  disturbances  must 

V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANGUAGE 

lead  to  absolutism,  dogmatism,  finalism,  and  similar  states,  which  are 
semantic  factors  out  of  which  states  of  un-sanity  are  built. 

We  know  that  we  must  start  with  undefined  terms,  which  may  be 
defined  at  some  other  date  in  other  undefined  terms.  At  a  given  date,  our 
undefined  terms  must  be  treated  as  postulates.  If  we  prefer,  we  may 
call  them  structural  assumptions  or  hypotheses.  From  a  theoretical  point 
of  view,  these  undefined  terms  represent  not  only  postulates  but  also 
variables,  and  so  generate  propositional  functions  and  not  propositions. 
In  mathematics,  these  issues  are  clear  and  simple.  Every  theory  is  ulti¬ 
mately  based  on  postulates  which  consist  of  propositional  functions  con¬ 
taining  variables,  and  which  express  relations,  indicating  the  structure  of 
the  scheme. 

It  appears  that  the  main  importance  of  the  linguistic  higher  order 
abstractions  is  in  their  public  character,  for  they  are  capable  of  being 
transmitted  in  neural  and  extra-neural  forms.  But  our  private  lives  are 
influenced  also  very  much  by  the  lower  order  abstractions,  ‘feelings', 
‘intuitions', .  These  can  be,  should  be,  but  seldom  are,  properly  influenced 
by  the  higher  order  abstractions.  These  ‘feelings'. ,  are  personal,  un¬ 
speakable,  and  so  are  non-transmittable.  For  instance,  we  cannot  trans¬ 
mit  the  actual  feeling  of  pain  when  we  burn  ourselves;  but  we  can 
transmit  the  invariant  relation  of  the  extremely  complex  fire-flesh-nerve- 
pain  manifold.  A  relation  is  present  empirically,  but  also  can  be  expressed 
by  words.  It  seems  important  to  have  means  to  translate  these  higher 
order  abstractions  into  lower,  and  this  will  be  the  subject  of  Part  VII. 

Section  C.  The  psycho-logical  importance  of  the  theory  of  aggregates 
and  the  theory  of  groups. 

Starting  with  the  A  denial  of  identity,  we  were  compelled  to  con¬ 
sider  structure  as  the  only  possible  link  between  the  empirical  and  the 
verbal  worlds.  The  analysis  of  structure  involved  relations  and  m.o  and 
multi-dimensional  order,  and,  ultimately,  has  led  us  to  a  semantic  defini¬ 
tion  of  mathematics  and  numbers.  These  definitions  make  it  obvious 
that  all  mathematics  expresses  general  processes  of  mentation  par  excel¬ 
lence.  We  could  thus  review  all  mathematics  from  this  psycho-logical 
point  of  view,  but  this  would  not  be  profitable  for  our  purpose;  so  we 
will  limit  ourselves  to  a  brief  sketch  connected  with  the  theory  of  aggre¬ 
gates  and  the  theory  of  groups,  because  these  two  fundamental  and  most 
general  theories  formulate  in  a  crisp  form  the  general  psycho-logical 
process,  and  also  show  the  mechanism  by  which  all  languages  (not  only 
mathematics)  have  been  built.  Besides,  with  the  exception  of  a  few 
specialists,  the  general  public  is  not  even  aware  of  the  existence  of  such 

MATHEMATICS  AND  THE  NERVOUS  SYSTEMS  281 

disciplines  which  depart  widely  from  traditional  notions  about  mathe¬ 
matics.  They  represent  most  successful  and  powerful  attempts  at  build- 
in  g  exact  relational  languages  in  subjects  which  are  on  the  border-line 
between  psycho-logics  and  the  traditional  mathematics.  Because  they  are 
exact,  they  have  been  embodied  in  mathematics,  although  they  belong 
just  as  well  to  a  general  science  of  relations,  or  general  semantics,  or 
‘psychology',  or  ‘logic',  or  scientific  linguistics  and  psychophysiology. 
There  are  other  mathematical  disciplines,  as,  for  instance,  analysis  situs, 
or  the  ‘algebra  of  logic'. ,  to  which  the  above  statements  apply ;  but,  for 
our  present  purposes,  we  shall  limit  ourselves  to  the  former  two. 

Dealing  with  the  theory  of  aggregates,  I  will  give  only  a  few  defini¬ 
tions  taken  from  the  Encyclopaedia  Britannica,  with  the  purpose  of 
drawing  the  attention  of  the  ‘psychologists',  and  others,  to  those  psycho¬ 
logical  data. 

The  theory  of  aggregates  underlies  the  theory  of  function.  An 
aggregate,  or  manifold,  or  set,  is  a  system  such  that :  (1)  It  includes  all 
entities  to  which  a  certain  characteristic  belongs;  and  (2)  no  entity 
without  this  characteristic  belongs  to  the  system;  (3)  any  entity  of  the 
system  is  permanently  recognizable  as  distinct  from  other  entities. 

The  separate  entities  which  belong  to  such  a  collection,  system, 
aggregate,  manifold,  or  set  are  called  elements.  We  assume  the  possibil¬ 
ity  of  selecting  at  pleasure,  by  a  definite  process  or  law,  one  or  more 
elements  of  any  aggregate  A ,  which  would  form  another  aggregate  B , . 

The  above  few  lines  express  how  the  human  ‘thought'  processes 
work  and  how  languages  were  built  up.  It  is  true  that  the  exactness 
imposes  limitations,  and  so  the  mathematical  theories  are  not  expressed 
in  the  usual  antiquated  ‘psychological'  terms,  although  they  describe  one 
of  the  most  important  psycho-logical  processes. 

Lately,  the  theory  of  aggregates  has  led  to  a  weighty  question: 
Does  one  of  the  fundamental  laws  of  old  ‘logic' ;  namely,  the  two-valued 
law  of  the  ‘excluded  third'  (A  is  either  B  or  not  B),  apply  in  all 
instances  ?  Or  is  it  valid  in  some  instances  and  invalid  in  others  ? 

This  problem  is  the  psycho-logical  kernel  of  the  new  revision  of 
the  foundation  of  mathematics,  which  has  lately  been  considerably 
advanced  by  Professor  Lukasiewicz  and  Tarski  with  their  many-valued 
‘logic',  which  merges  ultimately  with  the  mathematical  theory  of  proba¬ 
bility  ;  and  on  different  grounds  has  perhaps  been  solved  in  the  present 
non~elt  ^-system. 

The  notion  of  a  group  is  psychologically  still  more  important.  It  is 
connected  with  the  notions  of  transformation  and  invariance.  Without 
giving  formal  definitions  unnecessary  for  our  purpose,  we  may  say  that 

V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANGUAGE 

if  we  consider  a  set  of  elements  a,  b>  c. ,  and  we  have  a  rule  for  combin¬ 
ing  them,  say  O,  and  if  the  result  of  combining  any  two  members  of  the 
set  is  itself  a  member  of  the  set,  such  aggregate  is  said  to  have  the 
‘group  property*. 

Thus,  if  we  take  numbers  or  colours,  for  instance,  and  the  rule 
which  we  accept  is  ‘+*,  we  say  that  a  number  or  a  colour  is  transformed 
by  this  rule  into  a  number  or  a  colour,  and  so  both  possess  the  ‘group 
property*.  Obviously,  by  performing  the  given  operation,  we  have  trans¬ 
formed  one  element  into  another;  yet  some  characteristics  of  our  ele¬ 
ments  have  remained  invariant  under  transformation.  Thus,  if  1  is  a 
number  and  2  is  a  number,  the  operation  (+*  transforms  1  into  3,  since 
1  H”  2  **=  3 ;  but  3  has  the  character  of  being  a  number ;  so  this  charac¬ 
teristic  is  preserved  or  remains  invariant.  Similarly,  with  colours,  if  we 
add  colours,  these  are  transformed,  but  remain  colours,  and  so  both  sets 
have  the  ‘group  property*.  Keyser  suggests  that  the  ‘mental*  processes 
have  the  group  property,  which  is  undoubtedly  true.1 

The  role  this  theory  plays  in  our  language  is  of  great  importance, 
because  in  it  we  find  a  method  of  search  for  structure,  and  a  method  by 
which  we  can  establish  a  similarity  of  structure  between  the  un-speakable 
objective  level  and  the  verbal  level,  based  on  invariance  of  relations 
which  are  found  or  discovered  in  both. 

The  role  of  groups  in  physical  theory  is  best  described  by  quoting 
Professor  Rainich.  (Remarks  in  brackets  are  mine.)  ‘A  physicist,  we 
may  take  it,  is  a  person  who  measures  according  to  certain  rules.  Let  us 
denote  by  a  the  number  he  obtained  in  a  given  situation  by  applying  the 
rule  number  one,  by  b  the  number  obtained  in  the  same  situation  by 
measuring  according  to  rule  number  two  and  so  on  ( a  may  be  e.g.  the 
volume,  b  the  pressure,  c  the  temperature  of  gas  in  a  given  container). 
The  physicist  finds  further  that  the  results  of  measurements  of  the  same 
kind  undertaken  in  different  situations  satisfy  certain  relations,  we 
may  write,  for  instance : 

r(afb)  —  c. 

‘A  mathematician  is  busy  deducing  from  some  given  propositions 
other  propositions ;  this  usually  leads  to  numbers  which  we  may  call  A , 
C,  .  .  .  .  These  numbers  also  satisfy  certain  relations,  say 

R  ( A,B )  =  C. 

‘Then  comes,  as  Professor  Weyl  says,  a  messenger,  a  go-between 
who  may  be  a  mathematician  or  a  physicist,  or  both,  and  says :  “If  you 
establish  a  correspondence  between  the  physical  quantities  and  the  mathe¬ 
matical  quantities,  if  you  assign  A  to  a,  B  to  b,  etc.,  the  same  relations 

MATHEMATICS  AND  TIIE  NERVOUS  SYSTEMS  283 

hold  for  the  physical  quantities  as  for  the  corresponding  mathematical 
quantities  so  that  Rs~r”  [Similarity  of  structure.] 

Tn  the  course  bf  time  new  procedures  of  measurement  are  invented, 
some  physical  relations  do  not  find  their  counterpart  in  the  mathematical 
theory,  the  mathematical  theory  has  to  be  patched  up  by  introducing  new 
quantities  till  too  many  quantities  appear  in  it  which  do  not  correspond 
to  physical  quantities;  then  comes  the  phenomenological  point  of  view 
and  sweeps  the  theory  out  of  applied  mathematics — the  theory  becomes 
pure  mathematics  once  more,  and  physicists  begin  to  look  around  for  a 
new  theory.  Everybody  can  find  examples  for  this  situation;  it  is 
enough  to  mention  the  Bohr  atom  which  was  not  even  mentioned  today 
only  fifteen  years  after  its  introduction. 

‘However  the  theory  of  groups  which  is  being  applied  to  physics 
is  not  just  one  of  many  mathematical  theories  of  the  character  described 
above ;  its  application  is  of  a  far  more  fundamental  nature  and  we  shall 
be  able  to  indicate  what  it  is  by  analysing  further  the  scheme  outlined 
above. 

Tt  may  happen,  and  in  fact  it  happens  often,  that  the  same  mathe¬ 
matical  theory  can  be  applied  to  the  same  physical  facts  in  more  than  one 
way ;  for  instance,  instead  of  assigning  to  the  physical  quantities  a,b ,  .  .  . 
the  mathematical  quantities  A,B,  ...  we  might  have  assigned  to  them 
,Br ,  .  .  .  with  the  same  results,  that  is,  the  relations  for  physical  quan¬ 
tities  are  the  same  as  for  the  mathematical  quantities  corresponding  to 
them  now  (think  of  space  considered  from  the  experimental  point  of 
view — and  of  coordinate  geometry  ;  different  ways  of  establishing  a 
correspondence  result  from  different  choices  of  coordinate  axes).  If 
this  happens  it  means  that  the  mathematical  theory  possesses  a  peculiar 
property,  namely,  that  if  A'  is  substituted  for  A,  Bf  for  B  and  so  on,  no 
relation  of  the  type  R(A,B)=C  which  was  correct  before  the 
substitution  is  destroyed ;  in  other  words,  there  are  substitutions  or  trans¬ 
formations  for  which  all  relations  are  invariant.  All  such  transforma¬ 
tions  constitute  what  we  call  a  group ;  the  existence  and  the  properties  of 
such  a  group  present  a  very  important  characteristic  of  the  mathematical 
theory.  Moreover  it  is  clear  that  if  two  different  mathematical  theories 
can  be  applied — in  the  sense  described  above — to  the  same  physical 
theory,  the  groups  of  these  two  theories  will  be  essentially  the  same,  so 
that  the  groups  reflect  some  of  the  most  fundamental  properties  of 
physical  systems/2 

The  connection  between  groups  and  structure  is  described  by 
Professor  Shaw  as  follows :  The  first  branch  of  dynamic  mathematics 
is  the  theory  of  operations.  It  includes  the  general  theory  of  operators 

V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANHUACE 

of  any  type  and  in  particular  the  theory  of  groups  of  operators.  The 
structure  of  such  groups  is  evidently  a  study  of  form.  It  may  often  be 
exemplified  in  some  concrete  manner.  Thus  the  groups  of  geometric 
crystals  exemplify  the  structure  of  thirty-two  groups  of  a  discontinuous 
character,  and  the  230  space-groups  of  the  composition  of  crystals 
exemplify  the  corresponding  infinite  discontinuous  groups.  The  study 
of  the  composition  series  of  groups,  the  subgroups  and  their  relations, 
whether  in  the  case  of  substitution  groups,  linear  groups,  geometric 
groups,  or  continuous  groups,  is  a  study  of  form.  Also,  the  study  of  the 
construction  of  groups,  whether  by  generators,  or  by  the  combination  of 
groups,  or  in  other  ways,  is  also  a  study  of  structure  or  form.  The 
calculus  of  operations  in  general,  with  such  particular  forms  as  differ¬ 
ential  operators,  integral  operators,  difference  operators,  distributive 
operations  in  general,  is  for  the  most  part  a  study  of  structure.  In  so  far 
as  any  of  these  is  concerned  with  the  synthesis  of  compound  forms  from 
simple  elements,  it  is  to  be  classed  as  a  study  of  form,  as  the  term  is 
here  used/3  ( 

In  the  notion  of  a  group,  we  have  become  acquainted  with  two 
terms ;  namely,  transformation  and  invariance.  The  first  implies  ‘change* ; 
the  other,  a  lack  of  ‘change*  or  ‘permanence*.  Both  of  these  characteris¬ 
tics  are  semantically  fundamental,  but  involve  serious  complexities. 

The  world,  ourselves  included,  can  be  considered  as  processes  which 
can  be  analysed  in  terms  of  transformed  stages  with  all  their  derivative 
notions.  In  the  objective  world,  ‘change*  is  ever  present  and  is,  perhaps, 
the  most  important  structural  characteristic  of  our  experience.  But 
when  a  highly  developed  nervous  system,  a  process  itself,  is  acted  upon 
by  other  processes,  such  nervous  system  discovers,  at  some  stage  of  its 
development,  a  certain  relative  permanence,  which,  at  a  still  later  stage,  is 
formulated  as  invariance  of  function  and  relations.  The  latter  formula¬ 
tion  is  non-el  because  it  can  be  discovered  empirically,  which  means  by 
the  lower  nerve  centres,  but  also  is  the  main  necessity  and  means  of 
operating  of  the  higher  nerve  centres,  so-called  ‘thought*.  All  that  we 
usually  call  &  process  of  ‘association*  is  nothing  else  than  a  process  of 
relating ,  a  direct  consequence  of  the  structure  of  the  nervous  system, 
where  stimuli  are  registered  in  a  certain  four-dimensional  order,  which, 
on  the  psycho-logical  level,  take  the  form  of  relations.  From  this  point 
of  view,  it  is  natural  that  the  higher  nerve  centres,  as  a  limit  of  integrat¬ 
ing  processes,  should  produce  and  discover  invariance  of  relations,  which 
appears  then  as  the  supreme  product  and  so,  ultimately,  a  necessity  of 
the  activity  of  the  higher  centres.  Obviously,  if  the  invariance  of  rela¬ 
tions  has  any  objective  counterpart  whatsoever  in  the  external  world, 

MATI I  KM  ATK'S  AND  T1IK  NKRVOUS  SYSTKMS  285 

this  invariance  is  impressed  on  the  nervous  system  more  than  other  char¬ 
acteristics  ;  and  so,  at  a  certain  stage,  a  nervous  system  which  is  capable 
of  producing  and  using  a  highly  developed  symbolism,  must  discover 
and  formulate  this  invariance. 

It  seems  that  relations ,  because  of  the  possibility  of  discovering 
them  and  their  invariance  in  both  worlds,  are,  in  a  way,  more  ‘objective’ 
than  so-called  objects.  We  may  have  a  science  of  ‘invariance  of  rela¬ 
tions’,  but  we  could  not  have  a  science  of  permanence  of  things ;  and  the 
older  doctrines  of  the  permanence  of  our  institutions  must  also  be 
revised.  Under  modern  conditions,  which  change  rather  rapidly  nowa¬ 
days,  obviously,  some  relations  between  humans  alter,  and  so  the  institu¬ 
tions  must  be  revised.  If  we  want  their  invariance ,  we  must  build  them 
on  such  invariant  relations  between  humans  as  are  not  altered  by  the 
transformations.  This  present  work,  indeed,  is  concerned  with  investi¬ 
gating  such  relations,  and  they  are  found  in  the  mechanism  of  time¬ 
binding,  which,  once  stated,  becomes  quite  obvious  after  reflection. 

As  Professor  Shaw  says  :  ‘We  find  in  the  invariants  of  mathematics 
a  source  of  objective  truth.  So  far  as  the  creations  of  the  mathematician 
fit  the  objects  of  nature,  just  so  far  must  the  inherent  invariants  point 
to  objective  reality.  Indeed,  much  of  the  value  of  mathematics  in  its 
applications  lies  in  the  fact  that  its  invariants  have  an  objective  meaning. 
When  a  geometric  invariant  vanishes,  it  points  to  a  very  definite  charac¬ 
ter  in  the  corresponding  class  of  figures.  When  a  physical  invariant 
vanishes  or  has  particular  values,  there  must  correspond  to  it  physical 
facts.  When  a  set  of  equations  that  represent  physical  phenomena  have 
a  set  of  invariants  or  covariants  which  they  admit,  then  the  physical 
phenomena  have  a  corresponding  character,  and  the  physicist  is  forced 
to  explain  the  law  resulting.  The  unnoticed  invariants  of  the  electro¬ 
magnetic  equations  have  overturned  physical  theories,  and  have  threat¬ 
ened  philosophy.  Consequently  the  importance  of  invariants  cannot  be 
too  much  magnified,  from  a  practical  point  of  view’.4 

It  should  be  noticed  that  the  non-el  character  of  the  terms  relation, 
invariance  . ,  which  apply  both  to  ‘senses’  and  ‘mind’,  is  particularly  impor¬ 
tant,  as  it  allows  us  to  apply  them  to  all  processes ;  and  that  such  a  lan¬ 
guage  is  similar  in  structure  not  only  to  the  world  around  us,  but  also  to 
our  nervous  processes.  Thus,  a  process  of  being  iron,  or  a  rock,  or  a 
table,  or  you,  or  me,  may  be  considered,  for  practical  purposes,  as  a 
temporal  and  average  invariance  of  function  on  the  sub-microscopic  level. 
Under  the  action  of  other  processes,  the  process  becomes  structurally 
transformed  into  different  relational  complexes,  and  we  die,  and  a  table 
or  rock  turns  into  dust,  and  so  the  invariance  of  this  function  vanishes. 

V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANGUAGE 

The  notion  of  a  function  involves  the  notion  of  a  variable.  The 
functional  notion  has  been  extended  to  the  propositional  function  and, 
finally,  to  the  doctrinal  function  and  system- function.  The  term  trans¬ 
formation  is  closely  related  to  that  of  function  and  relation.  This  notion 
is  based  on  our  capacity  to  associate,  or  relate,  any  two  or  more  ‘mental* 
entities.  We  can,  for  instance,  associate  a  with  b  or  b  with  a.  We  say 
that  we  have  transformed  a  into  b ,  or  vice  versa. 

An  excellent  example  of  transformation,  given  by  Keyser,  is  an 
ordinary  dictionary,  which  would  be  genuinely  mathematical  if  it  were 
more  precise.  In  a  dictionary,  every  word  is  transformed  into  its  verbal 
meaning,  and  vice  versa.  A  telephone  directory  is  another  example. 
Quite  obviously,  the  term  ‘transformation*  has  far-reaching  implica¬ 
tions.  If  a  is  transformed  into  b,  this  implies  that  there  is  a  relation 
between  a  and  b  which  is  being  established,  by  the  fact  of  transforma¬ 
tion,  Once  a  relation  is  established,  we  have  a  propositional  function  of 
two  or  more  variables  which  define  an  extensional  set  of  all  elements 
connected  by  this  relation.5  i 

We  see  that  these  three  terms  are  inseparably  united  and  are  three 
aspects  of  one  psycho-logical  process.  If  we  have  a  transformation,  we 
have  a  function  and  a  relation ;  if  we  have  a  function,  we  have  a  relation 
and  a  transformation ;  if  we  have  a  relation,  we  have  a  transformation 
and  a  function.  Transformation,  as  we  see,  is  a  psycho-logical  term  of 
action.  A  relation  has  a  psycho-logically  mixed  character.  A  proposi¬ 
tional  function  is  a  static  statement,  on  record,  with  blanks  for  the  values 
of  the  variables.  In  it  the  form  is  invariant,  but  it  may  take  an  indefinite 
number  of  values.  The  extensional  manifold  of  the  values  for  the  vari¬ 
able  is  static,  given  once  for  all  in  a  given  context.  It  is  extensional 
and,  therefore,  may  be  empirical  and  experimental. 

Let  us  take  as  an  example,  for  instance,  the  transformation  of  a  set 
of  integers  1,  2,  3 , .  Let  us  suppose  that  the  given  law  of  transformation 
is  given  by  the  function  2x .  The  result  would  be  the  manifold  of 

even  integers  2,  4,  6 , .  We  see  that  integers  are  transformed  into  integers ; 
therefore,  the  characteristic  of  being  an  integer  is  preserved;  in  other 
words,  this  characteristic  is  an  invariant  under  the  given  transformation 
y  —  2x,  but  the  values  of  the  integers  are  not  preserved. 

The  theory  of  invariance  is  an  important  branch  of  mathematics, 
made  famous  of  late  through  the  work  of  Einstein.  Einstein  fulfilled 
the  dearest  dream  of  Riemann  and  attained  the  methodological  and  scien¬ 
tific  ideal,  that  a  ‘law  of  nature*  should  be  formulated  in  such  a  manner 
as  to  be  invariant  under  groups  of  transformations.  Such  a  semantic 
ideal,  once  stated,  cannot  be  denied ;  it  expresses  exactly  a  necessity  of 

MAT  1 1 KMATICS  AND  TI-IK  NERVOUS  SYSTEMS  287 

the  proper  working  of  the  human  nervous  system.  In  fact,  a  ‘law*  of 
nature  represents  nothing  else  than  a  statement  of  the  invariance  of  some 
relations.  When  the  Einstein  criterion  is  applied,  it  renders  most  of 
the  old  ‘natural  laws'  invalid,  as  they  cannot  stand  the  test  of  invari¬ 
ance.  The  older  ‘universal  laws'  then  appear  as  local  private  gossips, 
true  for  one  observer  and  false  for  another. 

The  method  of  the  theory  of  invariance  gives  us  the  trend  of  rela¬ 
tions  that  abide,  and  so  expresses  important  psycho-logical  characteristics 
of  the  human  ‘mind'.  Its  further  significance  is  revealed  by  Keyser  in 
the  suggestion  that  when  a  group  of  transformations  leaves  some  speci¬ 
fied  psycho-logical  activity  invariant,  it  defines  perfectly  some  actual  or 
potential  branch  of  science,  some  actual  or  potential  doctrine.® 

We  all  know  how  deeply  rooted  in  us  is  the  feeling,  the  longing  for 
stability,  how  worried  we  are  when  things  become  unstable.  Worries 
and  fear  are  destructive  to  semantic  health  and  should  be  taken  into 
account  in  a  theory  of  sanity.  A  similar  semantic  urge  apparently 
moved  mathematicians  when  they  worked  out  the  theory  of  invariance ; 
it  was  a  formulation  of  a  necessity  of  the  activities  of  the  human  ner¬ 
vous  system.  That  similar  semantic  methods,  if  applied,  would  give 
similar  results  in  our  daily  lives,  scarcely  needs  to  be  emphasized. 

We  have  already  spoken  of  the  mathematical  theory  of  invariance 
as  a  mathematical  species  of  a  semantic  theory  of  universal  agreement. 
Similarly,  in  a  ^-system  based  on  relations  and  structure,  it  is  possible 
to  formulate  a  theory  of  universal  agreement  which  would  be  structur¬ 
ally  impossible  in  the  ^-system,  and  so  the  dreams  of  Leibnitz  become 
a  sober  reality ;  but  we  must  first  re-educate  our  s.r. 

Section  D.  Similarity  in  structure  of  mathematics  and  of  our  nervous 
system. 

In  the  chapter  on  the  Semantics  of  the  Differential  Calculus,  the 
fundamental  notions  and  method  of  this  calculus  are  explained.  Here 
we  may  say,  briefly,  that  it  consists  in  stratifying,  or  expanding  into  a 
series,  of  an  interval  of  any  sort  which  proceeded  by  large  steps.  The 
large  steps  are  divided  into  a  great  number  of  smaller  and  smaller  steps, 
which,  in  the  limit,  when  the  numbers  of  steps  become  infinite,  take  on 
the  aspect  of  ‘continuity*  so  that  we  can  study  the  ‘rate  of  change*. 
When  ‘time'  is  taken  into  consideration,  the  dynamic  may  be  translated 
into  static,  and  vice  versa;  processes  can  be  analysed  at  any  stage,. 
This  short  description  is  far  from  exact  or  exhaustive;  I  emphasize 
only  in  an  intuitive  way  what  is  of  main  semantic  importance  for  our 
purpose. 

V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANGUAGE 

The  main  object  of  the  present  chapter  is  to  explain  that  the  struc¬ 
ture  of  the  human  nervous  system  is  such  that,  on  some  levels,  we 
produce  dynamic  abstractions ;  on  others,  static.  As  the  organism  works 
as-a-whole,  for  its  optimum  working,  and,  therefore,  for  sanity,  we  need 
a  language,  a  method,  which  may  be  translated  into  a  s.r  by  which  to 
translate  the  dynamic  into  the  static,  and  vice  versa ;  and  such  a  language, 
such  a  method,  is  produced  and  supplied  by  mathematicians.  To  some 
readers,  these  remarks  may  appear  so  obvious  as  to  make  it  unnecessary 
to  write  them,  but  I  have  found,  through  personal  observation  of 
reactions  of  different  individuals,  and  by  a  careful  survey  of  the  litera¬ 
ture  of  the  subject,  that  even  many  mathematicians  and  physicists  do 
not  have  this  s.r  in  all  problems — or,  at  least,  they  do  not  know  how 
to  apply  it. 

In  Part  VII,  elementary  A  methods  are  worked  out,  which  supply 
the  neurological  semantic  benefits  of  the  calculus,  very  easily  imparted  to 
even  small  children  without  any  mathematical  technique ,  and  establishing 
in  them  a  mathematical  attitude  toward  all  language  in  general,  training 
them  in  the  only  structural  psycho-logics  of  sanity ;  namely,  that  of  the 
calculus,  which  thus  becomes  the  foundation  of  healthy  and  normal 
human  s.r .  And  this,  let  us  repeat  again,  without  any  mathematical  tech¬ 
nique.  We  find,  also,  that  there  are  simple  and  physiological  means,  based 
on  structure,  of  training  our  s.r  and  imparting  the  feel  for  the  structural 
stratification  inherent  in  the  consciousness  of  abstracting. 

To  start  with,  let  me  mention  briefly  a  quite  unexpected,  unconscious, 
structural  biological  characteristic  of  mathematics;  namely,  its  (in  the 
main)  non-el%  organism-as-a- whole  character. 

From  the  time  of  Aristotle,  biologists,  physiologists,  neurologists, 
‘psychologists',  psychiatrists  and  others  have  spoken  a  great  deal  about  the 
organism-as-a-whole ;  yet,  they  have  not  seemed  to  realize  that  if  they 
produce  el  terms,  they  cannot  apply  the  non~el  principle. 

It  will  probably  not  be  an  exaggeration  to  say  that  the  majority  of 
mathematicians  have  never  heard  of  this  principle,  and  that,  if  they 
have,  they  paid  no  attention  to  it;  yet ,  in  practice,  they  have  applied  it 
very  thoroughly.  The  main  mathematical  terms  are  non-elt  organism-as^ 
a-whole  terms  which  apply  to  ‘senses'  as  well  as  to  ‘mind'.  For  instance, 
relation,  order,  difference,  variable,  function,  transformation,  invariance . , 
can  mostly  be  seen  as  well  as  ‘thought'  of.  The  use  of  such  terms  pre¬ 
vents  our  speculation  from  degenerating  into  purely  el  speculations  on 
words,  a  process  always  closely  related  to  the  morbid  semantic  manifes¬ 
tations  of  the  ‘mentally’  ill.  and  obviously  based  on  the  pathological 
confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions,  involving  inappropriate  evaluation. 

MAT1 IKMAT1CS  AND  THE  NKRVOUS  SYSTEMS  289 

This  fact  alone  is  of  serious  importance,  as  it  indicates  that  mathe¬ 
matics  is  a  language  of  similar  structure  to  the  structure  of  organisms 
and  is  a  correct  language,  not  only  neurologically,  but  also  biologically . 
This  characteristic  of  mathematics,  quite  unexpectedly  discovered,  made 
the  fusion  of  geometry  and  physics  possible.  It  underlies,  also,  the 
theory  of  space-time  and  the  Einstein  theory.  It  will  be  seen  later  that 
it  has  also  serious  psycho-neurological  importance. 

It  was  already  emphasized  that  the  existing  'psychologies’  are  ani¬ 
malistic  or  metaphysical,  because  either  they  disregard  one  of  the  most 
unique  human  characteristics,  such  as  the  behaviour  called  mathematiz- 
ing,  or  they  indulge  in  speculations  on,  and  in,  el  terms.  It  was  suggested 
that  no  human  'psychologist*  can  actually  perform  his  official  task  unless 
he  is  an  equipped  student  of  mathematics.  Unless  we  actually  apply  the 
non-el  principle,  and  take  into  account  that  the  structure  of  languages 
introduces  implications,  unconscious  in  the  main,  and  that  no  man  is  ever 
free  from  some  doctrines  and  some  so-called  'logical’  processes  involving 
physiological  and  semantic  concomitants,  no  general  theory  of  human 
'psychology’  can  be  produced. 

The  above  solves  a  very  knotty  semantic  problem,  for  we  see  that  if 
we  apply  the  non-el  principle,  any  'psychology’  on  the  human  level  must 
become  psycho-logics,  though  the  old  term  ‘psychology’  could  be  retained 
as  applying  to  animal  researches  only.  The  very  name  'psychology’,  or 
the  'theory  or  science  of  mind’,  is  obviously  el,  and  treats  ‘mind’  as  an 
objective  separate  entity.  As  these  results  were  originally  reached  inde¬ 
pendently,  it  is  interesting  to  notice  that  the  modem  methods  and  the 
application  of  the  structural  positive  knowledge  1933  lead  to  very  many 
analogies  and  similarities,  though  this,  after  all,  might  be  expected. 

Notice  the  hyphen  which,  out  of  the  el  and  delusional  objectified 
‘space’  and  ‘time’,  made  the  einsteinian  space-time  a  language  of  non-el 
structure  similar  to  the  world  around  us ;  and  the  hyphen  which  out  of  el 
‘psychology’  makes  a  non-el  human  discipline  of  psycho-logics.  It  seems 
that  a  little  dash  here  and  there  may  be  of  serious  semantic  importance 
when  we  deal  with  symbolism. 

To  facilitate  exposition,  it  is  useful  to  stress,  in  the  present  section, 
the  neurological  and  psychiatrical  side,  as  an  outline  of  the  methods  of 
the  calculus,  and  related  subjects  will,  of  necessity,  require  separate 
treatment. 

When  rats  are  trained  to  perform  a  simple  experiment  requiring 
some  'mentality*  and  afterwards  a  large  part  of  the  cerebral  cortex  is 
removed,  their  training  may  be  wholly  lost.  If  such  decorticated  rats  are 
trained  again,  they  re-acquire  the  habit  as  readily  as  before.  It  appears 

V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANGUAGE 

that,  with  rats,  the  cortex  is  not  essential  for  these  learning  processes. 
They  ‘learn’  as  well,  or  nearly  as  well,  with  their  sub-cortical  and  thal¬ 
amic  regions.7  In  what  follows,  to  avoid  misstatements,  I  will  use  the 
rather  vague  term,  yet  sufficient  for  my  purpose,  ‘thalamic  region*  or 
‘lower  centres’  instead  of  more  specific  terms,  the  use  of  which  would 
complicate  the  exposition  unnecessarily.  With  dogs,  apes,  and  men,  the 
situation  is  increasingly  different.  Their  nervous  systems  are  more  dif¬ 
ferentiated.  Their  functional  interchangeability  is  impaired.  In  the  most 
complex  human  brain  there  still  exists  some  interchangeability  of  func¬ 
tion.  When  an  arm,  for  instance,  is  paralysed  through  a  brain-lesion,  the 
arm  may  re-acquire  a  nearly  normal  function,  though  there  is  no  regen¬ 
eration  of  the  destroyed  brain  tissue.  However,  the  interchangeability  is 
less  pronounced  than  in  the  lower  brains.  There  seems  to  be  no  doubt 
that  the  thalamic  regions  are  not  only  a  vestibule  through  which  all  im¬ 
pulses  from  the  receptors  have  to  pass  in  order  to  reach  the  cortex,  but 
also  that  the  affective  characteristics  are  strictly  connected  with  processes 
in  these  regions.  It  seems  that  some  very  primitive  and  simple  associa¬ 
tions  can  be  carried  on  by  the  thalamic  regions. 

The  cortex  receives  its  material  as  elaborated  by  the  thalamus.  The 
abstractions  of  the  cortex  are  abstractions  from  abstractions  and  so 
ought  to  be  called  abstractions  of  higher  order.  In  neurology,  similarly, 
the  neurons  first  excited  are  called  of  ‘first  order’ ;  and  the  succeeding 
members  of  the  series  are  called  neurons  of  the  ‘second  order’,.  Such 
terminology  is  structurally  similar  to  the  inherent  structure  and  function 
of  the  nervous  system.  The  receptors  are  in  direct  contact  with  the  out¬ 
side  world  and  convey  their  excitation  and  nerve  currents  to  the  lower 
nerve  centres,  where  these  impulses  are  further  elaborated  and  then 
abstracted  by  the  higher  centres. 

According  to  our  daily  experience  and  scientific  knowledge,  the  out¬ 
side  world  is  an  ever-changing  chain  of  events,  a  kind  of  flux;  and, 
naturally,  those  nerve  centres  in  closest  contact  with  the  outside  world 
must  react  in  a  shifting  way.  These  reactions  are  easily  moved  one  way 
or  another,  as  in  our  ‘emotions’,  ‘affective  moods’,  ‘attention’,  ‘concen¬ 
tration’,  ‘evaluation’,  and  other  such  semantic  responses.  In  these  pro¬ 
cesses,  some  associative  or  relational  circuits  exist,  and  there  may  be 
some  very  low  kind  of  ‘thinking*  on  this  level.  Birds  have  a  well-devel¬ 
oped,  or,  perhaps,  over-developed,  thalamus  but  under-developed  and 
poor  cortex,  which  may  be  connected  with  their  stupidity  and  excitability. 

Something  similar  could  be  said  about  the  ‘thalamic  thinking’  in 
humans;  those  individuals  who  overwork  their  thalamus  and  use  their 
cortex  too  little  are  ‘emotional*  and  stupid.  This  statement  is  not  exag- 

MATHEMATICS  AND  THE  NERVOUS  SYSTEMS  291 

gerated,  because  there  are  experimental  data  to  show  how  through  a 
psycho-neural  training  the  s.r,  in  some  cases,  can  be  re-educated,  and 
that  with  the  elimination  of  the  semantic  disturbances  there  is  a  marked 
development  of  poise,  balance,  and  a  proportional  increase  of  critical 
judgement,  and  so  ‘intelligence’.  Idiots,  imbeciles,  and  morons  are  usually 
‘emotional’  and  excitable,  as  well  as  deficient  in  their  ‘mental’  processes. 
A  similar  characteristic  can  be  found  in  other  unclassified  ‘mentally’  de¬ 
ficient,  and  their  name  is  legion — a  characteristic  strictly  connected  with, 
and  often  produced  by,  disturbances  of  the  s.r.  When  these  shifting, 
dynamic,  affective,  thalamic-region,  lower  order  abstractions  are  ab¬ 
stracted  again  by  the  higher  centres,  these  new  abstractions  are  further 
removed  from  the  outside  world  and  must  be  somehow  different. 

In  fact,  they  are  different;  and  one  of  the  most  characteristic  dif¬ 
ferences  is  that  they  have  lost  their  shifting  character.  These  new 
abstractions  are  relatively  static.  It  is  true  that  one  may  be  supplanted 
by  another,  but  they  do  not  change.  In  this  fact  lies  the  tremendous 
value  and  danger  of  this  mechanism,  as  disclosed  clearly  by  the  disturb¬ 
ances  of  the  s.r.  The  value  is  chiefly  in  the  fact  that  such  higher  order 
abstractions  represent  a  perfected  kind  of  memory,  which  can  be  recalled 
exactly  in  the  form  as  it  was  originally  produced.  For  instance,  the 
circle,  defined  as  the  locus  of  points  in  a  plane  at  equal  distance  from  a 
given  point  called  the  centre,  remains  permanent  as  long  as  we  wish  to 
use  this  definition.  We  can,  therefore,  recall  it  perfectly,  analyse  it . , 
without  losing  the  definiteness  and  the  stability  of  this  memory.  Thus, 
critical  analysis,  and,  therefore,  progress,  becomes  possible.  Compare  this 
perfected  memory,  which  may  last  indefinitely  unchanged,  with  memories 
of  ‘emotions*  which,  whether  dim  or  clear,  are  always  distorted.  We  see 
that  the  first  are  reliable,  that  the  others  are  not. 

Another  most  important  characteristic  of  the  higher  order  abstrac¬ 
tions  is  that,  although  of  neural  origin,  they  may  be  preserved  and  used 
over  and  over  again  in  extra-neural  forms,  as  recorded  in  books  and 
otherwise.  This  fact  is  never  fully  appreciated  from  a  neurological  point 
of  view.  Neural  products  are  stored  up  or  preserved  in  extra-neural 
form,  and  they  can  be  put  back  in  the  nervous  system  as  active  neural 
processes.  The  above  represents  a  fundamental  mechanism  of  time¬ 
binding  which  becomes  overwhelmingly  important,  provided  we  discover 
the  physiological  mechanism  of  regulating  the  s.r,  on  the  one  hand,  and 
discover  the  mechanism  by  which  these  extra-neural  factors  can  be  made 
physiologically  effective,  on  the  other. 

If  humans  are  characterized  by  the  fact  that  they  build  up  this 
cumulative  affair  called  ‘civilization*,  this  is  possible  through  those  higher 

V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANGUAGE 

order  abstractions  and  the  time-binding  ability  to  extend  our  nervous 
system  by  extra-neural  means,  which,  in  the  meantime,  may  play  a  most 
important  neural  role  and  become  active  nervous  impulses.  The  last  is 
only  possible  if  some  abstractions  are  static,  and  so  can  be  recorded, 
leading  ultimately  to  further  extensions  of  the  human  nervous  system 
by  extra-neural  means,  such  as  microscopes,  telescopes,  and  practically 
all  modern  scientific  instruments,  books,  and  other  records. 

To  illustrate  what  has  been  said  here,  I  know  of  no  better  example 
than  is  found  in  moving  pictures.  When  we  watch  a  moving  picture 
representing  some  life  occurrence,  our  ‘emotions*  are  aroused,  we  ‘live 
through*  the  drama;  but  the  details,  in  the  main,  are  blurred,  and  a 
short  time  after  seeing  it  either  we  forget  it  all  or  in  parts,  or  our 
memory  falsifies  most  effectively  what  was  seen.  It  is  easy  to  verify 
the  above  experimentally  by  seeing  one  picture  twice  or  three  times, 
with  an  interval  of  a  few  days  between  each  seeing.  The  picture  was 
‘moving*,  all  was  changing,  shifting,  dynamic,  similar  to  the  world  and 
our  feelings  on  the  un-speakable  levels.  The  impressions  were  vague, 
shifting,  non-lasting,  and  what  was  left  of  it  was  mostly  coloured  by  the 
individual  mood.,  while  seeing  the  moving  picture.  Naturally,  under 
such  conditions,  there  is  little  possibility  of  a  rational  scientific  analysis 
of  a  situation. 

But  if  we  stop  the  moving  film  which  ran,  say,  thirty  minutes,  and 
analyse  the  static  and  extensional  series  of  small  pictures  on  the  reel,  we 
find  that  the  drama  which  so  stirred  our  ‘emotions*  in  its  moving  aspect 
becomes  a  series  of  slightly  different  static  pictures,  each  difference 
between  the  given  jerk  or  grimace  being  a  measurable  entity,  establish¬ 
ing  relations  which  last  indefinitely. 

The  moving  picture  represents  the  usually  brief  processes  going  on 
in  the  lower  nerve  centres,  ‘close  to  life*,  but  unreliable  and  evading 
scrutiny.  The  arrested  static  film  which  lasts  indefinitely,  giving  measur¬ 
able  differences  between  the  recorded  jerks  and  grimaces,  obviously 
allows  analysis  and  gives  a  good  analogy  of  the  working  of  higher  nerve 
centres,  disclosing  also  that  all  life  occurrences  have  many  aspects,  the 
selection  of  which  is  mostly  a  problem  of  our  pleasure  and  of  the  selec¬ 
tion  of  language.  The  moving  picture  gives  us  the  process ;  each  static 
film  of  the  reel  gives  us  stages  of  the  process  in  chosen  intervals.  In 
case  we  want  a  moving  picture  of  a  growing  plant,  for  instance,  we 
photograph  it  at  given  intervals  and  then  run  it  in  a  moving-picture  pro¬ 
jector,  and  then  we  see  the  process  of  growth.  These  are  empirical 
facts,  and  the  calculus  supplies  us  with  a  language  of  similar  structure 
with  many  other  important  consequences. 

MATHEMATICS  AND  THE  NERVOUS  SYSTEMS  293 

It  is  characteristic  that  those  who  claim  to  be  most  interested  in 
human  affairs  and  human  processes,  whom  we  call,  among  others, 
‘philosophers',  ‘psychologists'. ,  should  not  have  discovered  much  of  value 
in  these  fields.  But  mathematicians,  who  disclaim  meaning  in  their  un¬ 
defined  terms,  or  ‘truth'  in  their  postulates,  or  interest  in  human  affairs, 
have  had  a  most  astonishing  and  unique  success  by  elaborating  methods 
for  the  translation  of  the  dynamic  into  static  and  the  static  into  dynamic. 
Claims  and  disclaims  matter  little,  but  working  in  accordance  with  the 
survival  order  of  the  nerve  structure  and  currents  has  produced  most 
valuable  results. 

The  different  methods  of  mathematics  and  the  four-dimensional 
‘world'  of  Minkowski  form  the  means  for  translating  the  dynamic  into 
static  and  vice  versa.  Minkowski  established  a  language  of  a  new  struc¬ 
ture,  closer  to  actual  facts  of  the  world  around  us  and  ourselves, 
making  the  general  theory  of  Einstein  possible.  Further  analysis  of  these 
issues  is  carried  out  in  Part  IX,  and  it  is  one  of  the  semantic  founda¬ 
tions  upon  which  a  positive  theory  of  sanity  can  be  built. 

Disclaiming  definite  meanings,  mathematicians  have  an  intuitive 
predilection  for  selecting  their  terms  and  pursuing  their  line  of  enquiry 
among  possible  meanings ,  although  formally  these  meanings  are  disre¬ 
garded.  The  feeling  which  directs  the  selection  of  material  which  is 
formally  interesting  and  important  is  akin  to  the  artistic  sense,  but, 
unfortunately,  in  spite  of  its  importance,  it  has  been  neglected  by 
‘psychologists'.  Quite  often  it  is  the  ‘feel'  which  directs  the  mathema¬ 
ticians  in  their  researches  and  suggests  or  modifies  lines  of  development 
or  the  selection  of  one  set  of  postulates  in  preference  to  other  sets.  This 
is  why  the  ordinary  sense  of  the  terms  used  in  mathematics  is  so  im¬ 
portant,  although  it  represents  only  some  of  the  possible  meanings. 
These,  with  their  implications,  usually  represent  most  important  struc¬ 
tural  characteristics  of  the  human  nervous  system  and  the  world. 

This  is  to  be  expected  because  of  the  reasons  given  above ;  the  more 
so  that  invariance  in  this  shifting  world  is  a  characteristic  of  relations, 
and  mathematics  is  a  language  of  exact  relations  which,  in  the  mean¬ 
time,  have  mostly  objective  counterparts.  The  highest  abstractions  at 
every  date  are  detached  from  the  outside  world  neurologically,  and 
should  remain  detached,  to  represent  ‘pure  mind'  in  action.  These  higher 
abstractions  are  on  the  public  level,  as  they  are  transmittable  verbally 
with  all  characteristics  included.  They  are  static,  unhampered  directly 
by  the  outside  events,  although  they  normally  originate  in  them.  These 
higher  order  abstractions  are  ‘digested'  and  translated  into  lower  order 
abstractions  and  returned  to  the  lower  centres;  and  they  receive  their 

V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANGUAGE 

meanings  close  to  life.  Such  meanings  are  enlightened  meanings,  a  sur¬ 
vival  process,  and  each  nervous  level  did  its  work  properly. 

We  know  that  a  number  of  human  races  have  perished  without 
leaving  many  traces  of  their  existence.  This  process  is  going  on  con¬ 
tinually,  even  now.  Some  races  are  progressing;  some  are  regressing; 
some  are  at  a  seeming  standstill.  It  would  appear  that  the  mechanism 
of  higher  order  abstractions  had  and  has  survival  value,  and,  therefore, 
should  not  be  neglected  but  cultivated.  In  this  special  case,  cultivation 
is  a  condition  inherent  in  the  process  and  a  necessity  for  time-binders/ 

Serious  semantic  dangers  are  also  revealed  by  analysis  and  verified 
by  observation.  These  higher  order  abstractions,  let  us  repeat,  are  static 
and  may  last  indefinitely,  as  long  as  for  structural  reasons  we  do  not 
replace  the  old  by  new  ones.  Even  then,  though  rejected,  they  remain 
as  a  permanent  fact  on  record.  Obviously,  these  higher  abstractions 
have  only  a  ‘second-hand'  connection  with  the  outside  world.  Even  their 
character  is  changed,  they  are  static  while  the  world  is  dynamic.  The 
lower  ‘sense’  world  has  ‘characteristics  left  out’,  owing  to  the  mechanism^ 
of  abstracting  of  the  lower  centres;  and  the  abstractions  of  higher  orders 
have  all  characteristics  included’,  because  these  are  abstractions  from 
abstractions,  an  intra-organismal  process  in  its  entirety,  their  starting 
material  being  already  an  end-product  of  the  activities  of  the  lower 
centres.  This  mechanism  is  only  under  full  control  if  we  are  conscious 
of  abstracting,  because  the  higher  order  abstractions  in  the  nervous 
chain  affect,  in  their  turn,  the  lower  centres,  and,  in  pathological  cases, 
impress  on  them  a  semantic  delusional  or  illusional  evaluation  as  if  a 
character  of  experience.  In  severe  cases,  even  the  lower  nerve  centres 
are  stimulated  to  such  an  extent  that  hallucinations  appear. 

If  we  do  not  know  how  to  handle  different  order  abstractions,  this 
results  in  serious  semantic  dangers.  If  the  distribution  of  the  returning 
nerve  currents  is  a  non-survival  one,  we  exhibit  semantic  disturbances, 
such  as  identification  or  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions,  delusions, 
illusions,  and  hallucinations.  Thus,  we  ascribe  to  the  products  of  the 
lower  nerve  centres,  the  lower  order  abstractions,  characteristics  fic¬ 
titious  and  impossible  for  them,  such  as  ‘immutability’,  ‘permanence’, 
involving  disorientation  about  ‘time’. ,  . ,  which  are  characteristics  of  the 
higher  order  abstractions,  but  do  not  belong  to  the  world  as  given  by 
the  lower  abstractions,  and  result  in  an  improper  evaluation  disturbing 
to  the  ^.r.  Such  disturbances  make  us,  naturally,  absolutists  and  dog¬ 
matists,  involve  serious  affective  disturbances,  and  lead  to  non-adaptive 
behaviour  and  reactions,  and  other  semantic  manifestations  of  un-sanity. 
These,  in  their  turn,  make  adjustment  more  difficult,  often  affecting  the 

MATHEMATICS  AND  THE  NERVOUS  SYSTEMS  295 

structure  of  man-made  institutions,  which  again  make  adjustments  more 
complex  and  often  impossible.  We  become  un-sane,  ‘insane’,  and  life, 
whether  public  or  private,  becomes  a  mess.  In  such  a  vicious  semantic 
circle,  we  distort  our  education,  our  systems,  and  institutions.  Often  the 
morbid  reactions  of  powerful  individuals  are  forced  upon  masses,  who 
are  then  ruled  by  these  morbid  products,  with  injury  to  their  nervous 
systems.  Different  mass  hysterias,  ‘revivals’,  wars,  political  and  religious 
propaganda,  very  often  commercial  advertisements,  offer  notable 
examples. 

The  morbid  semantic  influence  of  commercialism  has  not  been 
investigated,  but  it  does  not  take  much  imagination  to  see  that  com¬ 
mercial  psycho-logics,  as  exemplified  by  the  theories  of  commercial 
evaluation,  ‘wisdom’,  appeal  to  selfishness,  animal  cunning,  concealing  of 
true  facts,  appeal  to  ‘sense’  gratification . ,  produce  a  verbal  and  semantic 
environment  and  slogans  for  the  children  which,  if  preserved  in  the 
grown-ups,  must  produce  some  pathological  results.  It  is  hoped  that 
some  day  a  psychiatrist  will  investigate  this  large,  neglected,  and  very 
important  semantic  problem. 

The  lack  of  structural  linguistic  researches  and  investigation  of  our 
s.r ,  and  the  ignorance  of  those  who  rule,  make  us  nearly  helpless. 
Malaria  or  other  germ  diseases  would  never  be  eliminated  were  we  to 
preserve  religiously  the  sources  of  infection.  The  semantic  sources  of 
un-sanity  are  not  only  defended  but  are  actively  sponsored  by  organized 
ignorance  and  the  power  of  merchants,  state,  and  church. 

The  situation  is  acute.  If  we  could  entirely  eliminate  our  cortex,  it 
would,  perhaps,  not  be  so  serious.  We  could,  perhaps,  live  as  complex 
a  life  as  a  fish  and  have  a  nervous  system  perfectly  adjusted  to  such  a 
life.  But,  unfortunately,  with  a  structural  change,  or.  according  to 
Lashley,  with  the  change  even  in  the  total  mass  of  the  brain,  the  activi¬ 
ties  and  the  role  of  the  whole,  including  other  parts,  are  profoundly 
altered.8  These  become  inadequate,  as  shown  by  the  boy  born  without 
the  cortex,  already  described.  His  nervous  system  was  much  more  com¬ 
plex  than  that  of  fishes  or  of  some  lower  animals  which  lead  adequately 
a  rather  complex  life.  But  the  boy  was  less  equipped  for  life  than  they. 
Even  his  ‘senses’,  though  apparently  ‘normal’  on  macroscopic  levels, 
must  have  been  pathological  on  colloidal  and  sub-microscopic  levels  and 
did  not  function  properly.  We  know,  also,  that  in  many  cases  of  ‘mental’ 
ills  the  ‘sense  reactions’  are  abnormal ;  sometimes  the  patients  seem  to 
be  entirely  insensitive  to  stimuli  which  would  produce  most  acute  pain 
to  other  less  pathological  individuals. 

V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANGUAGE 

It  is  impossible  to  eliminate  completely  from  our  lives  or  nerve 
currents  the  higher  abstractions  and  their  psycho-neural  effect.  Curi¬ 
ously  enough,  this  elementary  fact  has  never  been  emphasized  or  taken 
into  account  seriously ;  yet  it  is  a  crucial  semantic  factor  in  our  attitude 
toward  science  and  our  future.  Those  who  attempt  such  elimination, 
whether  by  actively  persecuting  science,  or  by  emitting  propaganda 
against  science,  or  by  the  cynical  or  ignoring  attitude  toward  'mental’ 
achievements,  whether  personally,  or  in  education,  or  in  public  prints, 
or  other  public  activities,  do  not  succeed  in  eliminating  the  higher  order 
abstractions,  but  simply  introduce  pathological  semantic  reactions  and 
succeed  in  disorganizing  their  own  nervous  systems  and  those  of  others. 
I  intended  this  implication  when  I  said  that  our  existing  educational . , 
systems  produce  morons,  but  'geniuses'  are  born.  Such  very  general 
semantic  directives  are,  perhaps,  responsible  for  the  extremely  low  level 
of  our  non-technical  development.  Humans  are  not  to  be  judged  simply 
by  the  ability  to  drive  an  automobile  or  by  the  knowledge  of  how  to  use 
a  bathtub;  nor  yet  by  their  capacity  for  buying  and  selling  things  pro¬ 
duced  by  others. 

The  tendency  of  some  public  prints  to  appeal  to  the  morbidity  of 
mob  psycho-logics  and  to  its  ignorance,  insisting  that  all  that  is  said 
should  be  said  in  'one-syllable'  words,  so  that  the  mob  can  understand, 
in  a  human  class  of  life,  is  an  arresting  or  regressive  tendency .  What 
should  be  urged  for  sanity,  and  for  humans,  is  that  the  mob  should  also 
learn  the  use  of  at  least  two-syllable  words !  Then,  perhaps,  the  day 
would  come  when  they  could  follow  easily  and  habitually  the  use  of 
non-el  terms  and,  perhaps,  even  of  words  connected  by  a  hyphen. 

This  appeal  to  mob  psycho-logics  and  ignorance  affects  profoundly 
our  s.r  and  should  be  investigated.  It  definitely  appears  that  in  countries 
where  the  majority  reads  only  the  sort  of  publications  referred  to  above 
and  commercial  advertisements,  their  psycho-logical  equipment  and 
standards  are  lower  than  those  of  perfectly  illiterate  peasants  of  other 
countries.  It  is  not  fully  realized  that  in  a  symbolic  class  of  life,  sym¬ 
bolism  of  any  sort — e.g.,  public  prints — plays  an  environmental  role  and 
creates  s.r  which  may  be  distinctly  morbid.  The  problems  of  public 
prints,  commercialism . ,  and  their  psycho-logical  effect  on  the  s.r  should 
undergo  a  searching  analysis  by  psychiatrists,  and  definite  suggestions 
should  be  formulated  by  psychiatric  scientific  organizations  or  congresses. 

Under  the  conditions  prevailing  at  present,  it  is  futile  to  preach 
morals  of  any  metaphysical  kind.  They  have  never  worked  satisfac¬ 
torily,  and  increasingly  they  cannot  work,  particularly  under  the  present 
much  more  complex  conditions  of  life.  They  disorganize  the  survival 

MATHEMATICS  AND  THE  NERVOUS  SYSTEMS  297 

activities  and  processes  of  the  human  nervous  system.  The  imposed  and 
delusional  dogmas  are  themselves  the  result  of  pathological  evaluation 
in  their  originators;  a  necessity,  perhaps,  on  a  primitive  level,  but  pro¬ 
foundly  semantically  harmful  under  the  complexities  of  life-conditions 
1933. 

As  it  is  impossible  to  eliminate  the  influence  of  the  higher  order 
abstractions,  we  should  investigate  whether  or  not  we  can  control  these 
processes  and  the  related  s.r.  We  can  learn  to  regulate  these  processes, 
which  otherwise  may  become  pathological,  and  to  redirect  the  currents 
into  constructive  survival  channels.  I  can  state  definitely  that  this  is  pos¬ 
sible.  We  can  control  physiologically  the  s.r  through  the  elimination  of 
identification,  by  training  in  order,  in  consciousness  of  abstracting,  and 
similar  disciplines,  and  thus  eliminate  the  pathological  semantic  disturb¬ 
ances  of  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions.  Such  training,  whenever 
possible,  has  seemingly  a  beneficial  influence  even  on  the  more  extreme 
pathological  states  listed  above,  and  suggests  general  preventive  value. 

Let  me  briefly  restate  the  fundamental  differences  between  lower 
order  abstractions  and  higher.  The  lower  order  abstractions  are  manu¬ 
factured  by  the  lower  nerve  centres,  which  are  closer  to,  and  in  direct 
contact  with,  actual  life  experiences.  These  are  non-permanent,  shifting, 
vague  and  un-speakable,  but  often  very  intense.  They  play  a  most  im¬ 
portant  role  in  our  daily  lives.  They  cannot  be  transmitted,  as  they  are 
essentially  of  a  non-transmittable  character,  and  have  a  private,  non¬ 
public  character.  All  ‘sense*  impressions,  ‘feelings*,  ‘moods*. ,  are  repre¬ 
sentative  of  them.  We  should  remember  that,  detached,  they  are 
fictions,  manufactured  verbally,  because  our  language  happens  to  be 
eL  Actually,  these  lower  centres  are  in  the  cyclic  chain  and  so  influence, 
and  are  influenced  by,  the  full  cycle,  including  the  higher  order  abstrac¬ 
tions,  whatever  the  latter  may  be  in  a  given  individual.  The  main  point 
is  that  they  are  shifting,  changing,  non-permanent,  non-stable — ‘moving*, 
so  to  say — and  remain  un-speakable. 

The  higher  order  abstractions  are  abstractions  from  the  lower 
order  abstractions,  being  further  removed  from  the  outside  world,  and 
are  of  a  distinctly  different  character.  These  are  static,  ‘permanent*,  and 
cannot  be  entirely  eliminated  from  any  one. 

From  the  point  of  view  of  sanity,  the  problem  of  how  we  can 
handle  these  functions  becomes  paramount.  In  the  cyclic  nervous  chain, 
we  always  must  translate  one  level  into  the  other.  Obviously,  if,  in  the 
higher  centres,  we  elaborate  shifting,  changing,  non-permanent  material, 
this  material  is  not  appropriate  for  them ;  they  cannot  work  properly,  and 
some  pathological  processes  may  set  in. 

V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANGUAGE 

If  we  elaborate  in  the  lower  nerve  centres  abstractions  that  are 
static,  permanent . ,  in  character,  and  hence  inappropriate  for  the  lower 
centres,  we  build  up  morbid  non-survival  identifications,  delusions,  illu¬ 
sions,  hallucinations,  and  other  disturbances  of  evaluation,  resulting  in 
milder  cases  in  absolutism,  dogmatism,  fanaticism . ,  and,  in  heavier  cases, 
in  a  neurosis  or  even  a  psychosis. 

It  seems  quite  obvious  that  each  nervous  level  has  its  own  specific 
kind  of  material  to  deal  with:  As  they  are  in  a  cyclic  nervous  chain 
and  are  interconnected  in  a  bewilderingly  complex  way,  the  problem 
of  appropriate  translation  of  one  level  of  abstractions  into  the  other 
becomes  a  semantic  foundation  for  a  well-balanced  functioning  of  the 
nervous  system.  In  this  respect,  we  differ  fundamentally  from  animals. 
The  above  difficulties  do  not  arise  in  animals  to  that  extent,  because  their 
nervous  systems  are  not  differentiated  enough  for  such  sharp  differen¬ 
tiation  in  the  functioning.  For  this  reason,  without  human  interference, 
there  could  be  no  ‘insane'  animals  which  could  survive  (see  Part  VI). 
But,  having  no  static  higher  order  abstractions  in  the  human  sense,  the^ 
cannot  pass  on  their  ‘experiences',  which  are  transmittable  only  in  the 
higher  order  formulations  in  neural  and  extra-neural  forms  to  the  next 
generations.  Animals  are  not  time-binders. 

For  humans,  the  proper  translation  of  dynamic  into  static  and  static 
into  dynamic  becomes  paramount  for  sanity,  on  psycho-logical  levels, 
affecting,  probably  by  colloidal  processes,  the  psycho-neural  foundation 
of  semantic  responses. 

Psychiatry  informs  us  that  most  of  the  ‘mentally'  ill  have  their  main 
disturbances  in  the  dynamic  affective  field.  It  is  a  very  difficult  field  to 
reach  by  the  older  methods,  the  more  so  that  the  older  el  sharp  distinc¬ 
tion  between  intellect  and  ‘emotions'  prevented  the  discovery  of  work¬ 
able  means.  ‘Thinking'  and  ‘feeling'  are  not  to  be  divided  so  simply. 
We  know  how  ‘thinking'  is  influenced  by  ‘feeling';  but  we  know  very 
little  how  ‘feeling'  is  influenced  by  ‘thinking'— perhaps,  because  we  have 
not  analysed  the  semantic  issues  in  non-el  terms. 

All  psychotherapy,  with  its  manifold  theories,  each  contributing  its 
share,  is  a  semantic  attempt  to  influence  ‘feeling'  by  ‘thinking*.  A  large 
number  of  successful  cases  seems  to  show  clearly  that  some  such  means 
are  possible.  Large  numbers  of  failures  show  equally  that  the  methods 
used  are  not  structurally  satisfactory.  The  need  of  more  scientific  inves¬ 
tigations  of  a  more  general  and  fundamental,  non-el  character  becomes 
emphatic.  The  present  enquiry  shows  that  such  structural  investigations 
suggest  that  the  method  can  be  found  in  the  psycho-logics  of  the  ‘mind' 
at  .its  best;  namely,  in  mathematics,  which  unexpectedly  leads  to  a 

MAT  1 1  KM  AT  ICS  AND  THE  NERVOUS  SYSTEMS  299 

physiological  control  of  the  s.r,  effective  not  only  as  a  therapeutic,  but 
also  as  a  preventive,  educational  means. 

Identification  as  a  factor  of  un-sanity  seems  to  be  a  natural  conse¬ 
quence  of  the  evolution  from  'animal*  to  'man*,  particularly  at  our  pres¬ 
ent  stage,  while  the  human  race  is  so  recent  a  product.  The  human 
cortex  appeared  only  comparatively  lately  and  is  a  young  structure; 
the  thalamic  regions  have  a  much  longer  history  of  functioning.  It 
seems  natural  that  the  nervous  impulses  should  pass  the  shorter,  more 
phylogenetically  travelled,  paths  in  preference  to  comparatively  newer 
and  longer  paths,  a  principle  well  known  in  neurology  in  connection  with 
so-called  ‘Bahnung*.  If  education,  and  on  human  levels  any  kind  of 
adjustment  involving  s.r  involves  some  education,  fails  to  force  the  nerve 
:urrents  into  their  proper  channels,  or  actively  establishes  in  them 
semantic  psycho-neural  blockages  through  pathological  evaluation  ac¬ 
quired  because  of  faulty  training,  we  should  expect  either  infantilism 
or  regression  to  still  lower  levels.  Whatever  the  correct  explanation  of 
the  distribution  of  nerve  currents,  semantic  blockages . ,  may  be,  observa¬ 
tion  shows  unmistakably  that  some  such  assumptions  are  necessitated  by 
observed  manifestations  in  behaviour.  Experiments  show,  also,  that  such 
defects  can  be  helped  greatly  by  the  proper  re-training  and  re-education 
of  the  s.r . 

To  understand  the  structure  of  these  semantic  disturbances,  we 
must  become  acquainted  with  the  affective  components  which  underlie 
mathematics  and  mathematical  methods,  hitherto  disregarded,  because 
of  the  el  character  of  our  old  terminology.  There  is  another  striking 
connection.  In  severe  'mental*  illnesses,  we  usually  find  a  disorientation 
in  ‘space*  and  ‘time*,  which  are,  by  necessity,  relational  data  of  experi¬ 
ence.  In  the  semantic  disturbances  called  identification,  we  also  find,  as 
a  rule,  relational  disorientation  about  ‘space*  and  ‘time*,  more  subtle  but 
very  vicious  in  effect,  bordering  on  what  are  called  ‘philosophical*  prob¬ 
lems,  which,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  represent  psycho-neural  disturbances. 
Since  Einstein,  the  disturbances  can  be  easily  eliminated,  provided  we 
take  into  account  structural  non-el  issues  in  connection  with  s.r  and  a 
A-system. 

It  is  instructive  to  make  a  short  survey  of  the  methods  by  which 
the  mechanism  of  the  nervous  cycle — ‘senses’,  ‘feelings*.,  first;  ‘mind*, 
which  again  influences  the  ‘feelings’,  next — works  in  mathematics. 
Weierstrass,  the  famous  mathematician,  says,  in  one  of  his  writings, 
that  a  mathematician  is  a  kind  of  poet.  This  is  largely  true.  Mathe¬ 
matics  is  not  only  a  rigorous  linguistic  relational  pattern,  but  it  uses 
the  highest  abstractions  which  we  have  reached  at  a  given  period  from 

V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANGUAGE 

the  data  given  by  the  lower  nerve  centres,  which  are  closer  to  experience, 
or  rather  which  constitute  experience.  The  older  arguments  about  the 
connection  or  lack  of  connection  between  the  lower  order  abstractions 
(‘sense’  data . ,) ,  and  mathematics  are  due  solely  to  a  confusion  of  orders 
of  abstractions  and  are  a  useless  gambling  in  el  terms.  Only  in  severe 
‘mental’  ills  is  the  speech  of  the  patients  entirely  unconnected  with  first 
order  external  ‘realities’,  and  so  the  study  of  relations  of  many  kinds 
and  orders,  called  ‘mathematics’,  cannot,  as  long  as  it  is  sane,  be  entirely 
detached  from  ‘reality’.  In  fact,  it  is  useless  for  mathematicians  to  try 
to  produce  disciplines  which  have  no  practical  applications.  As  long 
as  it  is  professionally  accepted  as  mathematics,  and,  therefore,  a  science 
and  sane,  whatever  mathematicians  produce  will  always  be  connected 
with  lower  order  abstractions,  and  must  have  an  application  sooner  or 
later.  When  these  higher  order  abstractions,  produced  very  often  by 
many  individuals,  are  absorbed  and  returned  in  a  modified  form  to  the 
lower  centres  as  ‘visualization’,  ‘intuition’,  ‘feelings’. ,  the  given  individual 
is  closer  to  the  external  world  than  he  was  before,  because  he  has 
absorbed,  digested,  and  appropriated  the  nervous  results  of  many  more 
experiences  than  he  himself  could  have  gathered  alone.  He  is  able  to 
compare,  evaluate,  and  relate,  revise  and  adjust  his  private  experiences 
and  observations  with  the  translated  experiences  from  higher  abstrac¬ 
tions  of  many  more  individuals.  The  translation  is  indispensable,  because 
the  reactions  of  both  levels  are  entirely  different,  and  comparable  only 
when  they  are  on  one  level.  Creative  work  has  begun . 

Experiences  given  by  the  lower  centres  and  lower  abstractions  are 
full  of  meanings,  colouring,  affective  and  semantic  components,  and 
these  are  not  directly  comparable  with  the  higher  abstractions  produced 
by  the  higher  nerve  centres.  They  must  be  first  transformed,  ‘digested’, 
and  translated  into  terms  of  the  lower  centres,  which  are  the  only  ones 
which  are  effective  on  the  lower  levels.  We  call  them  ‘visualization’, 
‘intuition’,  ‘feeling’,  ‘culture’, .  The  exact  mechanism  is  not  well  known, 
but  we  have  a  number  of  data  which  show  that  the  lower  nerve  centres 
are  somehow  engaged  in  these  processes. 

When  this  is  accomplished,  the  mathematician  has  at  his  disposal 
an  enormous  amount  of  data ;  first,  his  personal  experiences  and  observa¬ 
tion  of  actual  life  (lower  centres  and  lower  order  abstractions),  and  also 
all  the  personal  experiences  and  observations  of  past  generations.  Al¬ 
though  the  latter  were  stored  in  the  form  of  higher  order  abstractions 
only  as  an  account  of  past  experiences  in  neural  or  extra-neural  forms, 
his  nervous  cycle  was  affected  by  them,  and  they  were  translated  back 
into  experiences  of  the  lower  levels. 

MATHEMATICS  AND  THE  NERVOUS  SYSTEMS  301 

With  such  an  enormous  amount  of  data  of  experience,  he  can 
re-evaluate  the  data,  ‘see’  them  anew,  and  so  produce  new  and  more 
useful  and  structurally  more  correct  higher  order  abstractions.  In  their 
turn,  these  will  produce  similar  semantic  effects  with  other  individuals , . 
The  mechanism  is,  after  all,  well  known  and  general,  obvious  even  in 
the  relations  between  some  feeble-minded  parents  and  their  eventually 
feeble-minded  children.  It  is  entirely  obvious  on  racial  grounds ;  but,  at 
present,  it  is  not  so  obvious,  and  often  but  slightly  effective,  on  personal 
and  individual  grounds,  because  we  have  had  no  means  of  training 
structurally  and  effectively  the  s.r  in  proper  evaluation.  The  mechanism 
is  entirely  general,  but  it  is  obvious  and  seen  at  work  in  the  majority  of 
creative  scientists  and  so-called  ‘geniuses’.  These  processes  have  not  been 
analysed  in  terms  of  order,  and  so,  although  we  use  them  often,  we  are 
not  conscious  of  their  mechanism  and  have  no  means  of  training  our  s.r. 
The  s.r  are  a  product  of  training,  education . ,  and  are  not  inborn  in  a 
given  form.  Even  birds  bred  in  a  laboratory  which  have  never  heard 
their  parents  or  other  birds  sing  will  sing,  as  this  is  an  inborn  reflex, 
but  the  melody  produced  is  different  from  that  of  their  parents.  Under 
normal  conditions,  the  form  of  the  song  is  standardized  and  is  a  result 
of  copying  parents.  In  other  words,  the  melody-environment  has  affected 
them.  With  humans,  it  is  not  only  a  question  of  the  given  noises,  the 
‘melody-environment’  which  we  relate  with  some  experiences,  but  the 
s.r  involve  affective  responses  to  meanings,  and  this  depends  on  the 
structure  of  language,  involving  unconscious,  yet  vital,  evaluation  factors 
and  our  attitude  toward  language,  which  ultimately  depends  on  our 
knowledge  of  the  mechanism  and  use  of  language. 

These  problems  are  extremely  complex  and  subtle,  and,  at  this 
stage,  we  are  not  ready  to  go  into  further  details,  the  more  so  that  there 
is  a  very  simple  and  effective  physiological  structural  method  given  in 
Part  VII,  which  in  practice  eliminates  enormous  theoretical  difficulties. 
There  is  little  doubt  that  this  mechanism  of  recasting,  or  translation  of 
abstractions,  is  present  in  all  of  us,  but  this  mechanism  requires  knowl¬ 
edge  of  the  proper  way  to  handle  it,  and  that  knowledge  is  not  inborn, 
but  has  to  be  acquired  by  education.  Up  to  the  present  date,  these 
problems  have  been  disregarded,  and  the  s.r  treated  in  a  haphazard  way ; 
once  the  physiological  mechanism  of  these  reactions  is  discovered,  how¬ 
ever,  we  shall  be  able  to  use  its  benefits  without  the  inherent  dangers  of 
disturbances. 

Here  we  must  face  a  rather  unexpected  fact. 

Mathematics  is  alone  and  unique  in  that  it  has  no  content  or  definite 
meanings  ascribed  to  the  undefined  terms ;  and,  therefore,  only  in  mathe- 

V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANGUAGE 

matics  can  we  avoid  the  vicious  influencing  of  lower  centres  through  the 
feeling  of  false  analogies  which  distort  and  disorganize  the  process. 
It  is  important  to  notice  that  the  main  and  only  lasting  advances  in 
‘philosophy'  have  been  made  by  mathematicians ;  and,  as  a  rule,  when¬ 
ever  a  trained  mathematician  attempts  to  work  at  any  other  profession 
not  requiring  mathematics,  he  shortly  becomes  an  outstanding  worker 
in  the  new  field.  It  must  be  obvious  that  the  returning  nerve  currents, 
when  they  produce  the  ‘feel'  (language  of  the  lower  centres)  of  physics, 
or  chemistry,  or  biology,  or  other  sciences  with  a  definite  content,  must 
have  a  most  pronounced  semantic  effect.  Because  of  this  physical  con¬ 
tent,  identification  and  other  semantic  disturbances  are  usually  present, 
instead  of  the  highly  beneficial  visualization. 

Empirically,  this  is  quite  obviously  true.  Let  us  survey  the  character 
of  this  process  in  physicists  and  chemists.  Their  problems,  the  content 
of  their  abstractions,  are  obviously  not  so  closely  related  to  human  lives 
as  the  problems  of  biology.  History  shows  that  the  attitude  (affective) 
of  those  scientists  toward  human  affairs  is  often  shallow,  but  very  sel¬ 
dom  vicious  or  harmful.  But  let  us  take  the  attitudes  of  biologists, 
whose  subject  is  seemingly  much  closer,  or,  at  least,  more  affectively 
related  to  our  problems,  and  we  see,  from  Aristotle  on,  the  brutalizing 
and  unscientific  (1933)  effect  of  the  false  biological  analogies.  Prac¬ 
tically  all  the  vicious,  unjustified,  and  unscientific  generalizations  which 
have  made  the  white  race  the  most  animalistic,  selfish,  cruel,  hypocritical, 
and  un-sane  race  on  earth  are  mainly  due  to  the  biological,  A ,  distorted 
reasonings  and  s.r  produced  by  false  analogy. 

In  all  this  ‘philosophy',  they  always  reasoned  from  pigs,  cats,  and 
dogs  to  man.  Since  they  were  ‘scientific',  we  blindly  assumed  that  they 
must  know  what  they  were  talking  about.  Even  today,  the  majority  of 
the  older  biologists  refuse  to  investigate  the  structure  of  their  language. 
They  do  not  seem  to  be  able  to  realize  that  most  biological  ‘philosophies’ 
are  structurally  fallacious  and  unscientific  in  1933.  They  still  uncon¬ 
sciously  follow  Aristotle.  They  refuse  to  understand  that  life  is  made  up 
of  absolute  and  unique  individuals,  and  that  ‘man'  or  ‘animal*  is  not  an 
object,  but  labels  verbal  fictions. 

In  actual  life,  the  differences  between  individuals  are  absolute,  and 
father  and  son  are  different.  These  are  the  empirical  facts  of  their 
sciences,  the  rest  being  verbal  fictions.  The  notorious  Tennessee  trial 
demonstrated  that  in  a  large  country  like  the  United  States  of  America, 
with  a  few  good  universities,  there  was  no  biologist  to  voice  these  points 
about  ‘evolution’.  It  is  true  that,  through  the  work  of  neurologists  and 
some  others,  biologists,  of  late,  are  beginning  to  see  that  they  cannot 

MATHKMATICS  AND  THE  NERVOUS  SYSTEMS  303 

generalize  in  the  way  they  have  done  for  more  than  two  thousand  years. 
Naturally,  there  are  notable  exceptions;  yet  even  these  do  not  realize 
the  structural  linguistic  and  semantic  issues  involved. 

I  most  emphatically  do  not  deny  that  animal  researches  are  extremely 
useful  and  necessary;  but  I  question  the  right  of  biologists  to  remain 
innocent  of  the  importance  of  linguistic  and  semantic  issues,  and  to 
indulge  in  vicious,  unwarranted  generalizations  which,  although  they  may 
express  their  own  metaphysics  and  s.r ,  should  not  be  advanced  as  ‘scien¬ 
tific'  results.  Biologists  ought  to  be  informed  enough  to  understand  that 
‘man'  and  ‘animal'  are  verbal  fictions,  and  labels  for  something  going  on 
inside  our  skins — not  labels  for  the  unique  individuals  with  which  they 
have  to  deal  outside  their  skins. 

An  example  may,  perhaps,  be  useful.  We  know  that  rats,  prairie 
dogs,  and  some  other  animals  are  mostly  immune  to  scurvy,  but  that 
man,  monkeys,  and  guinea  pigs  are  mostly  not  immune.  How  can  we 
generalize  from  a  rat  to  a  man  or  a  guinea  pig?  Or  how  much  can  we 
learn  about  the  behaviour  of  a  bee  from  the  behaviour  of  an  oyster,  to 
use  the  example  of  Professor  Jennings?  Even  in  ‘man’,  what  helps  one 
‘man',  kills  another. 

Similar  false  analogies  occur  in  the  A  classification  of  ‘man'  as  an 
‘animal'.  This  classification  disregards  completely  the  s.r  and  twists  the 
generally  accepted  folk-meaning  of  the  term  ‘animal'  into  a  special  mean¬ 
ing  which  introduces  very  vicious  semantic  implications.  If  we  classify 
‘man'  as  an  ‘animal*,  the  structural  A  'plus'  elementalism  is  automatically 
introduced,  since  ‘man',  obviously,  has  many  characteristics  of  behaviour 
not  shown  by  the  ‘animal',  taken  in  its  folk-meaning.  The  disregard  of 
the  folk-meaning  in  our  terminology  shows  clearly  the  complete  dis¬ 
regard  for  s.r  which  are  very  strongly  related  to  those  folk-meanings. 
If  we  are  to  call  ‘man*  an  ‘animal',  then  ‘man’  must  be  an  ‘animal*  ‘plus* 
something.  If  we  were  to  call  him  some  sort  of  a  junior  ‘god*,  he  would 
be  a  ‘god'  ‘minus'  something.  The  latter  structural  fallacy  would  be 
just  as  vicious  in  its  implications,  and  would  again  deliver  our  specula¬ 
tions  into  the  semantic  clutches  of  the  structure  of  a  primitive-made  el 
language. 

Similar  objections  could  be  raised  to  that  class  of  ‘biological 
psychologies'  exemplified  by  the  ‘behaviourists' — (not  to  be  confused 
with  the  illuminating  and  highly  constructive  biological  psychiatry  or 
psychobiology  introduced  by  Professor  Adolf  Meyer).9  The  ‘behav¬ 
iourists*  try  to  be  ultra-‘scientific\  not  realizing  that  their  knowledge 
of  scientific  method  and  structure  belongs  somewhere  to  the  sixteenth 
century. 

V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANGUAGE 

Creative  mathematicians,  after  becoming  acquainted  with  the  work 
of  their  predecessors  and  contemporaries,  achieve  their  own  results,  at 
first,  through  ‘intuition’,  ‘feeling’,.  They  ‘visualize’  the  most  abstract 
theories,  though  sometimes  it  takes  the  invention  of  new  means  to 
achieve  this  result.  Their  lower  nervous  centres  are  affected  by  the 
higher  abstractions  made  by  themselves  and  others.  This  process  ac¬ 
counts  for  the  fact  that  no  mathematical  achievement  is  ever  detached, 
or  possibly  can  be  detached,  from  life.  The  source  of  all  creative  work 
is  always  in  the  lower  centres,  which  are  in  more  direct  contact  with  the 
world  around  us,  through  ‘feelings’,  ‘intuitions’,  ‘visualization*,  and 
other  first  order  reactions. 

Mathematics  and  what  is  called  ‘sublimation’  in  psychiatry  have  a 
similar  neural  mechanism,  which  is  expressed  structurally  in  the  spiral 
theory,  or  in  the  cyclic  chain  of  nerve  currents,  where  the  end-product 
of  one  process  becomes  the  starting  point  of  the  next.  As  was  said 
before,  this  is  quite  obvious  on  racial  grounds,  but  more  difficult  to  dis¬ 
cover  or  apply  in  individual  experience,  if  we  disregard  structure  and 
non-el 

If  we  can,  let  us  discover  means  by  which  the  ‘feel’  of  modem 
science  can  be  imparted  without  falsification  and  technicalities,  which, 
perhaps,  may  be  only  auxiliary  means  to  get  the  more  fundamental  life 
results.  We  may  at  once  anticipate  the  means  which  we  shall  discover. 
The  key  problem  is  to  eliminate,  first,  the  semantic  disturbance  called 
identification  or  the  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions,  and  similar  dis¬ 
turbances  of  evaluation.  This  elimination  is  attained  physiologically 
through  the  development  of  the  consciousness  of  abstracting,  which  leads 
to  proper  evaluation,  visualization  without  semantic  disturbances.  In 
other  words,  we  must  find  means  by  which  higher  abstractions  can  be 
translated  physiologically  into  lower  abstractions,  uniquely  connected 
with  the  translation  of  the  dynamic  into  the  static  and  vice  versa. 

The  present  status  of  the  white  race — I  do  not  know  enough  about 
the  structures  of  languages  of  other  races  and  their  s.r  to  speak  about 
them — is  such  that  a  majority  of  our  self-imposed  difficulties  is  due  to 
the  lack  of  scientific  structural  analysis,  which  lack  makes  it  impossible 
to  control  or  regulate  physiologically  and  adequately  the  semantic  evalu¬ 
ation  through  education.  Under  such  conditions,  everything  based  on 
arguments  involving  the  ‘is’  of  identity  and  the  older  el  ‘logic’  and  ‘psy¬ 
chology’,  such  as  the  prevailing  doctrines,  laws,  institutions,  systems . , 
cannot  possibly  be  in  full  accordance  with  the  structure  of  our  nervous 
system.  This,  in  turn,  affects  the  latter  and  results  in  the  prevailing 
private  and  public  un-sanity.  Hence,  the  unrest,  unhappiness,  nervous 

MATHEMATICS  AND  THE  NERVOUS  SYSTEMS  305 

strain,  irritability,  lack  of  wisdom  and  absence  of  balance,  the  instability 
gf  our  institutions,  the  wars  and  revolutions,  the  increase  of  ‘mental' 
ills,  prostitution,  criminality,  commercialism  as  a  creed,  the  inadequate 
standards  of  education,  the  low  professional  standards  of  lawyers, 
priests,  politicians,  physicians,  teachers,  parents,  and  even  of  scientists 
— which  in  the  last-named  field  often  lead  to  dogmatic  and  antisocial 
attitudes  and  lack  of  creativeness. 

This  is,  naturally,  an  unsatisfactory  semantic  state  of  affairs,  and, 
in  consequence,  our  nervous  systems  do  not  function  properly,  according 
to  the  potentialities  of  proper  evaluation  inherent  in  their  structure. 
False  creeds  or  doctrines  underlying  the  s.r,  particularly  when  connected 
with  strong  affective  tension,  play  as  great  a  havoc  with  our  responses 
and  capacities  on  sub-microscopic  colloidal  levels  as  any  macroscopic 
organic  lesion  of  our  nervous  system.  If  our  s.r  are  pathological,  invari¬ 
ably  some  affective  disturbance,  and  psycho-neural  blockages  on  the 
colloidal  level,  must  be  present.  The  nervous  currents  are  then  deviated 
and  forced  into  lower,  non-survival-for-man  channels,  resulting  in 
various  forms  of  arrested  development  or  regressive  symptoms.  Through 
this  we  are  deprived  of  the  higher  {human)  ‘intelligence*,  which  is  the 
result  of  the  optimum  working  of  the  nervous  system  on  all  levels; 
we  become  ‘mentally*  deficient  in  various  aspects  and  degrees,  and  we 
have  to  copy  animals,  primitives,  and  infants,  and  so  present,  in  milder 
disturbances,  the  pathetic  picture — so  often  seen — of  adult  infantilism, 
or  display  other  regressive  manifestations.  Thousands  of  such  cases 
have  been  analysed  and  recorded  in  psychiatrical  literature.  The  mechan¬ 
ism  of  these  disturbances  is  quite  clear,  because,  after  the  re-education 
of  the  s.r,  if  this  is  at  all  successful,  the  psycho-neurological  colloidal 
blockage  is  eliminated,  and  the  patient  is  relieved  from  his  semantic 
afflictions. 

Instances  of  infantilism  and  animalistic  reactions  are  abundant 
everywhere;  but  as  this  problem  is  analysed  further  in  Part  VII,  here 
we  shall  not  pursue  the  matter  further. 

It  should  be  noticed,  however,  in  this  connection,  that  sex  abnor¬ 
malities  of  every  description  and  most  sex  disturbances  are  also  inter¬ 
connected  with  infantilism  in  adults.  In  public  life  and  activities,  the 
results  are  equally  pathetic.  Instead  of  analysing  and  foreseeing,  we 
proceed  by  trial  and  error,  as  animals  do,  a  wasteful  and  painful  method. 
The  possession  of  an  adequate  physiological  method  for  the  translation 
from  the  appropriate  reactions  of  one  level  to  that  of  another,  therefore, 
becomes  paramount.  The  non-el  language  and  the  methods  of  mathe¬ 
matics  appear,  then,  to  be  of  neurological  value.  The  terms  are  easily 

V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANGUAGE 

and  correctly  applied  to  both  levels,  and  thus  facilitate  passing  from  the 
language  appropriate  to  one  level  to  the  language  appropriate  to  the 
other.  But,  in  this  case,  to  avoid  confusion,  we  should  have  to  make 
clear  the  multiordinality  of  terms  and  to  embody  recognition  of  this 
multiordinality  in  every,  even  the  most  elementary,  education,  as  any 
education  shapes  and  moulds  some  s.r.  This  will  aid  the  working  of  the 
human  nervous  system,  which,  at  present,  is  blocked,  sometimes  very 
effectively,  by  disturbances  of  evaluation.  The  old  el,  subject -predicate 
language  has  a  structure  dissimilar  to  the  structure  of  this  world  as  we 
know  it  in  1933,  and  also  dissimilar  to  the  structure  and  function  of  the 
human  nervous  system,  and  so,  by  necessity,  hampers  the  s.r  and  deviates 
them  from  their  natural  course. 

That  the  problems  before  us  are  subtle,  and  that  the  demarcation 
line  between  ‘sanity7,  ‘un-sanity7,  and  ‘insanity7  is  extremely  thin,  is  no 
reason  for  neglecting  this  neurological  benefit  of  psychophysiological 
investigation.  It  seems  obvious  that  the  attitude  toward  our  forms  of 
representation,  and  toward  our  s.r ,  are  fundamentally  affected  by  the 
disturbances  of  evaluation  called  identification  or  confusion  of  orders 
of  abstractions,  and,  in  particular,  by  objectification,  which  ascribe  un¬ 
justified  and  delusional  values  and  meanings  to  these  forms. 

Up  to  this  point,  we  have  been  emphasizing  the  beneficial  structural 
aspect  of  mathematics,  and  it  is  now  necessary  to  explain  why  mathe- 
matizing,  when  considered  as  a  formal  interplay  of  contentless  symbols, 
should  not  be  considered  a  high-class  ‘mental7  activity,  no  matter  how 
useful  and  important  it  may  be,  and  why  the  majority  of  mathematicians 
do  not  get  the  full  psycho-logical  semantic  benefit  of  their  training  and 
activities.  The  nervous  systems  of  many  such  mathematicians  do  not  act 
fully  and  successfully,  nor  pass  normally  through  the  cycle  of  their 
natural  activities.  Such  a  technician  is  seldom,  if  ever,  what  we  call  a 
great  man.  He  seldom  has  a  direct  creative  influence  on  our  lives.  But, 
in  the  case  of  a  man  with  a  more  efficient  nervous  system,  the  cycle  is 
completed  successfully,  the  higher  abstractions  are  translated  back  into 
new  lower  abstractions,  which  are  closer  to  life.  Such  an  individual 
sees ,  visualizes  ,  has  ‘intuitions7. ,  in  his  symbolic  interplays.  He  then 
has  a  new  structural  vision  through  a  new  survey  of  his  own  experiences 
and  all  the  experiences  of  others  when  translated  in  terms  of  lower 
centres.  He  gains  a  deeper  insight,  which  he  ultimately  makes  useful 
to  all  of  us. 

Immediate  experience,  always  un-speakable,  is  strictly  connected 
with  the  lower  centres.  In  the  translation  of  experience  into  higher 
order  abstractions  and  language,  the  un-speakable  character  of  experi- 

MATHEMATICS  AND  THE  NERVOUS  SYSTEMS  307 

ence  is  lost,  and  a  new  neurological  process  is  needed  to  re-translate  these 
higher  order  abstractions  into  new  lower  abstractions,  and  thus  fully 
and  successfully  to  complete  the  nervous  cycle.  One  can  learn  to  play 
with  symbols  according  to  rules,  but  such  play  has  little  creative  value. 
If  the  translation  is  made  into  the  language  of  lower  centres — namely, 
into  'intuitions’,  'feelings’,  'visualizations’. , — the  higher  abstractions  gain 
the  character  of  experience,  and  so  creative  actrfity  begins.  Individuals 
with  thoroughly  efficient  nervous  systems  become  hat  we  call  'geniuses’. 
They  create  new  values  by  inventions  of  new  methods  and  in  other  ways, 
which  give  us  a  new  structural  means  of  exploring,  and  thus  of  dealing 
with,  the  world  around  us  and  ourselves,  and  so,  ultimately,  human 
adjustment  is  helped. 

It  is  important  for  the  reader  to  become  thoroughly  familiar  with 
the  simple  division  of  our  nervous  processes  into  terms  of  order  in  a 
cyclic  chain.  Even  neurology  calls  the  neurons  excited  first  of  'first 
order’,  and  the  succeeding  members  of  the  series,  of  'second  order’, . 
The  above  considerations  have  an  important  practical  semantic  bearing 
for  all  of  us,  since  many  of  the  processes  which  we  are  describing  can 
be  influenced  educationally  by  simple  methods,  because  the  term  'order’, 
when  applied,  acquires  a  physiological  character  for  evaluation .  The 
description  and  verbal  analysis  of  the  process  is,  naturally,  complex,  but 
once  the  physiological  base  of  evaluation  is  discovered,  the  training 
becomes  very  simple,  although  not  easy. 

The  principal  aim  of  this  present  work  is  to  make  available  a  simple 
and  practical  physiological  means  for  accomplishing  what  is  highly 
desirable,  and,  at  the  same  time,  for  eliminating  what  is  semantically 
undesirable.  We  deal  with  mathematics,  because  mathematics  is  unique , 
and,  being  unique,  has  no  substitute.  When  discussing  the  theory  of 
meanings,  we  have  shown  that  all  verbalism  is,  ultimately,  similar  to 
mathematics  in  structure.  This  conclusion  contradicts  many  current 
theories  of  language  and  meanings,  and  so,  at  this  stage  of  our  argument, 
we  lay  special  emphasis  on  the  only  discipline  in  which  these  issues  are 
clear  and  obvious  ;  namely,  mathematics.  The  older  theories,  based  on 
ignorance  of  mathematics,  have  led  to  serious  abuses  of  our  linguistic 
capacities  and  to  s.r  which  are  mostly  pathological,  with  the  result  that 
practically  99  per  cent  of  us  are  semantically  disturbed  and  un-sane. 
Many  of  us,  even,  are  on  the  verge  of  more  serious  ‘mental’  illnesses. 

It  will  be  well  to  give  a  rough  picture  of  the  similarities  of,  and 
differences  between,  the  working  of  the  human  'mind’  at  its  worst 
('insanity’),  and  its  working  at  its  best  (mathematics).  We  shall  find 
that  the  average  man  is  between  the  two,  often  dangerously  close  to  the 

V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANGUAGE 

first.  The  following  picture  is  rough  and  one-sided,  but  suggestive,  and 
should  be  worked  out  more  fully. 

The  insane  have  structural,  conscious  or  unconscious,  ‘premises', 
which  are  ‘false’,  or,  in  general,  semantically  inappropriate.  Their  s.r 
are  shifting  when  they  should  be  static,  or  static  when  they  should  be 
flexible.  In  the  main,  the  difficulty  of  evaluation  lies  in  the  lower 
abstractions  and  the  affective  field.  These  abstractions  are  not  properly 
transmitted  or  translated  or  regulated  by  the  higher  centres ;  or  else,  the 
higher  order  static  abstractions  are  projected  with  too  strong  affective 
components  on  the  lower  centres.  Hence,  different  identifications,  delu¬ 
sions,  illusions,  and  hallucinations  result.  Their  ‘ideas’  are  evaluated  as 
things  or  experience,  and  affectively  objectified  in  different  degrees, 
which  results  in  the  above  mis-evaluating  manifestations.  These  seman¬ 
tic  disturbances  and  tensions  make  the  ‘mentally’  ill  believe  irresistibly 
in  the  ‘truth’  of  their  ‘premises’  and  their  inductions  and  deductions, 
which  they  follow  blindly.  In  them,  as  in  the  rest  of  us,  some  internal 
affective  pressure  comes  first,  but  because  in  humans  the  effect  of  higher 
nerve  centres  cannot  be  entirely  abolished,  this  affective  pressure  is 
rationalized  somehow  into  some  sort  of  ‘premises’.  This  organism-as-a- 
whole  process  is  entirely  general  and  applies  to  all  of  us  in  all  our 
activities,  but  is  most  clearly  seen  in  the  ordered  details  in  the  work  of 
creative  scientists  and  ‘geniuses’,  and  in  the  more  severe  cases  of  ‘mental* 
illness.  To  the  mentally’  ill  these  ‘premises’  have  the  value  of  ‘the’  and 
not  ‘a  premise.  They  act  upon  them,  and  so  cannot  adjust  themselves 
to  a  world  different  from  their  fancies.  They  would  seldom  survive  at 
all  if  left  alone  by  themselves,  particularly  in  a  complex  ‘civilization*. 

Mathematicians,  also,  have  structural  premises,  often  called  pos¬ 
tulates,  but  they  never  evaluate  them  to  be  ‘true’ ;  wherefore  their  prem¬ 
ises  cannot  be  ‘false .  They  have  no  claims,  and  claims  are  always 
affective.  Like  the  ‘insane’,  they  follow  up  these  premises  blindly,  but, 
being  generally  conscious  of  abstracting  in  the  field  of  their  profession, 
they  are  not  usually  subject  to  semantic  disturbances  in  this  field  and 
do  not  live  out  their  theories  in  life,  the  theories  thus  remaining  affec¬ 
tively  hypothetical.  If  a  mathematician  were  to  believe,  with  strong 
affective  evaluation,  that  his  premises  are  ‘true’,  these  premises  then 
would  become  mostly  false,  or  meaningless,  or,  in  general,  inappropriate. 
If  he  lived  through  them,  the  given  individual  would  then  be  ‘mentally’ 
ill,  not  because  of  his  premises,  but  because  of  the  semantic  disturbance, 
which  would  involve  erroneous  evaluation,  identifications,  confusion  of 
orders  of  abstractions  in  his  affective  attitude  toward  his  premises.  This 
subtle  organism-as-a- whole  mechanism,  in  which  all  affective  pressure 

MATH  KM  AT  ICS  AND  THE  NERVOUS  SYSTEMS  309 

can  be  rationalized,  and  all  rationalization  can  produce  affective  mani¬ 
festations,  not  only  makes  the  present  non-el  analysis  possible  and  legiti¬ 
mate,  but  also  offers  some  explanation  of  those  remarkable  cases  of 
'mental’  illness  in  a  number  of  mathematical  geniuses.  Under  such 
organism-as-a- whole  structural  conditions,  a  general  consciousness  of 
abstracting  not  restricted  to  a  special  field  is  the  only  possible  safeguard 
against  the  semantic  disturbances  which  lead  to  an  unbalanced  ‘mental’ 

condition.  (  . 

As  we  have  seen,  the  difference  between  ‘sanity  and  insanity  is 
subtle.  The  reader  must  be  reminded  that  it  takes  a  good  ‘mind’  to  be 
‘insane’.  Morons,  imbeciles,  and  idiots  are  ‘mentally’  deficient,  but  could 
not  be  ‘insane’. 

The  so-called  ‘sane’  also  have  structural  premises;  we  all  have  some 
standards  of  evaluation.  These  are  also  usually  false,  or,  in  general, 
inappropriate,  being  mostly  due  to  our  savage  inheritance.  But  the 
saner  we  are,  the  less  we  abide  by  them.  Therefore,  in  a  world  quite 
different  structurally  from  our  fancies,  we  are  often  able  to  adjust  our¬ 
selves  for  all  practical  purposes,  often  avoiding  major  disasters  for  a 
number  of  years. 

For  instance,  the  believers  in  extraordinary  blisses  in  the  ‘other 
life’  or  the  ‘other  world’  should  welcome  death.  Why  be  so  unhappy 
here,  when,  according  to  their  doctrines,  there  is  such  an  ideally  happy 
future  after  death?  Why  make  use  of  medicine  and  doctors,  when  a 
deadly  illness  should  open  the  door  to  everlasting  bliss !  In  conflict  with 
such  a  creed,  he  lives  as  long  as  he  can,  often  most  unhappily,  and  is 
generally  willing  to  spend  fortunes  on  doctors  and  medicines  to  delay 
the  bliss!  The  genuine  and  very  serious  danger  to  all  of  us  of  such 
creeds  is  that  when  the  s.r  of  an  individual  are  trained  in  this  way  he 
finally  does  become  indifferent,  or  apathetic  toward  actualities  in  this 
world ,  so  that  cunning,  and  often  pathological,  individuals  are  thus  given 
an  opportunity  of  directing  human  affairs  toward  their  personal  ends. 

Naturally,  with  the  increase  of  the  complexities  of  conditions,  the 
dangers  also  increase  in  a  geometrical  ratio,  because  when  nt.o  realities 
become  too  unbearable,  the  masses  cease  to  be  influenced  by  these  seman¬ 
tic  illusions,  and  they  'break  all  barriers,  only  to  fall  again  under  the 
influence  of  new  leaders  very  often  equally  irresponsible  and  ignorant. 

Unfortunately,  the  failure  to  understand  these  semantic  issues, 
based  on  animalistic  lack  of  foresight,  results  invariably  in  a  great  deal 
of  unnecessary  suffering.  There  is  little  doubt  that  without  these  delu¬ 
sions  and  illusions  we  should  look  after  the  conditions  of  our  actual 
lives  more  closely,  and  many  of  our  pressing  needs  would  be  adjusted. 

V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANGUAGE 

The  difficulties  which  we  have  are  mostly  man-made,  and  so  only  man¬ 
kind  can  remedy  them,  and  any  attempts  to  escape  from  m.o  reality 
only  aggravate  the  situation. 

Lack  of  space  does  not  allow  me  to  dwell  here  on  many  other 
aspects  of  mathematics  which  are  of  neurological  structural  importance, 
except  to  mention  the  theory  of  statistics  and  probability.  All  human 
knowledge  is  neurologically  due  to  a  process  of  abstracting  in  different 
orders,  giving  us  the  only  structural  knowledge  of  processes,  which,  in 
1933,  must  always  be  considered  on  three  levels,  the  macroscopic,  the 
microscopic,  and  the  sub-microscopic. 

Because  the  nervous  system  is  an  abstracting,  integrating  mechan¬ 
ism,  all  human  psycho-neurological  reactions  and,  particularly,  psycho¬ 
logical,  to  be  similar  in  structure,  must  be  based  on  the  mathematical 
theories  of  statistics  and  probability.  On  the  objective  level,  we  deal  with 
absolute  individuals,  and  so  all  statements,  or  higher  order  abstractions, 
can  only  be  probable.  Historically,  mathematicians  have  elaborated  not 
only  both  theories,  but  Boole,  in  his  Laws  of  Thought, ,  extended  the 
mathematical  approach  to  ‘logic'  in  connection  with  the  theory  of  proba¬ 
bility.  Finally,  the  difficulties  of  the  law  of  excluded  third  have  been 
solved  by  Lukasiewicz  and  Tarski10  in  their  ‘many-valued  logic',  which, 
when  N  increases  indefinitely,  merges  with  the  mathematical  theory  of 
probability,  a  result  reached  independently  by  a  different  type  of  analysis 
in  the  present  system.  Any  possible  future  scientific  A ,  non-el  ‘logic', 
which  I  call  general  semantics,  must  be  built  on  this  structurally  more 
correct  foundation.  It  should  be  noticed  that  the  notions  of  probability 
are  very  flexible,  and  entirely  cover  our  structural  needs,  the  field  of 
degrees  of  probability  ranging  from  impossibility  to  certainty.  This  new 
semantics  involves  entirely  new  affective  attitudes,  and  underlies  new 
and  better  balanced  s.r. 

Under  such  conditions,  the  restricted  ‘uncertainty  principle'  of  Heis¬ 
enberg  becomes  a  structural,  most  revolutionary,  and  creative  general 
principle ,  transferring  the  laws  of  two-valued  ‘cause  and  effect'  from 
the  realm  of  gambling  on  words  by  ‘philosophers'  to  the  scrutiny  of 
scientists,  and  establishing  oo-valued  ‘determinism'  on  a  neuro-mathe- 
matical  base  of  ‘the  greatest  probability'.  Methodologically  and  psycho¬ 
logically,  this  requires  full  consciousness  of  abstracting ,  achieved,  as  yet, 
by  extremely  few  of  us,  even  among  physicists  and  mathematicians. 
Then  the  ‘law'  of  two-valued  ‘cause  and  effect',  instead  of  depending  on 
the  el  and  objectified  older  interpretations,  will  be  based  on  the  mathe¬ 
matical,  and  much  more  reliable,  oo-valued  principle  of  greatest  proba- 

MATHEMATICS  AND  THE  NERVOUS  SYSTEMS  311 

bility.  This  will  eliminate  to  a  large  extent  semantic  disturbances,  and 
so  the  problems  of  sanity  will  be  greatly  helped  towards  solution. 

To  those  who  are  accustomed  to  the  disclaimers  made  by  many 
mathematicians  of  human  values  in  their  work,  such  an  analysis  as  I 
have  given  in  the  present  chapter  must  seem  unexpected.  But,  upon 
reflection,  we  may  see  that,  after  all,  it  is  only  a  natural  evaluation. 
Language  is  a  unique,  and,  therefore,  most  important,  human  character¬ 
istic.  Ought  we  to  wonder  that  these  linguists  of  exact  sciences,  whom 
we  call  mathematicians,  should  have  produced  unknowingly  and  unwit¬ 
tingly  great  human  values,  fundamentally  affecting  the  s.r?  They  could 
not  help  it.  Once  they  worked  out  their  own  problems  properly — and 
no  one  doubts  that  they  did  it  well — the  results  were  bound  to  have 
broad  human  significance.  Their  activities  were  kept  on  the  proper  levels 
and  so  were  naturally  a  help  toward  sanity.  In  Part  VII,  I  shall  discuss 
another  mathematical  discovery,  known  as  the  Theory  of  mathematical 
types',  of  Russell,  which,  when  generalized,  becomes  a  physiological 
theory  of  enormous  semantic  importance  and  of  fundamental  and  con¬ 
stant  human  application. 

In  spite  of  popular  belief,  mathematics  is  the  simplest  language  in 
existence.  Our  daily  language  is  so  very  complex  in  its  structure  that 
for  many  thousand  years  it  evaded  analysis.  Probably,  the  writer,  with¬ 
out  the  study  of  mathematics,  would  not  have  been  able  to  discover  the 
ultimately  extremely  simple  yet  workable  principles  outlined  in  the  pres¬ 
ent  work. 

PART  VI 

ON  THE  FOUNDATION  OF  PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGY 

It  is  an  important  principle  of  physiological  epistemology  that  a  phe¬ 
nomenon  which  occurs  generally,  cannot  possibly  be  the  specific  function 
of  an  organ  which  is  peculiar  to  a  few  forms  only.  (306)  jacques  loeb 

I  have  observed,  as  a  consequence  of  serious  and  repeated  emotional 
shocks,  very  curious  cases  of  infantilism  in  adults,  where  complete  amnesia, 
accompanying  sexual  inhibition  and  disturbances  of  the  affective  area, 
produced  the  mentality  and  conduct  of  a  little  child.  <4ii)  henri  pieron 

The  organism  is  reacting  as  a  whole  to  its  environment  as  a  whole,  and 
it  is  doing  so  in  ways  that  cannot  be  formulated  in  terms  of  an  algebraic 
sum  or  simple  mechanical  resultant  of  the  interplay  of  the  simple  reflex 
responses  to  external  stimulation.  ...  the  mechanisms  of  traditional  reflex¬ 
ology  seem  hopelessly  inadequate.  (224>  c.  judson  herrick 

CHAPTER  XX 

GENERAL  CONSIDERATIONS 

We  know  also  how  different  extra  stimuli  inhibit  and  discoordinate  a 
well-established  routine  of  activity,  and  how  a  change  in  a  pre-established 
order  dislocates  and  renders  difficult  our  movements,  activities  and  the 
whole  routine  of  life.  (394)  I.  p.  pavlov 

The  experiments  show  that  a  compound  stimulus  the  component  units 
of  which  remain  themselves  unaltered,  and  consequently  most  probably 
affect  the  same  cells  of  the  cerebral  cortex,  behaves  in  different  modifica¬ 
tions  as  a  different  stimulus,  evoking  in  these  cells  now  an  excitatory 
process  and  now  an  inhibitory  one.  (394>  I.  P.  pavlov 

We  thus  come  to  the  following  conclusion :  when  perfectly  neutral  stimuli 
fall  upon  the  hemispheres  at  a  time  when  there  prevails  a  state  of  inhibition 
they  acquire  an  inhibitory  function  of  their  own,  so  that  when  they  act 
subsequently  upon  any  region  of  the  brain  which  is  in  a  state  of  excitation 
they  produce  inhibition.  (394)  I.  p.  pavlov 

Some  of  the  most  important  researches  in  the  function  of  the  higher 
nervous  centres  have  been  done  lately  by  Professor  Pavlov  in  his  work 
on  the  so-called  ‘conditioned  reflexes’.  This  work  was  developed  in  a 
series  of  papers  covering  a  period  of  nearly  thirty  years  of  experimenta¬ 
tion,  but  the  average  international  scientist  did  not  know  this  work  as 
an  entirety,  because  the  papers  were  scattered  and  written  mostly  in 
Russian.  Only  in  1927  did  the  Oxford  Press  publish  Pavlov’s  Condi¬ 
tioned  Reflexes,  an  Investigation  of  the  Physiological  Activity  of  the 
Cerebral  Cortex  in  the  English  translation  of  Doctor  G.  V.  Anrep ;  and 
in  1928  The  International  Publishers  (New  York)  published  Pavlov’s 
Lectures  on  Conditioned  Reflexes,  Twenty- five  Years  of  Objective 
Study  of  the  Higher  Nervous  Activity  (Behaviour)  of  Animals  in  the 
translation  of  Doctor  W.  Horsley  Gantt.  Both  translators  were  collabo¬ 
rators  of  Professor  Pavlov  in  Leningrad  for  a  number  of  years.  In 
these  two  books,  the  latest  experiments  and  interpretations  are  given. 

Hitherto,  most  of  the  researches  on  the  function  of  the  higher 
nervous  systems  were  formulated  in  ‘psychological’  languages,  which, 
obviously,  are  not  fit  for  physiological  disciplines.  Professor  Pavlov, 
himself,  suggests  this  fact  as  an  explanation  why,  until  his  work,  the 
physiology  of  the  cerebral  cortex  was  so  little  known.  There  is  no  doubt 
that  the  descriptive  physiological  language  of  happenings,  functionings . , 
used  by  him  exclusively,  is  responsible  for  his  results.  This  language 
suggests  structurally  new  experimentations,  which  suggestions  are  lack¬ 
ing  in  other  accounts  of  the  kind  where  antiquated  ‘psychological*  terms 
are  used. 

Although  I  knew  as  much  as  the  average  scientist  about  the  work 
of  Pavlov,  this  knowledge  was  not  integrated  enough  to  make  some 

dU>  VI.  ON  rSYCI  lOIil  YSIOIXKiY 

issues  clear.  But,  after  I  had  formulated  my  ^-system,  I  read  the 
books  of  Pavlov  and  found,  to  my  great  satisfaction,  that  a  neurological 
mechanism,  the  analysis  of  which  underlies  my  own  work,  and  the  exist¬ 
ence  of  which  was  independently  discovered  by  me  on  theoretical 
grounds,  had  been  discovered  by  Professor  Pavlov  and  his  co-workers 
on  experimental  grounds,  thus  supplying  additional  experimental  veri¬ 
fication  for  my  system. 

It  seems  that  the  so-called  ‘ethics*. ,  in  general,  sanity,  which  underlie 
desirable  human  characteristics  have  a  definite  physiological  mechanism, 
automatically  involving  on  psycho-logical  levels  these  desirable  semantic 
attitudes.  It  appears  that  some  of  the  psycho-logical  problems  enor¬ 
mously  complex  and  difficult  to  reach,  or  even  inaccessible,  are  solved, 
not  by  preaching,  but  by  the  most  simple  and  elementary  physiological 
training,  a  fact  which  has  been  verified  empirically.  Obviously,  such 
simplification,  if  at  all  possible,  must  be  of  fundamental  importance. 

Physiology  deals,  in  the  main,  with  the  functioning  of  oVgans  in 
organisms,  and  results  in  various  formulations.  Thus,  there  might  be 
an  hypothetical  ‘physiological  theory  of  most  effective  feeding*,  for  in¬ 
stance,  stating  that  food  should  be  secured  first  in  one*s  hand,  or  spoon, 
or  fork,  before  putting  it  in  the  mouth , .  A  group  of  people  who  habitu¬ 
ally  disregarded  the  ‘physiological  theory*  and  abandoned  attempts  to  act 
in  accordance  with  it  after  the  first  unsuccessful  one,  would  be  badly 
underfed  or  would  simply  perish.  Facts  of  experience  show  that  some 
such  ‘physiological  theory*  must  have  been  known  and  applied  from  time 
immemorial,  and  that,  perhaps,  because  of  it  we  survive  at  all! 

How  about  the  ‘mental*  field?  As  I  demonstrate— and  close  observa^ 
tion  will  verify  this  very  generally — the  existing  theories  of  ‘mental* 
life,  closely  related  with  our  linguistic  habits,  are  A,  grossly  inadequate, 
and  lead  to  a  wholesale  production  of  morons,  imbeciles,  ‘emotionally* 
disturbed,  and,  in  general,  un-sane  individuals.  Investigation  shows  the 
possibility  of  a  simple  and  obvious  physiological  theory  of  the  use  of  our 
nervous  system,  which  automatically  leads  to  desirable  psycho-logical, 
semantic  states  of  general  sanity. 

In  the  frivolous  example  of  a  ‘physiological  theory  of  feeding*  given 
above,  the  problems  of  order  were  important.  In  the  physiological 
theory  of  sanity,  order  becomes  paramount*  Processes  and  function 
involve  series  of  states,  by  necessity  exhibiting  order.  Adjustment  to 
life-conditions  means  adjustment  of  processes,  and  a  physiological  theory 
of  sanity  must  be  based  structurally  on  four-dimensional  order,  where 
‘space*  and  ‘time*  are  indivisibly  interwoven. 

GENERAL  CONSIDERATIONS 

Pavlov  shows,  in  an  unusually  impressive  variety  and  numbers  of 
experiments,  how  ‘order’  and  ‘delay’  (four-dimensional  order,  in  the 
language  used  here  in  this  connection)  are  intimately  related  with  most 
fundamental  processes  in  the  higher  nervous  centres,  and  how,  by  the 
changes  or  interplays  of  them,  we  can  produce  or  eliminate  pathological 
states  of  the  nervous  system. 

In  the  human  field  we  find  a  quite  similar  situation,  unanalysable 
by  older  methods,  because  all  order  involves  asymmetrical  relations, 
which,  as  we  have  already  shown,  cannot  be  dealt  with  by  A  means. 

The  issue  is  clear  and  definite :  either  we  persist  in  our  old  A  habits 
of  speech,  in  which  case  asymmetrical  relations  and  order  evade  our 
grasp,  and  proper  evaluation  and  sanity  are  physiologically  impossible, 
or  we  build  a  A- system  free,  or  at  least  more  free,  from  these  evalua- 
tional  limitations,  which  allows  us  to  deal  with  order,  and  sanity  becomes 
physiologically  possible . 

‘Stimuli  are  never  “simple”,  and,  by  necessity,  involve  fourfold 
space-time  structure  and  order.  Survival  values  involve,  also,  this  four¬ 
dimensional  order.  For  instance,  the  natural  survival  order  is  “senses” 
first,  “mind”  next;  object  first,  label  next;  description  first,  inference 
next , .  The  reversal  of  the  natural  order  appears  pathological  and  patho¬ 
genic  and  is  found  as  a  symptom  in  practically  all  forms  of  “mental” 
ills,  as  well  as  in  most  human  difficulties  and  disturbances  which,  at 
present,  are  still  not  considered  abnormal.  Thus,  objectivity  is  ascribed 
to  words,  “mind”  projected  into  “senses”,  inferences  evaluated  as  descrip¬ 
tions  . , — quite  common  “symptoms”  .  .  .  Observations  on  human  levels 
show  that  we  still  copy  animals  in  our  nervous  responses,  confuse  orders 
of  abstractions  (non-existent  for  the  animals),  leading  fatalistically  to 
the  reversal  of  the  natural  order  and  to  pathological  results,  making  the 
great  majority  of  us  un-sane.’* 

A  structural  non-el  enquiry  into  the  objective  world  shows  quite 
clearly  that  no  event  is  ever  ‘simple’ ;  it  is,  at  least,  a  limited  whole  of 
interrelated  factors.  The  eventual  ‘simplicity’  is  manufactured  by  a 
nervous  process  of  higher  and  higher  abstractions. 

In  our  consideration  of  ‘order’  and  ‘delay’,  and  the  role  they  play  in 
connection  with  the  activities  of  the  nervous  system,  we  must  first  dis¬ 
criminate  sharply  between  the  objective  level  which  is  unspeakable , 
because  anything  that  can  be  said  is  not  the  object,  and  the  verbal  level, 
on  which  we  can,  at  will,  concentrate  attention  on  similarities,  or  differ¬ 
ences,  or  both.  Secondly,  we  must  pay  special  attention  to  structure — 

♦From — Discussion  by  A.  Korzybski.  Proceedings  of  the  First  International 
Congress  of  Mental  Hygiene.  New  York,  1932. 

VI.  ON  PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGY 

that  is  to  say,  search  for  structure  in  the  empirical  world,  and,  once  this 
has  been  found,  adjust,  accordingly,  the  structure  of  our  language. 

The  structure  of  the  daily,  as  well  as  of  the  ‘philosophical*,  lan¬ 
guage,  which  we  inherited,  in  the  main,  from  our  primitive  ancestors,  is 
such  that  we  have  separate  terms  for  factors  which  are  not  separable, 
such  as  ‘matter*,  ‘space*,  ‘time’,  or  ‘body*,  fsoul*,  ‘mind*, .  Then,  as  it  were, 
we  try  to  make  out  of  the  word,  flesh,  by  reversing  the  natural  order 
and  affectively  ascribing  a  delusional  objectivity  to  these  terms. 

If  we  deal  with  the  silent,  un-speakable,  objective  level  and  try  to 
divide  according  to  the  implications  of  the  verbal  division,  we  find  a 
brutal  fact,  which,  until  Einstein  and  Minkowski,  has  escaped  scientific 
verbal  formulation,  that  this  cannot  be  done  at  all.  On  the  objective 
level  every  dealing  with  ‘matter*  involves  ‘space*  and  ‘time* ;  any  dealing 
with  ‘space*  involves  some  fulness  of  something  and  ‘time*;  and  every 
dealing  with  ‘time*  involves  ‘something*  and  ‘space*. 

^  The  structure  of  the  world  happens  to  be  such  that  empirically  ‘mat¬ 
ter  ,  space ,  time ,  cannot  be  divided ;  wherefore,  we  should  have  a 
non~el  language  of  similar  structure ..  This  was  accomplished  by  Einstein- 
*  see  page  Jdi  Minkowksi,  when  they  created  a  language  of  ‘space-time*,  in  which  the 
hard  lumps  against  which  we  bump  our  noses  are  connected  analytically 
with  the  curvature  of  space-time. 

In  this  new,  non-el ,  four-dimensional  language,  every  three-dimen¬ 
sional  point  of  space  has  a  date,  and  so  is  different.  For  our  purpose, 
we  do  not  need,  at  present,  to  bother  much  about  its  curvature  or  the 
kinks  in  space-time,  called  in  the  old  way  ‘matter’,  but  we  must  empha¬ 
size  that  the  fourfold  order  is  of  great  importance,  as  it  corresponds 
structurally  to  experience ,  and  is  intimately  connected  with  physiological 
reactions,  the  semantic  included. 

There  is  a  great  deal  of  confusion  about  these  problems  among 
laymen  and  also  among  scientists.  From  a  structural  point  of  view,  the 
issues  are  quite  simple,  and  there  is  nothing  sensational  in  the  latest 
announcement  of  Einstein  that  ‘space*  in  its  importance  is  displacing 
‘matter*  ( Nottingham  Lectures).  Naturally,  the  statement  in  this  form 
is  rather  baffling  and  attracted  much — even  newspaper — attention.  Yet 
it  seems  that  even  the  einsteinists  do  not  fully  realize  the  verbal ,  struc¬ 
tural ,  and  semantic  issues  involved. 

For  the  layman,  as  well  as  for  the  majority  of  the  physicists  in  their 
less  sober,  or  metaphysical,  moments,  ‘space*  is  ‘emotionally*  newtonian 
and  an  ‘absolute  void*,  which,  of  course,  being  ‘absolute  nothingness*, 
cannot  have  objective  existence,  by  definition.  For  Einstein,  ‘space-time* 
is,  semantically,  ‘fulness*,  not  ‘emptiness’,  and,  in  his  language ,  he  does 

GENERAL  CONSIDERATIONS 

not  need  any  term  like  ‘ether’,  as  his  ‘plenum’,  structurally,  covers  the 
ground,  without  his  committing  himself  to  a  definite  two- valued  mechan¬ 
istic  ether.  The  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions,  from  which  we  all 
suffer,  is  semantic,  and  is  due  to  disregard  of  the  structure  and  role  of 
language.  If  we  accept  a  non-el  language  of  space-time,  structurally  we 
deal  with  fulness,  and  we  should  not  use  the  term  ‘space’,  as  its  old 
semantic  implications  are  ‘emptiness’  and  so  are  very  confusing.  The 
‘sensation’  of  Einstein’s  declaration  amounts  to  the  fact  that  the  sub- 
microscopic  fulness  (‘space’)  is  more  important  than  a  few  kinks  or 
concentrations  of  that  fulness  (‘matter’), — a  fact  which  science  has 
established,  and  which  is  quite  obvious. 

Experiments  with  ‘conditioned  reflexes’  have  established  firmly  tlv 
fact  that  stimuli  can  be  compounded,  and  that,  when  established,  the 
compound  stimulus  acts  as  a  unit,  and  that  a  change  in  the  four-dimen¬ 
sional  order  of  factors  (including  delays)  acts  as  a  different  stimulus, 
not  necessarily  resulting  in  the  established  reflex.  This  often  introduces 
great  complexities. 

As  an  example  of  this,  we  will  use  the  so-called  ‘delayed  reflex . 
When  established,  the  ‘conditioned  reflex’  does  not  appear  at  once  after 
the  stimulation,  but  after  the  stimulation  combined  with  the  usual  ‘time’- 
delay  has  occurred,  thus  showing  that  the  ‘time’  factor  plays  a  physio¬ 
logical  role  in  a  compound  stimulus.  Organisms  live  in,  and  consist 
of,  periodic  processes,  such  as  the  alternation  of  day  and  night,  sleep, 
taking  in  food,  heart-beats,  breathing,  electronic  pulsations . ;  so  that  any 
stimulus,  no  matter  how  nominally  ‘simple’,  is,  in  reality,  a  compound 
stimulus  of,  let  us  say,  x  and  y  heart-beats  and  what  not.  An  organism 
represents,  invariably,  a  clock  of  some  sort,  and,  when  that  clock  stops, 
life  ceases. 

Under  such  actual  structural  conditions  a  four-dimensional  analysis 
makes  every  ‘simple’  stimulus  compound,  and  thus  four-dimensional 
order  becomes  a  potent  physiological  factor,  exerting  definite  effects. 
The  interplay  of  four-dimensional  order  of  factors  represents,  in  general, 
a  new  stimulus ;  we  have  an  interplay  of  positive  and  negative  excitations 
which  may  lead  to  clashes  between  the  two  that  the  nervous  system  finds 
difficult  to  resolve,  and  so  pathological  results  follow. 

If  we  pass  to  sub-microscopic  levels  and  processes,  we  find  that, 
although  we  may  speak  of  them  as  ‘chemical’  or  ‘stimuli  of  greater 
physiological  strength’. ,  yet,  by  structural  necessity,  they  represent  dif¬ 
ferent  kinds  of  multi-dimensional  order,  because,  as  we  say  in  1933,  the 
dynamic  physical  unit  of  that  order  is  a  quantum  of  action.  The  meta¬ 
physician  should  not  get  excited  about  this  statement,  because  whatever 

VI.  ON  PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGY 

he  might  say  will  also  be  a  verbal  statement  of  a  given  date,  made 
mostly  without  any  structural  considerations,  and  based  mostly  upon 
the  reversed  survival  order,  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions  and 
other  semantic  disturbances.  As  the  world,  both  outside  and  inside  our 
skins,  is  invariably  found  to  exhibit  a  fourfold  space-time  order,  it  is 
inevitable  that  this  order  should  be  structurally  impressed  on  the  nervous 
system,  establishing  a  natural  survival  order.  Therefore,  changes  in  this 
order  on  the  macroscopic  level,  the  level  of  outward  events,  must  have 
direct  inward  sub-microscopic  effects,  disturbing  or  restoring  the  nervous 
equilibrium.  This  statement  may  appear  innocent;  it  is  not;  it  has  a 
vital  human  significance,  as  it  involves  standards  of  evaluation.  In  short, 
it  means  that,  in  the  actual  application  of  the  consideration  of  order  in 
education  and  training  on  the  daily-life  levels,  we  can  affect  the  evasive 
(as  yet)  microscopic  and  sub-microscopic  structural  levels  of  the  human 
nervous  system,  thus  directly  affecting  our  s.r  and  behaviour. 

To  make  this  clearer,  let  us  recall  some  of  the  neurological  researches 
of  Bolton  (as  quoted  by  Herrick).  The  cortex  has  different  layers,  char¬ 
acterized  by  the  difference  in  the  number,  size,  shape,  internal  structure, 
and  density  of  neural  cells.  Bolton's  third  layer  of  granules  divides  the 
cortex  into  two  types  of  layers.  Those  closer  to  the  base  of  the  brain,  or 
below  the  third,  are  called  the  infragranular ;  those  above,  the  supra- 
granular,  layers. 

The  Six-months  New-bo»*n  Normal 
mole  foetus  ohiltf  human 

adult 

Fig.  1 

Diagrams  of  the  relative  thickness  of  the 
supragranular,  granular,  and  infragranular 
cerebral  cortex  in  the  six-months  foetus,  the 
new-born  child,  the  normal  human  adult,  and 
the  adult  mole.  The  granular  layer  is  dotted. 
(Redrawn  from  G.  A.  Watson  (1907),  and 
adopted  from  Herrick.1) 

The  lower  mammals  show 
a  well-developed  infragranular 
cortex,  and  a  very  poorly  or¬ 
ganized  supragranular  cortex, 
the  latter  increasing  in  relative 
size  and  complexity  as  we 
ascend  the  animal  series.  On 
the  human  level,  we  find  a  most 
important,  and  usually  disre¬ 
garded,  fact — that  the  human 
nervous  system  is  not  com¬ 
pleted  at  birth,  but  develops 
structurally  years  after  birth. 

The  above  explains  why 
animalistic  theories  and  meth¬ 
ods,  primitive-made  languages 
of  wrong  structure,  and  similar 
relics,  result  in  training  the  s.r 
of  our  children  in  the  patho- 

GENERAL  CONSIDERATIONS 

logical  order,  and  bring  about  such  great  harm,  individually  and  col¬ 
lectively.  It  enables  us  to  understand,  also,  why  all  forms  of  'mental*  ills 
invariably  exhibit  infantile  characteristics  of  some  sort. 

If  we  train  a  child  with  a  physically  undeveloped  nervous  system  in 
animalistic  doctrines  strictly  connected  with  a  primitive-made  language 
of  wrong  structure,  in  the  pathological  reversed  order  of  responses,  such 
semantic  training  must  affect  harmfully  the  still  developing  nervous 
system.  So,  when  we  say,  and  demonstrate,  that  we  still  copy  animals 
in  our  nervous  responses,  we  imply  an  undeveloped  or  thwarted  nervous 
system,  of  which  the  development  has  been  arrested  or  made  regressive. 
Such  a  deficiency,  of  course,  is  superimposed  functionally,  and  so  struc¬ 
turally,  upon  whatever  congenital  deficiency  there  might  have  been  in  a 
given  case.  We  are  nearly  all  in  a  situation  of  this  kind.  We  continue 
to  be  educated  under  animalistic  conditions  since  we  became  time-binders, 
which,  from  a  biological  point  of  view,  is  a  very  recent  event,  and  it  is 
not  rash  to  assume  that  our  nervous  system  is  still  not  fully  developed, 
the  more  so  that  we  submit  the  cortex,  which  in  childhood  is  still  incom¬ 
plete,  to  injurious  semantic  influences.  Obviously,  such  a  fundamental 
human  function  as  language,  when  used  in  a  way  not  in  correspondence 
with  the  structure  of  the  nervous  system,  must  act  detrimentally  on  its 
development. 

In  congenital  extreme  imbecility,  the  cortex  is  poorly  organized, 
thin,  and  deficient  in  nerve  cells,  and  the  infragranular  layers  show  less 
impairment  than  the  supragranular  layers.  It  seems  that  Bolton’s  second 
supragranular  layer  is  the  last  to  mature,  and  its  relative  development 
corresponds  to  the  relative  development  of  an  animal  or  human  being, 
and,  in  a  way,  it  goes  parallel  with  the  so-called  'intelligence*. 

In  human  defectives,  its  deficiency  corresponds  with  the  degree  of 
psycho-logical  arrest,  regression,  or  deterioration.  Let  us  recall  that 
these  ‘mental’  deficiencies,  which,  in  behaviour  as  well  as  in  nervous 
structure,  take  us  one  step  (or  several)  back  toward  the  level  of  the 
infant,  or  even  to  that  of  the  animal,  are  always  connected  with  infantile 
behaviour  in  adults,  and  semantic  disturbances. 

Nervous  as  well  as  muscular  tissues  have  differentiated  from  the 
general  protoplasm,  and  we  know  positively  that,  through  training,  we 
can  enlarge  or  otherwise  improve  muscular  tissues,  and  there  is  no  reason 
to  doubt  that  something  similar  can  be  done  to  nervous  tissue.  All  educa¬ 
tion,  and  the  establishing  of  any  conditional  or  s.r ,  shows  this,  although 
in  a  rather  vague  way. 

If,  by  a  physiological  training  based  on  order,  we  can  alter  a  nervous 
deficiency,  as  shown  by  behaviour,  we  may  conclude  that  there  are  physio- 

VI.  UN  PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGY 

logical  means  by  which  we  can  effectively  train  and  help  the  development 
of  nervous  cells  and  supragranular  layers— or,  at  least,  not  hinder  their 
natural  development.  On  the  macroscopic  levels,  this  beneficial  training 
consists  in  forming  habits  of  proper  evaluation  through  the  natural  sur¬ 
vival  order.  The  effect  of  this  on  the  sub-microscopic  level  is  neural 
colloidal,  and  structural,  a  result  which,  by  the  older  methods,  could  not 
be  reached,  either  with  ease  or  with  effectiveness. 

Although  these  conclusions  are  necessary,  it  is  impossible  directly  *d 
verify  them  empirically,  because  we  should  have  to  dissect  the  brain  of  a 
given  person  before,  and  during,  the  training.  In  this  case,  as  in  many 
others,  we  have  to  observe  ‘human  nature’  and  semantic  responses  to 
stimuli  of  a  given  individual  before  and  after  the  training;  and,  on  the 
foundation  of  what  we  know  of  the  development  of  the  nervous  system 
in  animals,  infants,  ‘mentally’  defective  and  well-developed  adults,  build 
our  eventual  conclusion  as  preliminary  hypotheses  for  further  structural 
testing,  improvement,  and  empirical  verification. 

To  realize  fully  the  importance  and  necessity  of  this  conclusion,  we 
must  first  understand  that,  in  accordance  with  the  modern  discoveries  of 
mathematics,  physics,  chemistry,  colloidal  chemistry,  and  other  branches 
of  science,  all  function  depends  on  structure ,  because  the  unit-brick  of 
structure  represents  a  dynamic  unit  of  a  quantum  of  action.  In  the 
remarks  which  follow,  it  is  impossible  to  be  as  full  and  precise  as  I 
should  like  to  be,  because  to  be  able  to  do  so  would  be  equivalent  to  being 
able  to  solve  all  scientific  problems ;  yet  the  reader  should  realize  that  the 
considerations  of  structure  will  become  extremely  creative  and  helpful  as 
long  as  we  recognize  a  quantum  of  action,  or  any  other  dynamic  unit. 

We  may  recall  that  the  characteristics  of  molecules  are  due  to  atomic 
structure,  and  that  the  characteristics  of  atoms  are  due  to  electronic 
structure.  The  latest  quantum  theories  also  seem  to  find  that  the  char¬ 
acteristics  of  electrons  are  an  outgrowth  of  structure;  and,  if  the  sug¬ 
gestions  of  Dirac  are  verified,  even  the  difference  between  positive  and 
negative  electricity  is  structural.  Even  at  present  it  appears  that  ‘struc¬ 
ture’  is  not  only  a  term  fit  to  handle  and  explain,  but  that  it  has  an 
objective  counterpart,  allowing  a  similarity  of  structure,  and,  therefore, 
making  the  understanding  of  this  world  possible. 

This  last  very  important  semantic  point  is  based  on  the  fact  that 
relations  of  similar  structure  have  similar  ‘logical’  characteristics,  and 
that,  therefore,  in  structure  we  find  means  by  which  the  events  can 
always  be  made  intelligible  to  us,  and  so  properly  evaluated. 

Experience— my  own,  as  well  as  that  drawn  from  scientific  litera¬ 
ture-impresses  me  with  the  fact  that  we  very  seldom  realize  that  our 

GENERAL  CONSIDERATIONS 

knowledge'  (or,  roughly,  what  we  can  say )  is  not  ‘it’,  as  the  ‘it'  is 
always  un-speakable. 

Between  two  houses  or  two  stones,  there  is  some  sort  of  sub- 
microscopic  interaction ;  but  on  the  macroscopic  level,  nothing  definite 
happens.  So  we  say  that  in  the  given  context  or  configuration,  the  units 
under  consideration  are  too  heavy  (implying  gravitational  structure),  or 
the  medium,  the  plenum  in  which  they  are  immersed,  is  too  light  (again 
structural  implications)  and  so,  macroscopically,  nothing  obvious  happens. 

If  that  structure  is  changed,  different  conditions,  different  relations 
and  results  prevail.  Thus,  if  the  particles  are  very  small,  and  the  media 
not  too  heavy,  the  surface  phenomena,  electrical  charges . ,  begin  to  play 
an  important  role.  We  then  have  colloidal  behaviour  of  enormous  com¬ 
plexity  and  variability  where  we  find,  not  necessarily  life,  but  many 
inorganic  forms,  duplicating  some  forms  found  in  life.  Obviously,  col¬ 
loidal  structure  accounts  for  that.2 

When  little  colloidal  wholes,  most  probably  of  specialized  internal 
structure,  arise,  we  may  have  not  only  colloids,  but  also  little  wholes, 
separated  by  a  membrane,  or  perhaps  by  surface  phenomena,  which  rep¬ 
resent  a  most  generalized  membrane.  We  may  have  a  new  structural 
fact,  an  interplay  of  the  inside  with  the  outside,  and  life  begins. 

The  general  irritability  and  conductivity  of  protoplasm  is  known 
to  be  strictly  connected  with  permeability  to  the  passage  of  ions  and, 
therefore,  is  a  structural  phenomenon.  On  this  structural  foundation, 
physiological  gradients  result,  forming  a  dynamic  field  of  forces,  again 
involving  structure.  The  development  of  the  differentiated  tissue  of 
muscles  and  nerves  consists  of  higher  order  complex  structures,  based 
on  more  primitive  structures ;  and,  finally,  function  and  behaviour  of  all 
life,  man  included,  is  due  to  sub-microscopic,  microscopic,  and  macro¬ 
scopic  structure. 

I  may  be  reproached  by  specialists  that,  although  what  I  have  just 
said  may  possibly  be  true,  yet,  actually,  to  make  these  assertions  is,  per¬ 
haps,  premature,  in  1933,  because  we  lack  too  many  details. 

My  answer  is  sharp  and  definite,  and  may  be  considered  a  serious 
scientific  suggestion,  because  it  can  be  made  legitimately  in  this  form: 

1)  All  science  depends  on  human  ‘knowledge'. 

2)  All  human  ‘knowledge'  is  structurally  circular  and  self -reflexive, 
and  so  depends  on  some  conscious  or  unconscious  theory  of  knowledge 
and  undefined  terms. 

3)  Words  are  not  the  things  we  speak  about ;  and,  therefore, 

4)  The  only  possible  connection  between  the  objective  and  un¬ 
speakable  levels  and  words  is  structural;  introducing 

VI.  ON  PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGY 

5)  Structural  analysis  of  languages  as  fundamental;  making 

6)  The  only  possible  content  of  * knowledge’  structural ,  and 

7)  All  science  becomes  a  search  for  the  unknown  structure  of  the 
empirical  world  on  all  levels,  and  the  matching  of  this  unknown  structure 
with  the  potentially  known  structure  of  languages ;  so  that 

8)  All  knowledge  is  hypothetical,  in  which 

9)  The  most  important  facts  must  be  negative.  When  the  structures 
do  not  match,  then  we  learn  something  quite  definite  about  the  empirical 
structures. 

10)  All  predictability  becomes  possible  because  of  similarity  of 
structure ;  and  so  definitely  making 

11)  All  possible  aims  and  quests  of  science  uniquely  structural* 
necessitating 

12)  Unique  methods  of  translation  of  dynamic  into  static,  and  vice 
versa,  in  order  to  cover  the  structural  exigency  of  both  the  dynamic 
world  and  the  static  languages. 

13)  Such  unique  methods  of  translation  are  given  in  the  differential 
calculus  and  four-dimensional  geometries,  in  which 

14)  What  in  a  four-dimensional  language  is  structure  becomes  in 
three-dimensional  language  ‘importing  time’  function;  showing  once 
more  that 

15)  Structural  considerations  are  not  only  a  modern  necessity,  but 
also  the  most  creative  and  helpful  for  the  future  development  of  science 
and  man,  and  justifying  the  above  assertions,  with  the  setback  that 

16)  Full  1933  structural  analysis,  being  one  of  the,  or  perhaps  the, 
highest  abstraction  of  this  date,  the  mastering  of  that  language  may 
present  some  difficulties. 

The  reader  must  be  reminded  (see,  for  details,  Part  VII)  that  the 
terms  structure’,  ‘function’. ,  are  multiordinal  terms  with  many  meanings, 
and  so  that  they  have  no  general  meaning  apart  from  context,  but  have 
definite  meaning  in  each  context.  Without  this  realization  of  the  multi- 
ordmality  of  terms,  the  statement  above  could  not  be  made,  for  it  is  a 
structural  statement  about  languages. 

As  an  example  of  the  immense  and  inherent  importance  of  consid¬ 
erations  of  four-dimensional  order,  the  following  psychological  experi¬ 
ment  for  which  Doctor  Harry  Helson  has  suggested  lately  the  name  of 
Tau  effect,  is  useful.® 

,  1  stunulate  three  spots  of  the  skin  by  touching  them  lightly  with 

the  end  of  a  pencil  in  quick  succession,  and  if  the  distance  between  the 
first  and  the  second  spots  is,  say,  20  mm.,  and  that  between  the  second 
and  the  third  is  10  mm.*  but  the  ‘time’  interval  between  the  second  and 

GKNKRAL  CONSIDERATIONS 

the  third  stimulations  is  twice  as  long  as  that  between  the  first  and  the 
second,  the  distance  between  the  second  and  the  third  spots  will  be  judged 
as  nearly  twice  as  great  as  that  between  the  first  and  second.  Similar 
results  are  obtained  with  other  analysers,  such  as  vision  and  hearing. 
If  we  change  the  conditions  of  the  experiment,  the  results  may  be 
reversed.  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  the  effect  does  not  depend  on 
'knowing',  as  similar  results  happen  when  the  subject  knows  the  condi¬ 
tions  of  the  experiment.  The  last  shows  that  the  experiment  deals  with 
a  physiological  and  neurological  mechanism.  In  general  terms,  if  we 
vary  the  time-interval  in  the  opposite  sense  from  the  space-interval,  the 
latter  will  be  distorted,  showing  once  more  the  structural  fact  that  in 
actual  life  and  experience  we  deal  exclusively  with  the  four-dimensional 
space-time  order,  which,  as  such,  must  have  physiological  and  neuro¬ 
logical  significance,  and  an  adapting  mechanism. 

CHAPTER  XXI 
ON  CONDITIONAL  REFLEXES 

The  conditioned  reflex  is  conventionally  regarded  as  differing  essentially 
trom  the  unconditioned  reflex,  but  this  is  contradicted  by  evidence  drawn 
from  the  development  of  behavior.  (io7)  G.  E.  coghzll 

The  main  experiments  of  Pavlov  were  made  on  dogs,  animals  with 
a  rather  well-developed  nervous  system ;  and  so  most  of  what  he  has  to 
say  is  about  dogs,  although  some  general  physiological  facts  apply  to  all 
the  higher  nervous  systems,  man  included.  In  some  instances;  because 
of  human  complexities,  some  results  must  be  re-interpreted,  structural 
linguistic  re-adjustments  made,  and  some  obscuring,  wrong-in-structure, 
el  ‘psychological’  terms  analysed  and  rejected.  My  linguistic,  structural, 
non~elt  theoretical  revision  leads  to  a  new  and  important  enlargement  of 
the  application  to  man  of  the  Pavlov  experimental  theory  of  ‘conditioned’ 
reflexes.  The  fact  that  these  independent  discoveries  reinforce  and 
support  each  other  is  a  striking  instance  of  the  usefulness  of  theoretical 
researches. 

We  must  take  care  to  notice  and  beware  of  the  differences  in  lan¬ 
guages.  Any  happening  has  as  many  aspects  as  there  are  sciences,  or 
even  human  interests.  Thus,  if  we  speak  about  an  objective  ‘pencil’,  we 
may  speak  about  its  chemistry,  or  methods  of  manufacturing,  its  uses, 
prices,  markets , .  As  the  content  of  knowledge  is  structural,  we  must 
search  empirically  for  structure,  understood  nowadays  always  on  three 
levels  (the  term  being  multiordinal),  the  macroscopic  gross  structure, 
the  microscopic,  and  sub-microscopic  structures. 

When  we  deal  with  life  phenomena,  we  have  also  different  lan¬ 
guages  dealing  with  their  different  aspects.  Thus,  a  biological  language 
would  cover  eventually  the  vital  events  in  general ;  a  physiological  lan¬ 
guage  would  be  narrower  and  cover  the  analysis  of  phenomena  in  an 
organism,  the  function  of  its  organs  and  the  conditions  and  the  mech¬ 
anism  which  determine  these  functions ;  a  neurological  language  would 
be  physiological  as  applied  only  to  the  nervous  system.  The  day  is  not 
distant  when  all  these  problems  will  be  formulated  in  the  language  of 
the  quantum  mechanics. 

A  psycho-logical  language  is  legitimate  only  on  human  levels,  as 
we  never  know,  or  can  know,  what  an  animal  ‘thinks’,  ‘feels’. ,  and  on 
human  levels  it  applies  to  so-called  ‘psychic’  phenomena  only. 

Usually,  one  extremely  fundamental  semantic  fact  is  disregarded ; 
namely,  that  what  on  the  psycho-logical  level  is  objective  and  in  language 
descriptive  to  one  person  (e.g.,  ‘my  toothache’),  is  inferential  to  the  other 

ON  CONDITIONAL  REFLEXES 

person,  and  vice  versa.  The  lack  of  consciousness  of  abstracting  intro¬ 
duces,  by  structural  necessity,  an  identification  of  orders  of  abstractions ; 
namely,  the  confusion  of  descriptions  with  inferences,  and  vice  versa. 
This  makes  it  imperative  to  avoid  psycho-logical  language  as  much  as 
possible.  It  is  also  bad  epistemology  to  use  a  language  which  applies  to  a 
few  individuals  (psycho-logics)  for  describing  functions  which  are  much 
more  general,  and  which,  fundamentally,  apply  to  all  organisms. 

It  is  a  striking  fact  that,  although  physiology  is  a  fairly  old  and  well- 
developed  discipline,  yet  the  purely  physiological  approach  to  the  study 
of  the  brain-functions  is  very  recent,  and,  in  the  main,  has  been  carried 
on  by  Pavlov  and  his  followers.  Pavlov  gives  us  a  simple  yet  profoundly 
true  explanation;  namely,  that  the  higher  nervous  centres  have  never 
been  treated  on  equal  footing  with  other  organs,  or  other  parts  of  the 
nervous  system.  The  activities  of  the  hemispheres  have  been  treated 
from  a  ‘psychological’  point  of  view,  and,  by  analogy,  we  have  ascribed 
to  animals  similar  ‘psychological’  states,  a  remnant  of  primitive  animism. 
As  such  attitudes  have  become  more  and  more  obviously  absurd,  we  have 
drifted  into  the  opposite  absurdity  of  animalism,  ascribing  animal  charac¬ 
teristics  to  man,  forgetting  that  the  human  nervous  system  is  far  more 
complex,  matures  later  than  in  any  animal,  and  is  a  non-additive  affair. 
Naturally,  reasoning  by  such  analogies  must  be  fallacious. 

The  prevalent  complete  disregard  of  the  fact  that  these  issues  are 
linguistic  and  structural  makes  the  advances  in  these  fields  very  slow  and 
halting,  and  only  so-called  ‘geniuses’  are  capable  of  breaking  through 
these  semantic  barriers.  Once  the  linguistic  character  of  the  issues  is 
fully  realized,  the  psycho-logical,  semantic  blockage  is  removed,  freedom 
of  analysis  is  inwardly  established,  and  even  ‘non-geniuses’  will  produce 
important  creative  work.  Indeed,  we  may  find  that  with  this  realization, 
particularly  if  embodied  in  early  education,  the  ‘normal’  man  would  be, 
what  we  call  at  present,  a  ‘genius’. 

This  conclusion  naturally  follows  if  we  abandon  animalistic  analo¬ 
gies  and  face  the  fact  that  high-grade  human  intelligence  happens  to  be 
not  less  ‘natural’  and  inherent  in  the  history  of  evolution  than  any  other 
‘tropism’.  By  eliminating  the  psycho-logical  semantic  blockage  due  to 
copying  animals  in  our  nervous  reactions,  we  may  handle  this  important 
human  function  of  language  properly.  Man  will  function  as  man,  in 
accordance  with  the  structure  of  his  more  complex  nervous  system. 
There  is  no  doubt  at  present  that  some  organisms  called  ‘man’  have  an 
important  function  connected  with  s.r  called  speech ,  perhaps  the  most 
complex  and  involved  and  also  unique  function  evolved  by  this  class  of 
life,  and  which  it  does  not  yet  know  how  to  use.  Biologically  and  physio- 

VI.  ON  PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGY 

logically,  this  misuse  of  a  function  must  be  a  non-survival  tendency  for 
this  class  of  life. 

Sanity  must  be  based  on  methods  for  the  most  efficient  use  of  the 
human  nervous  system,  in  accordance  with  its  structure,  and  will  thus 
bring  about  the  full  working  of  human  capacities,  which  at  present  are 
still  semantically  blocked  by  faulty  handling  of  the  apparatus. 

Before  going  further,  I  will  analyse  and  suggest  the  complete  elim¬ 
ination  from  the  English  language  of  the  term  ‘conditioned’  reflex,  which 
is  structurally  false  to  facts,  and  suggest  in  its  place  the  uniform  use  of 
the  term  ‘conditional’  reflex,  introduced  by  Pavlov  and  used  occasionally 
by  some  English  writers.  I  will  also  suggest  the  elimination  of  a  psycho¬ 
logical  term,  inhibition’,  from  physiology  and  neurology,  in  which  it 
should  have  no  place  at  all.  Such  a  change  in  language  leads  to  new 
results,  and  also  suggests  new  experiments.  It  is  little  known  and  seldom 
taken  into  consideration  that  long  ago  Locke  was  quite  clear  on  the  point 
that  the  misuse  of  language  has  often  been  taken  for  deep  mysteries  of 
science;  but  Locke,  unfortunately,  did  not  take  into  consideration  struc¬ 
ture,  and  s.r;  so  his  arguments  were,  in  general,  non-operative. 

As  everything  in  this  actual  world  is  structurally  interrelated  with 
everything  else,  we  should  consciously  look  for  interrelations;  in  which 
case  we  have  to  build  special  languages  for  the  eventual  synthesis.  As 
we  must  first  ascertain  empirical  structure,  and  only  then  coin  the  lan¬ 
guages,  obviously  to  start  with  a  descriptive,  impersonal,  non-‘psycho- 
logical  language  of  ordered  events  on  a  given  level  is  most  important 

In  our  case,  we  are  investigating  the  structural  and  semantic  prob¬ 
lems  in  connection  with  language.  We  have  to  accept  the  structural 
facts  as  discovered  by  physicists,  physiologists,  neurologists,  and  other 
scientists,  and  then  build  a  language  similar  in  structure  to  the  empirical 
world.  The  language  in  which  the  present  theoiy  is  formulated  is  a 
physiological  and  neurological  one,  as  it  deals  with  observed  impersonal 
functionings  of  the  organisms  called  ‘man’.  When  we  reach  results  in  a 
physiological  language,  these  have,  naturally  on  the  human  level,  a  psycho¬ 
logical  aspect,  and  perhaps  the  main  importance,  and  even  value,  of  the 
present  work  is  that  it  reaches  the  very  difficult  psycho-logical,  semantic 
level  by  purely  functional  and  easily  controlled  physiological  methods. 

Thus  the  reader  must  translate  for  himself,  as  nobody  else  can  do  it 
for  him,  the  physiological  results  into  his  psycho-logical  feelings  and 
attitudes  and  evoke  the  un-speakable  s.r.  These  must  be  evoked  by  the 
reader,  otherwise  he  will  inevitably  miss  the  point.  For  instance,  if  it  is 
said  that  ‘the  objective  level  is  un-speakable’,  the  reader  should  try  to 
become  entirely  ‘emotionally’  impassive,  outwardly  and  inwardly  silent 

ON  CONDITIONAL  REFLEXES 

about  an  object,  or  a  feeling,  as  whatever  we  may  say  is  not  it .  This, 
obviously,  involves  a  complete  checking  of  affective  responses,  precon¬ 
ceived  ideas*. ,  making  him  an  ‘impartial  observer*.  In  fact,  to  do  this 
successfully  is  something  very  difficult  to  achieve,  requiring  long  seman¬ 
tic  training  with  the  Structural  Differential,  and  usually  involving  a  com¬ 
plete  reversal  of  our  habitual  modes  of  affective  responses. 

Similarly,  when  we  speak  of  ‘natural  order*  or  reversal  of  this 
order,  let  the  reader  try  actually  to  evoke  these  s.rt  and  he  will  find  it  is 
not  so  easy,  as  it  involves  a  completely  new  process  of  re-evaluation.  In 
both  cases,  we  can  gain  physiological,  easily  operating  means  to  re¬ 
educate  the  very  stubborn  semantic  responses,  by  functional  and  ordinal 
methods.  The  difficulties  are  only  serious  with  grown-ups ;  they  present 
no  difficulties  in  the  early  semantic  training  of  infants,  for  whom  this 
training  becomes  a  powerful  preventive  method  against  future  nervous 
disturbances  (limited,  of  course,  to  this  aspect  of  un-sanity). 

Directly  such  a  semantic  re-education  is  accomplished,  the  formerly 
impossible  is  also  performed,  and  ‘human  nature’  has  been  changed. 
Obviously,  the  trouble  has  not  been  with  ‘human  nature*,  but  with  the 
lack  of  physiological  and  educational  means  to  affect  the  psycho-logical 
level  and  to  change  the  s.r .  The  above  applies  to  the  so-called  ‘normal* 
man,  as  well  as  to  the  ‘mentally*  ill.  It  works  with  both  types,  provided 
the  latter  is  in  a  condition  to  be  at  all  accessible  to  approach. 

The  term  ‘nervous  reflex*  was  originated  by  the  mathematician 
Descartes.  Structurally,  it  was  a  genuinely  scientific  notion.  It  implies 
necessity;  namely,  that  a  stimulus  results  in  a  response.  Obviously,  if 
such  were  not  the  case,  an  animal  would  not  be  in  sufficient  correspon¬ 
dence  with  it's  environment  and  could  not  survive.  Thus  an  animal  must 
be  attracted  and  not  repelled  by  food,  it  must  avoid  fire,  and  so  forth.1 
The  term  ‘reflex*  is  usually  used  in  connection  with  A  two-valued 
implications;  this  makes  reflexology  el  and  generally  inadequate  to 
account  for  organic  non-el  responses  in  the  colloidal  sense.  In  a  -system 
based  on  the  oo-valued  semantics  of  probability,  I  prefer  to  avoid  the 
two-valued  implication  and  use  the  term  reaction  instead. 

The  main  function  of  the  nervous  system  is  the  co-ordination  of  all 
activities  of  the  organism  for  its  preservation.  Thus  there  must  be  no 
conflict  between  the  opposing  activities  of  different  parts  of  the  organ¬ 
ism,  and  any  action  must  ultimately  benefit  the  whole.  There  may  be  a 
conflict  of  different  excitations,  but  one  must  finally  dominate  the  others, 
as  otherwise  co-ordination  would  be  impossible. 

If  food  or  some  noxious  material  is  put  into  the  mouth  of  a  dog,  a 
secretion  of  saliva  is  produced,  either  to  alter  the  food  chemically  and 

VI.  UN  PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGY 

help  digestion,  or  to  wash  the  mouth  out  and  eliminate  it.  But  observa¬ 
tion  shows  further  that  other  factors,  not  food  or  noxious  materials 
alone,  may  produce  similar  secretions.  Thus,  for  instance,  the  sight  or 
smell  of  some  such  material,  or  of  the  person  who  usually  administers  it, 
or  even  the  latter  s  footsteps  may  produce  salivary  secretions. 

To  make  the  experiments  as  exact  as  possible,  the  dogs  observed  by 
Pavlov  were  submitted  to  minor  operations.  Among  others,  the  opening 
of  the  salivary  duct  was  transplanted  to  the  outside  of  the  skin,  so  that 
all  secretions  could  be  carefully  and  exactly  collected  and  measured. 

1  he  principle  which  underlies  these  experiments  is  the  observation 
that  if  we  combine  some  hitherto  neutral  stimulus,  such  as  a  definite 
tone,  colour,  or  shape,  with  the  presenting  of  the  food  or  acid,  after  a 
few  trials  tbs  neutral  stimulus  acquires  the  potentiality  of  producing 
similar  secretory  effects  as  the  food  or  acid  itself. 

.  TI“S  fundamental  and  exact  method  of  experimentation  allows  con¬ 
siderable  freedom  in  the  selection  of  neutral  stimuli,  affecting,  as  we 
prefer  the  visual,  or  auditory,  or  tactile,  or  other  nerve  centres  of  the 
animal  We  can  also  control  their  numbers,  intensity,  their  combina- 
tions,  the  order  and  delays  in  their  application , . 

If  food  or  noxious  materials  are  placed  in  the  mouth,  the  secretion 
of  saliva  is  an  almost  automatic  reaction,  owing  to  the  physico-chemical 
action  of  these  materials.  Such  reaction  is  inborn  and  practically  general 
for  a  given  species,  the  nervous  paths  for  such  reactions  being  mostly 
completed  at  birth.  Not  so  with  the  reactions  produced  by  neutral  stimuli, 
which  acquire  the  secretory  characteristics  only  after  some  experiences. 
These  characteristics  are  reactions  acquired  during  individual  life,  and 
the  nervous  paths  and  connections  have  to  be  completed  during  the 
lifetime  of  the  individual.  6 

Thus,  when  puppies  are  shown  meat  or  bread,  which  they  had 
never  eaten  before,  usually  no  salivary  secretion  appears.  Only  after 
eating  meat  and  bread  on  several  occasions  will  the  sight  of  them  produce 
secretions. 

Some  of  the  effects  of  these  acquired  reactions  are  very  strong  and 
lasting  In  some  experiments,  the  dogs  were  given  a  hypodermic  injec¬ 
tion  of  morphine.  The  usual  effect  of  the  drug  is  to  produce  nausea 
with  profuse  secretion  of  saliva,  followed  by  vomiting  and  deep  sleep 
In  further  experimenting,  it  was  found  that  the  preliminaries,  or  even 
seeing  the  experimenter,  without  injection,  was  often  enough  to  produce 
the  effects  of  the  actual  injection  of  the  drug. 

Pavlov  studied  the  nervous  mechanism  of  the  functioning  of  the 
sa  lvary  glands,  not  because  of  any  special  physiological  importance  of 

ON  CONDITIONAL  REFLEXES 

these  glands,  but  because  such  experimenting  was  the  simplest,  and  the 
method  used  allowed  him  to  conduct  the  most  varied  experiments  under 
accurate  control. 

The  experiments  disclosed  an  amazingly  subtle  and  complex  nervous 
mechanism,  probably  typical  for  the  functioning  of  other  glands  of  inter¬ 
nal  secretions.  These  findings,  when  translated  into  a  language  applicable 
to  the  human  level,  disclose  a  great  deal  about  the  nervous  mechanism 
underlying  so-called  ‘associations'  and  other  ‘mental',  relational,  or 
psycho-logical  semantic  manifestations.  Usually,  the  salivary  glands  are 
not  supposed  to  be  as  closely  connected  with  psycho-logical  manifesta¬ 
tions  as  the  thyroid,  the  adrenals,  and  other  glands  are  known  to  be. 
It  is,  therefore,  a  new  and  very  important  general  discovery  of  Pavlov 
that  the  salivary  glands  have  such  intricate  and  far-reaching  nervous 
interconnections. 

The  example  of  the  dog  reacting  to  the  ‘associations'  (relations)  of 
the  experiment  with  morphine  in  a  similar  way  as  to  the  actual  injection 
of  the  drug,  is  a  close  parallel  to  the  example  already  given,  of  the 
patient  who  reproduced  symptoms  of  hay  fever  at  the  sight  of  paper 
roses .  In  this  case,  the  ‘associations'  were  also  uncritical,  compulsory, 
almost  automatic,  of  the  type  found  in  the  animals.  In  fact,  this  state¬ 
ment  is  very  nearly  general,  and  we  shall  find  later  that  most  of  ‘mental' 
ills  follow  neurologically  the  patterns  of  animal  responses,  and  so 
become  pathological  for  man.  This  observation  has  very  far-reaching 
consequences,  to  be  explained  later;  but  we  want  to  emphasize  it  from 
the  beginning,  and  to  stress  the  fact  that  copying  animals  in  our  nervous 
reactions  must  be  detrimental  to  humans. 

The  above  narrows  our  problem  considerably :  we  have  to  discover 
only  the  main  differences  between  the  nervous  responses  of  animals  and 
humans,  and  draw  our  conclusions. 

The  alimentary  reactions  to  food  and  the  mild  defense-reaction  to 
noxious  materials  may  be  roughly  divided  into  two  components,  the 
secretory  and  the  motor.  It  was  found  possible  to  link  another  neutral 
stimulus  to  an  already  acquired  reaction.  Thus,  if  a  dog  was  trained  to 
respond  to  a  bell,  which  was  a  signal  for  food,  he  could  be  trained, 
further,  to  link  a  formerly  neutral  stimulus;  let  us  say,  the  sound  of  a 
buzzer,  with  the  bell,  and  the  bell  with  food.  Such  a  secondary  acquired 
reaction  may  be  called  of  the  second  order .  Naturally,  it  is  very  instruc¬ 
tive  to  find  out  if  these  responses  could  be  extended  to  more  orders. 
Experiments  disclosed  the  important  fact  that,  as  far  as  dogs  and  alimen¬ 
tary  reactions  are  concerned,  it  was  impossible  to  go  beyond  the  second 
order.  However,  when  defense  reactions  were  tested,  it  was  found  that 

VI.  ON  PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGY 

it  was  possible  to  establish  acquired  reactions  of  the  third  order .  But  it 
was  impossible  to  go  beyond  the  third  order,  even  in  these  cases. 

In  our  field,  where  we  have  to  formulate  sharp  differences  between 
the  nervous  responses  of  ‘man*  and  ‘animal*,  we  say  that  animals  stop 
abstracting  or  linking  of  signals  on  some  level,  while  humans  do  not. 
The  latter  abstract  in  indefinitely  higher  orders — at  least  potentially. 

Here  we  encounter  a  fundamental  and  sharp  far-reaching  difference 
between  the  nervous  functioning  of  ‘animal*  and  ‘man*.  This  abstracting 
in  indefinitely  higher  orders  no  doubt  conditions  the  mechanism  of  what 
we  call  human  ‘mentality*.  If  we  stop  this  abstracting  anywhere,  and 
rest  content  with  it,  we  copy  animals  in  our  nervous  processes,  involving 
animalistic  s.r .  As  will  be  shown  later,  this  is  the  actual  case  with  prac¬ 
tically  all  of  us,  owing  to  our  A  education  and  theories.  This  ‘copying 
animals’  in  our  nervous  responses  is,  perhaps,  a  natural  tendency  at  an 
extremely  low  level  of  development ;  but  as  soon  as  we  understand  the 
physiological  mechanism,  we  can  correct  our  education,  with  correspond¬ 
ing  human  semantic  results.  Naturally,  such  ‘copying  animals*  by  humans 
must  be  a  process  of  arrested  development  or  regression.  It  must  be 
pathological  for  man,  no  matter  how  severe  or  how  mild  the  affliction 
may  be.  Various  absolutists,  and  the  ‘mentally*  ill  in  general,  show  this 
semantic  mechanism  clearly. 

The  reactions  can  be  divided  into  two  groups,  those  which  are 
inborn ,  almost  automatic,  almost  unconditional,  rather  few  and  simple, 
belonging  to  the  so-called  ‘species’ ;  and  those  which  are  acquired  during 
individual  life,  allow  a  great  variety  of  complications,  are  conditional  in 
different  degrees,  and  are  acquired  by  the  individual.  Pavlov  suggests 
different  terminologies ;  for  instance,  he  calls  the  one  ‘inborn*,  the  other 
‘acquired* ;  or  as  usually  incorrectly  translated  into  English  as  ‘uncondi¬ 
tioned’  and  ‘conditioned*  respectively.  The  two  last  terms  have  received 
a  scientific  general  acceptance,  yet  I  would  suggest  that  in  the  English 
incorrect  translation  they  are  structurally  unsatisfactory,  and  that  par¬ 
ticularly,  when  applied  to  humans,  they  carry  harmful  implications. 
Structurally,  ‘inborn’  and  ‘acquired*  are  entirely  satisfactory.  Terms  like 
‘conditional*  and  ‘unconditional’  (in  the  original  language  of  Pavlov), 
although  less  satisfactory,  are  more  appropriate,  as  they  do  not  imply 
some  sort  of  ‘cause-lessness*.  In  fact,  the  ‘unconditioned*  salivary  re¬ 
actions  are  conditioned  and  produced  by  the  physico-chemical  effect  of 
the  food,  and  so  to  call  them  ‘unconditioned*  is  structurally  erroneous. 
The  terms  ‘conditional*  and  ‘unconditional*  do  not  have  similar  implica¬ 
tions,  and  carry  others,  as,  for  instance,  the  possibility  of  very  important 

ON  CONDITIONAL  REFLEXES 

degrees  of  conditionality,  establishing  the  oo-valued  character  of  the 
reactions ;  conditional  meaning  non-absolute,  and  non-one-valued. 

For  these  structural  reasons,  I  shall  use  the  terms  ‘inborn’  and 
‘acquired’  or  else  ‘unconditional’  and  ‘conditional’  reactions. 

Under  natural  conditions,  an  animal,  to  survive,  must  respond  not 
only  to  normal  stimuli,  which  bring  immediate  harm  or  benefit,  but  also 
to  different  physical  and  chemical  stimuli,  in  themselves  neutral,  such  as 
waves  of  sound  or  light . ,  which  are  signals  for  animals  and  symbols  for 
man.  The  number  of  inborn  reactions  is  comparatively  small,  and,  alone, 
they  are  not  sufficient  for  the  survival  of  higher  animals  in  their  more 
complex  environment.  Experiments  have  made  this  point  quite  obvious. 
A  completely  decorticated  animal  may  retain  his  inborn  reactions  and 
become  a  kind  of  automatic  mechanism;  but  all  his  subtler  means  of 
adjustment,  owing  to  acquired  reactions,  disappear,  and  if  unaided  he  can 
not  survive.  Thus,  a  decorticated  dog  will  only  eat  when  food  is  intro¬ 
duced  into  his  mouth,  and  would  otherwise  die  of  starvation  though  food 
be  placed  all  around  him. 

Experimental  evidence  seems  to  show  that  all  higher  activities  of 
the  nervous  system,  the  whole  signalizing  apparatus,  which  underlies  the 
formation  and  maintenance  of  the  acquired  conditional  reactions,  depend 
on  the  integrity  of  the  cortex.  Stimuli  which  produce  conditional  re¬ 
actions  are  acting  as  signals  of  benefit  or  danger.  These  signals  are 
sometimes  nominally  ‘simple’,  sometimes  very  complex,  and  the  structure 
of  the  nervous  system  is  such  that  it  can  abstract,  analyse,  and  synthetize 
the  factors  of  importance  for  the  organism,  and  integrate  them  into 
excitatory  complexes.  The  analysing  and  synthetizing  functions,  as  usual, 
overlap,  and  cannot  be  sharply  divided,  both  functions  being  only  aspects 
of  the  manifestation  of  the  activity  of  the  nervous  system  as-a-whole. 
In  general,  one  of  the  most  important  functions  of  the  cerebral  cortex  is 
that  of  reacting  to  innumerable  stimuli  of  variable  significance,  which  act 
as  signals  in  animals  and  symbols  in  humans,  and  give  means  of  very 
subtle  adjustment  of  the  organism  to  the  environment.  In  psycho-logical 
terms,  we  speak  of  ‘associations’,  ‘selection’,  ‘intelligence’. ;  in  mathemat¬ 
ical  terms,  of  relations,  structure,  order.;  in  psychophysiological  terms, 
of  semantic  reactions. 

The  language  of  reactions  is  of  special  interest  because  its  structure 
is  similar  to  the  structure  of  protoplasm  in  general  and  the  nervous  sys¬ 
tem  in  particular.  This  language  can  be  expanded  and  supplemented  by 
the  following  further  structural  observations : 

1)  That  reactions  in  animals  and  humans  exhibit  different  degrees 
of  conditionality ; 

VI.  ON  I'SYCIIOIMIYSIOLOOY 

2)  That  the  signals  and  symbols  may  have  different  orders ,  indicat¬ 
ing  superimposition  of  stimuli ; 

3)  That  animals  cannot  extend  their  responses  to  signals  of  higher 
order  indefinitely ; 

4)  That  humans  can  extend  their  semantic  responses  to  higher 
order  symbols  indefinitely,  and,  in  fact,  have  done  so  through  language 
which  is  always  connected  with  some  response,  be  it  only  repression  or 
some  other  neurotic  or  psychotic  manifestations. 

The  above  extension  is  structurally  fundamental,  because  we  can 
extend  the  vocabulary  of  conditional  reactions  to  humans  in  all  their 
functions.  Without  it,  we  find  ourselves  saddled  with  a  vocabulary  which 
does  not  correspond  in  structure  to  the  well-known  elementary  facts 
concerning  human  responses  to  stimuli,  and  we  relapse  into  the  old 
‘behaviourism’,  which  is  structurally  insufficient. 

The  present  system  is  based  on  such  observations  and  extensions. 
It  was  reached  independently  from  structural  and  physico-mathematical 
considerations.  With  this  structural  verbal  extension,  we  can  easily  be 
convinced  that  everything  that  we  call  ‘education’,  ‘habits’,  ‘learning’. ,  on 
all  levels  is  building  up  acquired  or  conditional  and  s.r  of  different  orders , 
as  one  of  the  differences  between  ‘man’  and  ‘animal’  consists  in  the  fact 
that  humans  can  extend  their  symbolism  and  responses  to  indefinitely 
high  orders,  while  with  animals  this  power  of  abstracting  and  response 
stops  somewhere.  We  establish  here  a  sharp  distinction  between  the  high 
abstractions  ‘man’  and  ‘animal’,  and  so  build  up  a  psychophysiological 
and  structurally  satisfactory  language. 

It  is  obvious  that  the  fundamental  means  which  man  possesses  of 
extending  his  orders  of  abstractions  indefinitely  is  conditioned,  and  con¬ 
sists  in  general  in  symbolism  and,  in  particular,  in  speech.  Words, 
considered  as  symbols  for  humans,  provide  us  with  endlessly  flexible 
conditional  semantic  stimuli,  which  are  just  as  ‘real’  and  effective  for 
man  as  any  other  powerful  stimulus. 

Take,  for  instance,  the  example  of  the  World  War!  Would  the 
men  in  the  trenches  have  endured  at  all  the  horrors  they  had  to  live 
through  if  it  had  not  been  for  words,  and,  neurologically  speaking, 
because  of  the  conditional  s.r  connected  with  words? 

‘If  any  question  why  we  died. 

Tell  them,  because  our  fathers  lied.’ 
said  the  poet  truly,  and  experience  shows  it  is  not  limited  to  the  trenches.2 

In  interpreting  the  experiments  on  animals  as  applied  to  humans,  it 
should  be  remembered  that  some  of  the  experiments  of  Pavlov,  as  they 
stand ,  would  be,  at  the  least,  neurotic  for  man.  The  reason  for  this  is 

ON  CONDITIONAL  REFLEXES 

that  the  higher  abstractions  of  man,  which  are  due  to  the  more  developed 
complexities  of  his  nervous  system,  would  often  make  such  simple  ex¬ 
periments  impossible.  Once  a  conditional  reaction  is  established  with  an 
animal,  no  amount  of  any  sort  of  'intellectual'  persuasion,  or  the  like, 
would  disturb  his  glandular  secretions,  as  the  animal’s  range  of  ‘mean¬ 
ings’  is  very  limited*  These  secretions  can  be  diminished  or  even  abol¬ 
ished  by  other  means,  but  not  by  ‘intellectual’  means  alone.  In  the 
‘normal’  man,  his  ‘knowing’  that  the  sound  of  the  metronome  or  bell  is 
part  of  an  experiment  and  not  a  signal  for  actual  food,  would,  or  should, 
alter  his  nervous  reactions  and  glandular  secretions  and  make  the  experi¬ 
ments  much  more  complex.  The  conditional  reactions  of  the  animals 
have  still  the  element  of  unconditionality .  In  man,  they  may  become  fully 
conditional  and  depend  on  a  much  larger  number  of  semantic  factors 
called  ‘mental’,  ‘psychic’. ,  than  we  find  in  any  animal. 

On  the  human  level,  outside  of  the  experiments  with  the  salivary 
glands,  we  have  in  the  psychogalvanic  reaction  a  most  subtle  semantic 
means  of  experimenting  with  the  effect  of  words  as  connected  with  some 
secretions,  probably  at  least  the  sweat  glands.  Humans  react  to  different 
events  or  words  by  minute  electrical  currents  (among  others)  which  can 
be  registered  by  a  very  sensitive  galvanometer  and  the  curves  photo¬ 
graphed.  It  is  interesting  to  notice  that  so-called  ‘self -consciousness’  dis¬ 
turbs  the  success  of  the  experiments,  or  makes  them  impossible,  at  least 
with  some  individuals .  It  should  be  remembered  that  general  statements 
are  invalidated  if  there  are  any  exceptions. 

In  experiments,  we  are  usually  interested  in  their  success.  When 
analysing  the  oo-valued  degrees  of  conditionality ,  we  are  equally  inter¬ 
ested  in  their  failures,  which  suggest  a  far-reaching  revision  of  the  inter¬ 
pretation  of  our  experimental  data  in  this  field.  Although  some  writers 
say  that  the  reactions  registered  are  ‘beyond  control’  (unconditional), 
this  statement,  in  general,  is  not  correct,  and  should  be  amended  to  *  often 
beyond  control’  (conditional  of  different  degrees).  It  is  impossible  to 
go  into  details  here,  as  the  problems  are  extremely  complex.  In  addition 
to  this,  the  testing  of  degrees  of  conditionality  presents  an  extremely 
wide  new  semantic  held  for  experimentation  which  has  not  yet  been 
attempted.  It  should  be  noted,  however,  in  passing,  that  in  these  experi¬ 
ments  different  types  of  ‘mentally’  ill,  as  well  as  the  ‘healthy’  persons, 
exhibit  different  types  of  curves.8 

When  psycho-logical  events  or  s.r  are  interpreted,  the  difficulties 
become  particularly  acute.  Thus,  we  seldom  discriminate  between  the 
average  and  the  ‘normal’  person.  In  the  animal  world ,  under  natural 
conditions — by  which  is  meant  entirely  without  human  interference — 

VI.  ON  PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGY 

the  survival  conditions  are  two-valued  and  very  sharp.  The  animals 
survive  or  they  die  out.  Because  of  this,  it  could  be  said,  with  regard  to 
the  animal  world,  with  some  sort  of  plausibility,  that  the  average,  with 
a  long  list  of  specifications,  could  be  considered  the  ‘normal’  animal.  We 
usually  enlarge  this  notion  to  humans  and  land  in  fallacies,  particularly 
in  so-called  ‘psychological*  problems,  which  admittedly  are  very  difficult. 

In  general  medical  science,  such  mistakes  are  made  more  seldom. 
No  physician,  studying  a  colony  of  lepers  or  syphilitics,  could  conclude 
that  a  ‘normal*  man  should  be  a  leper  or  a  syphilitic.  He  would  say  that 
probably,  in  a  given  colony,  the  average  person  is  afflicted  with  such 
and  such  a  disease,  and  he  would  keep  as  his  medical  standard  for  desir¬ 
able  health,  a  ‘normal*  man ;  that  is  to  say,  one  free  from  this  disease. 

It  is  true  that  in  the  example  given  above,  outside  of  such  rare 
colonies,  we  have  a  majority  which,  in  respect  to  the  given  disease,  are 
healthy ;  so  we  are  empirically  forewarned  against  fallacies,  although 
existing  theories  of  knowledge  do  not  forewarn  us.  But  the  main  point 
remains  true;  namely,  that  in  human  life  the  average  1933  does  not  mean 
‘normal*,  and  the  standard  for  ‘normal*  will  have  to  be  established  exclu¬ 
sively  by  scientific  research.  In  our  present  work,  we  show  that  the 
average  person  copies  animals  in  his  psycho-logical  and  nervous  pro¬ 
cesses,  exhibits  the  unconditionality  of  nervous  responses,  confuses  orders 
of  abstractions,  reverses  the  natural  order . ,  semantic  symptoms  of  similar 
structure  as  found  in  obviously  ‘mentally*  ill.  Therefore,  the  average 
person  1933  must  be  considered  pathological .  If  we  take  the  animalistic 
average  for  ‘normal*,  and  apply  it  to  man,  we  commit  a  similar  fallacy 
as  that  of  treating  a  colony  of  lepers  as  a  ‘normal*  or  ‘healthy*  group. 

In  conditional  s.r  of  man,  the  average  person  cultivates,  through 
inheritance  and  training  in  A  doctrines,  languages  of  inappropriate  struc¬ 
ture.,  animalistic,  nervous,  and  so  psycho-logical,  s.r.  But  here,  as  in 
general  medicine,  the  average  pathological  situation  should  not  be  con¬ 
sidered  ‘normal*.  Only  a  structural  study  can  disclose  what  with  man 
should  be  considered  ‘normal*.  The  present  system  performs  this  task 
to  a  limited  degree  and  in  various  ways,  among  others,  by  the  revision 
and  the  widening  of  the  reaction  vocabulary  to  a  larger  structural  con¬ 
ditionality,  as  found  in  the,  as  yet,  exceptional  ‘normal*  man,  and  intro¬ 
duces  the  important  notion  of  non-elementalistic  semantic  reactions. 

Because  of  this  ‘average  for  normal*  fallacy,  the  theories  of  ‘con¬ 
ditional  reflexes’  in  man  should  be  thoroughly  revised  and  enlarged  to 
include  non-elementalistic  semantic  reactions ;  and  then  we  should  find 
that  often  what  is  ‘normal*  with  animals  is  quite  pathological  for  man. 
The  semantic  difficulties  are  serious,  because  the  accepted  two-valued 

ON  CONDITIONAL  REFLEXES 

structure  of  language  and  semantic  habits  reflect  the  primitive  myth¬ 
ologies  ;  so  there  is  always  the  danger  of  drifting  either  into  animalism, 
or  into  some  other  sort  of  equally  primitive  mysticism. 

The  net  psycho-logical  result  of  such  a  revision  appears  to  be  that, 
on  structural  grounds,  what  on  human  level  appears  as  desirable,  and,  at 
present,  exceptional — as,  for  instance,  the  complete  conditionality  of 
conditional  and  s.r ,  based  on  the  consciousness  of  abstracting — ought  to 
be  considered  the  rule  for  a  ‘normal*  man.  Then  the  older  animalistic 
generalizations  will  become  invalid  and  reactions  transformed.  But  for 
this  purpose,  and  to  be  able  to  apply  these  considerations  in  practice,  we 
shall  have  to  analyse  ‘consciousness  of  abstracting*  and,  therefore,  ‘con¬ 
sciousness*  which  must  be  defined  in  simpler  terms,  discussed  in  Part  VII. 

When  we  deal  with  ‘mentally*  ill  persons,  the  reactions  which  would 
be  conditional  with  ‘normal*  persons  become,  in  a  sense,  unconditional, 
compulsory,  and  semi-automatic  in  effect,  inwardly  as  well  as  outwardly. 
As  with  animals,  no  amount  of  ‘intellectual*  persuasion  has  any  effect  on 
them,  and  the  reactions,  secretions.,  follow  automatically.  From  the 
physiological  point  of  view,  ‘mental*  ills  in  humans  compare  well  with 
conditional  reactions  in  animals.  It  seems  that  under  such  circumstances 
a  physiological  language  of  different  orders  of  abstractions,  different 
orders  of  conditional  and  s.r  would  be  structurally  satisfactory.  In  such 
a  language,  we  should  pass  from  the  inborn  reactions,  which  exhibit  the 
maximum  of  persistence,  unconditionality,  and  almost  automatic  char¬ 
acter,  to  the  acquired  or  conditional  reactions  tn  animals ,  which  would 
be  called  lower  order  conditional  reactions ,  still,  to  some  extent,  auto¬ 
matic  in  their  working,  and,  finally,  to  the  much  more  flexible,  variable, 
oo-valued  and  potentially  fully  conditional  reactions  in  man ,  which  we 
will  call  conditional  reactions  of  higher  orders  which  include  the  seman¬ 
tic  reactions. 

In  such  a  vocabulary,  the  main  term  ‘reaction*  would  be  retained 
as  a  structural  implication ;  yet  the  degrees  of  conditionality  would  be 
established  by  the  terms  of  ‘lower  order*  or  ‘higher  order*  conditional 
reactions.  Such  a  language  would  have  the  enormous  advantage  of  being 
physiological  and  oo-valued.  Structurally,  it  would  be  in  accordance 
with  what  we  know  from  psychiatry ;  namely,  that  the  ‘mentally*  ill  ex¬ 
hibit  arrested  development  or  regressive  tendencies. 

We  would  say  that  ‘mental*  illness  exhibits  not  only  arrested  devel¬ 
opment  or  regression,  but  we  could  state  definitely  that  the  fully  con¬ 
ditional  (oo-valued)  reactions  of  higher  order  have  not  developed  enough, 
or  have  degenerated  (regression)  into  less  conditional  (few-valued) 
reactions  of  lower  orders  as  found  in  animals.  All  the  ‘phobias*, 

VI.  ON  PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGY 

‘panics',  ‘compulsory  actions',  identifications  or  confusions  of  orders  of 
abstractions . ,  show  a  similar  semantic  mechanism  of  mis-evaluation. 
Although  they  naturally  belong  to  the  so-called  ‘conditional  reactions', 
yet,  being  impervious  to  reason,  they  have  the  one-valued  character  of 
unconditionality,  as  in  animals. 

Similarly  with  the  difference  between  signals  and  symbols.  The 
signal  with  the  animal  is  less  conditional,  more  one-valued,  ‘absolute', 
and  involves  the  animal  in  the  responses  which  we  have  named  condi¬ 
tional  reactions  of  lower  order.  Symbols  with  the  normally  developed 
man  (see  discussion  of  ‘normal'  above)  are,  or  should  be,  oo-valued, 
indefinitely  conditional,  not  automatic ;  the  meanings,  and,  therefore,  the 
situation  as-a- whole,  or  the  context  in  a  given  case,  become  paramount, 
and  the  reactions  should  be  fully  conditional — that  is  to  say,  reactions 
of  higher  order.  In  human  regression  or  undevelopment,  human  symbols 
have  degenerated  to  the  value  of  signals  effective  with  animals,  the  main 
difference  being  in  the  degree  of  conditionality.  Absolutism  as  a  seman¬ 
tic  tendency  in  humans  involves,  of  necessity,  one-  or  few-valued  atti¬ 
tudes,  the  lack  of  conditionality,  and  thus  represents  a  pre-human 
tendency. 

To  what  extent  the  language  of  the  degrees  of  conditionality  is  help¬ 
ful  in  understanding  the  development  of  human  ‘intelligence',  and  why 
a  fully  developed  human  ‘mind'  should  be  related  with  fully  conditional 
reactions  of  higher  order,  can  be  well  illustrated  by  an  example  taken 
quite  low  in  the  scale  of  life. 

This  example  is  selected  only  because  it  is  simple,  and  illustrates 
an  important  principle  very  clearly.  We  know  that  fishes  have  a  well- 
developed  nervous  system,  do  not  possess  a  differentiated  cerebral  cor¬ 
tex;  but  experiments  show  that  they  can  learn  by  experience.  If  we 
take  a  pike  (or  a  perch)  and  put  it  in  a  tank  in  which  some  minnows, 
its  natural  food,  are  separated  from  it  by  a  glass  partition,  the  pike 
will  dash  repeatedly  against  the  glass  partition  to  capture  the  minnows. 
After  a  number  of  such  dashes  it  abandons  the  attempt.  If  we  then 
remove  the  partition,  the  pike  and  the  minnows  will  freely  swim  together 
and  the  pike  will  not  attempt  to  capture  the  minnows.4 

The  dash  for  capturing  the  minnows  was  a  positive  and  uncondi¬ 
tional,  inborn  feeding  reaction,  unsuited  for  the  environmental  con¬ 
ditions  as  they  happened  to  be  at  that  moment.  The  (perhaps)  painful 
striking  of  the  glass  was  a  negative  stimulus,  which  abolished  the  posi¬ 
tive  reaction — speaking  descriptively — and  established  a  negative  condi¬ 
tional  reaction,  the  result  of  individual  experience,  which,  as  we  observe 
by  the  actions  of  the  fish,  is  not  flexible,  not  adjustable,  and  quite  rigid, 

UN  CONDITIONAL  REFLEXES 

one-valued,  and  semi-unconditional,  or  of  low  degree  of  conditionality, 
because,  when  the  glass  partition  is  removed,  the  pike  swims  freely 
among  the  minnows  without  adjusting  itself  to  the  new  conditions  and 
capturing  the  minnows. 

A  cat  separated  from  a  mouse  by  a  glass  partition  also  stops  dash¬ 
ing  against  the  glass,  but  this  negative  reaction  is  more  conditional.  In 
‘psychological’  terms,  the  cat  is  ‘more  intelligent’,  evaluates  relations  bet¬ 
ter  than  the  fish,  and  when  the  glass  partition  is  removed,  the  cat  cap¬ 
tures  the  mouse  almost  immediately. 

In  this  connection,  an  interesting  experiment  could  be  made,  though 
I  am  not  aware  that  it  has  been  performed;  namely,  to  separate  the 
above  fishes  with  a  wire  screen,  which  would  be  visible  to  the  fishes,  and 
repeat  the  experiments  to  test  if  the  removal  of  a  visible  obstacle  would 
alter  the  outcome  of  the  experiment  or  the  ‘time’  of  the  reactions.  If  the 
‘time’  for  capturing  the  minnows  were  reduced,  this  would  mean  that  the 
conditionality  of  the  reaction  was  increased,  and  so  the  seeing  of  the 
obstacle,  or  the  increased  power  of  abstraction,  would  play  some  role  in 
it.  Even  humans  are  deceived  by  Houdinis.  Are  we  so  ‘superior’  to  the 
‘poor  fish’  ? 

These  problems  of  degrees  of  conditionality  can  also  be  studied  in 
the  life  of  insects,  and  the  works  of  Professor  Wm.  M.  Wheeler,  for 
instance,  furnish  most  instructive  material,  which  we  have  not  space 
to  analyse  here.5 

In  the  process  of  human  evolution  from  the  lowest  savage  to  the 
highest  civilized  man,  it  is  natural  that  we  should  pass  through  a  period 
in  which  the  primitive  doctrines  and  languages  must  be  revised.  The 
newest  achievements  in  science  indicate  that  the  twentieth  century  may 
be  such  a  period.  Even  in  mathematics  and  physics,  to  say  nothing  of 
other  disciplines,  it  is  only  the  other  day  that  the  old  elementalism  and 
two-valued  semantics  were  abandoned.  Obviously,  consciousness  of  ab¬ 
stracting  produces  complete  conditionality  in  our  conditional  higher 
order  reactions,  and  so  must  be  the  foundation  on  which  a  science  of 
man,  or  a  theory  of  sanity  and  human  progress,  must  be  built. 

The  suggested  extension  of  the  reaction  vocabulary  would  allow  us, 
at  least,  to  apply  a  uniform  physiological  language  to  life,  man  included . 
We  should  have  a  general  language  for  life  and  all  activities,  ‘mind’ 
included,  of  a  structure  similar  to  the  known  protoplasmic  and  nervous 
structure,  not  excepting  the  highest  activities.  ‘Mental’  ills  would  be 
considered  as  arrested  development  or  regression  to  one-,  or  few-valued 
semantic  levels ;  sanity  would  be  in  the  other  direction ;  namely,  progres¬ 
sion  conditioned  by  larger  and  larger  flexibility  of  conditional  and  seman- 

Vi.  ON  PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGY 

tic  reactions  of  higher  order,  which,  through  oo-valued  semantics,  would 
help  adjustment  under  the  most  complex  social  and  economic  conditions 
for  man.  The  maximum  of  conditionality  would  be  reached,  let  us  re¬ 
peat,  through  the  consciousness  of  abstracting,  which  is  fundamental 
for  sanity,  and  is  the  main  object  of  the  present  work,  explained  in 
Part  VII. 

It  seems  that  the  aggregate  of  inborn,  almost  unconditional  and 
acquired  or  conditional  reactions  of  different  orders  and  types  constitute 
the  foundation  of  the  nervous  activities  of  humans  and  animals.  The 
mechanism  is  not  an  additive  one.  A  little  bit  of  cortex  ‘added’  involves 
most  far-reaching  differences  of  behaviour  in  life;  in  fact,  the  number 
of  possibilities  probably  follow  the  combinations  of  higher  order. 

Higher  order  combinations  are  constructed  from  groups  which  them¬ 
selves  are  groups.  Thus,  out  of  twenty-six  letters  of  the  English  alpha¬ 
bet,  there  are  probably  trillions  of  pronounceable  combinations  of  letters. 
Sentences  are  groups  of  words  which  are  groups  of  letters,  and  their 
number,  therefore,  exceeds  enormously  the  original  trillions.  Books  are 
combinations  of  sentences,  and,  finally,  libraries  are  combinations  of 
books.  Thus,  a  library  is  a  combination  of  fifth  order,  and  the  number 
of  possible  different  libraries  is  inconceivably  large.  As  a  rule,  we  pay 
little  attention  to  combinations  of  higher  order,  disregarding  the  fact 
that  even  materials  and  the  possible  variety  of  them  have  some  such 
structure. 

To  give  an  intuitive  feel  how  combinations  of  higher  order  increase, 
let  me  quote  Jevons  on  the  simplest  case,  starting  with  2.  ‘At  the  first 
step  w6  have  2;  at  the  next  22,  or  4;  at  the  third,  222,  or  16,  numbers  of 
very  moderate  amount.  Let  the  reader  calculate  the  next  term,  2222,  and 
he  will  be  surprised  to  find  it  leap  up  to  65,536.  But  at  the  next  step 
he  has  to  calculate  the  value  of  65,536  two? s  multiplied  together,  and  it 
is  so  great  that  we  could  not  possibly  compute  it,  the  mere  expression  of 
the  result  requiring  19,729  places  of  figures.  But  go  one  step  more  and 
we  pass  the  bounds  of  all  reason.  The  sixth  order  of  the  powers  of  two 
becomes  so  great,  that  we  could  not  even  express  the  number  of  figures 
required  in  writing  it  down,  without  using  about  19,729  figures  for  the 
purpose/® 

In  actual  life,  the  number  of  possibilities  of  higher  order  combina¬ 
tions  are  limited  by  structural  and  environmental  conditions;  never¬ 
theless,  the  numbers  of  possibilities  which  follow  such  a  rule  increase 
surprisingly  fast. 

CHAPTER  XXII 

ON  'INHIBITION' 

.  .  .  "destructive  lesions  never  cause  positive  effects,  but  induce  a  nega¬ 
tive  condition  which  permits  positive  symptoms  to  appear,"  has  become 
one  of  the  hall-marks  of  English  neurology.  (212)  H.  head 

Excitation  rather  than  inhibition  is  important  in  correlation  because 
from  what  has  been  said  it  appears  that  so  far  as  known  inhibition  is  not 
transmitted  as  such.  The  existence  of  inhibitory  nervous  correlation  is  of 
course  a  familiar  fact,  but  in  such  cases  the  inhibitory  effect  is  apparently 
produced,  not  by  transmission  of  an  inhibitory  change,  but  by  transmission 
of  an  excitation  and  the  mechanism  of  the  final  inhibitory  effect  is  still 
obscure.  (92)  Charles  m.  child 

But  since  inhibition  is  not  a  static  condition  but  a  mode  of  action,  the 
mechanism  of  the  total  pattern  must  be  regarded  as  participating  in  every 
local  reflex.  (107)  G-  E*  coghill 

It  is  highly  probable  that  excitation  and  inhibition,  the  two  functions  of 
the  nerve  cell  which  are  so  intimately  interwoven  and  which  so  constantly 
supersede  each  other,  may,  fundamentally,  represent  only  different  phases 
of  one  and  the  same  physico-chemical  process.  (394)  i.  p.  pavlov 

The  term  ‘unconditional  reflex’  applies  only  under  ‘normal’  or 
‘natural’  conditions,  as  we  know  that  different  drugs,  such  as  ether, 
which  alter  the  conductivity  of  nervous  tissue . ,  can  also  alter  its  irri¬ 
tability.  Similarly,  with  conditional  reactions,  the  introduction  of  degrees 
of  conditionality  becomes  an  important  oo-valued  structural  refinement 
of  language,  depending  on,  and  introducing  explicitly  or  by  implication, 
the  number  of  factors,  the  degrees  of  freedom.,  which  are  observed 
empirically,  and  so  should  have  a  linguistic  and  semantic  parallel. 

If  we  disregard,  for  instance,  the  possibility  of  the  use  of  a  drug . , 
then  the  ‘unconditional’  reactions  are  largely  unconditional.  The  ‘condi¬ 
tional  reflexes’  in  animals  are  a  much  subtler  form  of  adjustment  to  many 
more  factors,  and  if  we  call  them  ‘conditional  of  lower  orders’  we  cover 
structurally  their  limited  conditionality,  which  with  higher  animals  is 
considerable.  For  example,  a  fly  in  the  laboratory  might  disturb  the 
reactions,  but  merely  ‘intellectual’  interference  would  be  ineffective. 
And,  finally,  the  ‘conditional  reactions  of  higher  orders’  in  man  involve 
still  more  factors,  introduce  more  and  new  complexities,  and  necessitate 
that  the  human  reactions  should  be  fully  conditional,  requiring  oo-valued 
semantics.  At  present,  this  is  an  exceptional  occurrence,  although  the 
potentiality  for  such  full  conditionality  is  present  in  the  majority  of  us. 

The  mechanism  of  the  unconditional  reaction  is,  Under  ordinary 
circumstances,  almost  automatic.  It  is  evolved  on  the  background  of 

VI.  ON  I  \S  YC1  IQ  PH  Y  S IOLOG  Y 

general  protoplasmic  characteristics,  combined  with  structural  polarity, 
symmetry . ,  and  is  not  efficient  enough  for  the  survival  of  higher 
organisms. 

Under  more  complex  conditions,  the  adjustment  for  survival  must 
be  more  flexible :  a  similar  direct  stimulation  must,  under  different  con¬ 
ditions,  result  in  different  reactions,  or  different  stimuli,  under  other 
conditions,  produce  similar  reactions,  resulting,  ultimately,  not  only  in 
direct  responses  to  stimuli,  but  also  in  the  equally  important  holding  in 
abeyance  of  the  reaction,  or  even  the  abolishing  of  it.  Let  us  assume 
that  the  direct  response  of  a  cat  to  a  mouse  would  be  clawing  and  chew¬ 
ing.  If  that  given  cat  would  just  claw  and  chew  when  the  mouse  was 
some  distance  away,  I  am  afraid  such  a  cat  would  soon  starve,  for  such 
an  immediate  response  would  not  be  a  survival  response,  and  this  char¬ 
acteristic  could  not  become  hereditary.  The  cats  which  have  survived 
and  perpetuated  their  characteristics  are,  as  a  rule,  different.  When  they 
see,  hear,  or  smell  the  mouse  at  a  distance,  they  flatten  out,  keep  still, 
crouch . ,  and  get  ready,  until  they  are  in  such  a  position  that  a  jump  will 
procure  the  victim,  and  not  merely  frighten  it  away. 

We  see  that,  under  more  complex  conditions,  the  nervous  mechan¬ 
ism  must  produce  not  only  direct  responses  to  the  stimuli  but  also  equally 
important  delays  and  temporal  or  permanent  abolishments  of  these  direct 
responses  to  stimuli. 

Hitherto,  we  have  analysed  the  simplest  reactions  of  a  positive 
character  in  which  a  stimulus  produces  a  direct  arid  obvious  response; 
e.g.,  the  showing  of  the  food  or  the  ringing  of  the  bell  results  in  an 
excitation  in  the  nervous  system  and  the  secretion  from  the  salivary 
glands.  We  are,  however,  acquainted  with  another  type  of  fundamental 
nervous  activity  of  equal  importance.  For  instance,  in  experimenting 
with  the  positive  reactions,  we  must  be  careful  not  to  introduce  any  extra 
stimuli,  as  any  new  stimulus  immediately  excites  an  investigatory  reac¬ 
tion,  and  the  alimentary  conditional  reaction  becomes  temporarily  abol¬ 
ished.  From  our  personal  experience,  we  know  a  large  number  of  stimuli 
which  have  some  such  hindering  effect  on  our  respiration,  circulation, 
locomotion . ,  which  we  describe  as  'paralysed  with  fear’,  'speechless  with 
rage’,  'struck  dumb’,  'stupefied  with  pain’, .  The  diminution,  or  deviation, 
or  the  lack  of  some  function  or  response  on  the  nervous  level  is  usually 
called  ‘inhibition*. 

The  term  ‘inhibition*  is  structurally  a  profoundly  unsatisfactory 
and  a  misleading  psycho-logical  term,  and  should  be  completely  aban¬ 
doned  in  physiology  and  neurology,  although  it  could  be  retained  in 
psycho-logics  and  psychiatry.  This  term  is  in  general  use,  and  the  sug- 

ON  ‘INHIBITION’ 

gestion  of  abandoning  a  term  in  general  use  is  always  hard  to  accept. 
Therefore,  it  will  be  well  to  analyse  it  in  some  detail.  In  this  case,  it 
does  not  matter  if  the  positive  suggestion  of  a  new  term  or  terms  is 
structurally  acceptable ;  the  analysis  of  the  term  ‘inhibition’  shows  clearly 
that  it  has  false  to  fact  implications,  and  so  should  be  rejected  in  neu¬ 
rology  in  any  case. 

This  term  is  a  favorite  word  in  ecclesiastical  and  legal  literature, 
and  means,  in  the  main,  to  forbid,  to  prohibit,  to  hinder,  to  restrain.  It 
is  a  psycho-logical  term;  it  implies  anthropomorphic  ‘free  will*  and 
‘authority’  notions  perfectly  unfit  for  neurological  use.  It  is  not  an 
exaggeration  to  say  that  the  structural  implications  of  this  term  underlie 
the  older  animalistic  prohibitive  and  punitive  education,  legal  and  eccle¬ 
siastical  tendencies,  which,  in  1933,  are  known  to  be  not  only  in  a  larger 
sense  inoperative,  but  positively  harmful.  On  the  human  level,  this  word 
is,  perhaps,  responsible  for  the  fact  that  so  much  about  our  educational 
and  social  methods  is  uncertain  and  often  harmful.  Education  is  a 
process  of  building  conditional  and  s.r  of  different  orders.  If  the  neuro¬ 
logical  terms  dealing  with  conditional  reactions  are  structurally  unsatis¬ 
factory,  our  speculations  which  are  carried  on  in  these  terms  must 
involve  these  false  implications.  When  the  empirical  results  are  unsatis¬ 
factory,  as  they  must  be,  because  of  wrong  structure  of  the  arguments, 
and  a  scrutiny  of  our  argumentation  shows  them  to  be  correctly  fol¬ 
lowing  the  structural  implications  of  the  language  used,  then  we  usually 
blame  ‘human  nature’,  which  is  a  very  unintelligent  excuse,  indeed. 

The  implications  of  the  term  ‘inhibition’  become  a  guidance  for  our 
conduct ;  we  repress  and,  in  consequence,  breed  un-sanity  and  maladjust¬ 
ment.  On  animal  level,  ‘repression’  is  workable,  but,  on  human  levels, 
we  need  a  subtler  regulative  mechanism,  in  accordance  with  the  structure 
of  the  human  nervous  system,  and  this  is  found  in  the  fuller  condition¬ 
ality  of  reactions,  based  upon  consciousness  of  abstracting,  and  involving, 
of  course,  affective  components,  semantic  factors  of  evaluation  which 
regulate  human  impulses  without  the  animalistic  repression.  In  humans, 
the  ‘inhibited’,  repressed  impulses  often  remain  as  internal  excitatory 
factors ;  they  are  not  eliminated  by  some  ‘supernatural’  hocus-pocus,  but 
remain  active,  sometimes  very  active,  semantic  sources  of  internal  excita¬ 
tion,  resulting  in  conflicts  which  generally  have  pathological  results. 

We  are  usually  told  that  ‘inhibition’  plays  an  important  role  in  con¬ 
ditional  reactions.  With  the  introduction  of  the  degrees  of  conditionality, 
the  importance  of  the  possibility  of  altering,  delaying,  or  abolishing  some 
immediate  response  becomes  much  more  accentuated.  Indeed,  it  appears 
that  this  possibility  of  influencing  responses  is  an  important  factor  in  the 

VI.  ON  PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGY 

mechanism  of  conditionality  of  lower  orders,  but  becomes  the  main 
factor  in  establishing  the  degrees  of  conditionality  of  higher  orders. 
Obviously,  the  reactions  become  very  labile,  the  adjustment  to  conditions 
very  subtle,  allowing  the  organism  to  survive  under  the  most  complex 
conditions,  such  as  are  found  in  highly  ‘civilized*  life. 

This  mechanism  is  responsible  not  only  for  human  intelligence,  but 
also  for  all  that  is  constructive  in  so-called  ‘civilization*.  Vice  versa,  for 
survival  in  such  complex  civilization,  one  must  possess  these  fully  con* 
ditional  reactions.  At  this  point,  it  will  suffice  to  mention  that  in  organ¬ 
isms  below  humans,  ‘inhibition*,  which  underlies  the  mechanism  of 
conditionality  of  reactions,  plays  a  most  important  biological  and  sur¬ 
vival  role,  while  on  the  human  level  it  is  the  foundation  on  which  all 
human  s.r ,  ‘intelligence*,  and  desirable  human  characteristics  are  built. 
The  present  theory  introduces  methods  to  make  the  application  of  the 
above  considerations  possible  in  daily  life. 

All  possible  analysis  depends  not  only  on  definitions  of  terms  but 
also  on  undefined  terms ,  which,  outside  of  mathematics,  have  seldom, 
if  ever,  been  investigated,  thus  making  the  structural  assumptions  which 
they  introduce  unconscious.  In  definitions,  we  also  usually  posit  struc¬ 
ture,  though  we  seldom  realize  this  fact.  When  we  approach  the  experi¬ 
mental  side  of  science,  which  is  the  search  for  empirical  structure,  the 
implications  involved  consciously  or  unconsciously  in  the  defined  and 
undefined  terms  play  a  very  important  role,  and  they  direct,  to  a  large 
extent,  our  efforts  and  ingenuity.  This  is  why  we  still  have  so  few 
genuinely  creative  scientists,  although  since  the  psychologically  and 
semantically  liberating  work  of  Einstein,  the  number  of  creative  physi¬ 
cists  of  the  younger  generation  has  increased  surprisingly.  Yet  the 
majority  of  scientists  do  not  realize  to  what  extent  their  s.r  are  influ¬ 
enced  by  the  terms  they  use  and  what  enormous  help  and  creative 
freedom  they  would  have  from  being  conscious  of  the  role  the  structure 
of  language  plays. 

With  this  realization,  before  we  begin  the  constructive  analysis  of 
such  an  important  term  as  ‘inhibition*,  we  must  state  clearly  what  the 
general  biological  presuppositions  which  underlie  such  an  analysis  are. 

The  present  work  is  a  ^-system,  structurally  very  different  from 
the  older  systems,  which  attempts  to  build  a  verbal  system  of  similar 
structure  to  the  empirical  structures,  as  given  by  science  1933.  The 
older  systems  had  also  a  structure  similar  to  the  very  limited  knowledge 
of  empirical  structure  which  our  primitive  ancestors  had.  Hence; 
animism,  anthropomorphism,  ‘psychologism*,  and  the  rest,  and  the  per- 

ON  ‘INHIBITION’ 

sistence  of  such  structural  features  in  science  as  ‘inhibition’  in  neurology, 
‘force’  and  ‘heat’  in  physics . . 

According  to  scientific  standards  of  1933,  there  is,  as  far  as  I  know, 
only  one  biological  system  in  existence  which  can  be  called  modem,  and 
this  is  the  A  biology  of  Professor  C.  M.  Child  (see  Chapter  VIII).  It 
is,  therefore,  necessary  to  accept  this  system,  and  also  the  A  neurology 
of  Professor  Herrick,  which  is  based  on  this  biology. 

Generally,  the  neurologists  tell  us  that  the  structural  aspects  of 
‘inhibition’  are  unknown.  To  a  large  extent,  this  is  true,  although  it  is 
quite  obvious  that  a  * psychological*  term  cannot  shed  any  light  on  its 
physiological  structure.  To  get  glimpses  of  this  mechanism,  we  must 
start  our  analysis  quite  low  in  the  scale  of  life  and  see  what  the  most 
general  characteristics  of  protoplasm  are. 

All  protoplasm  is  irritable.  In  any  undifferentiated  bit  of  proto¬ 
plasm  an  excitation  must  (1933)  spread  in  a  diminishing  gradient, 
establishing,  by  necessity,  a  region  of  highest  excitation  in  contact  with 
the  stimulus,  resulting  in  a  polar  orientation,  with  an  eventual  future 
head-end,  and  establishing  a  physiological  gradient,  long  preceding  the 
appearance  of  any  differentiated  tissue.  The  nervous  system  is  a  later 
outgrowth  of  such  an  oriented  dynamic  field,  and  its  primary  morpho¬ 
logical  and  physiological  characteristics  are,  to  that  extent,  predeter¬ 
mined,  being,  in  the  meantime,  a  joint  phenomenon  of  the  inherent 
characteristics  of  protoplasm,  its  irritability,  conductivity,  and  what  not, 
and  of  its  reaction  to  the  environment.  The  physiological  gradient  is, 
then,  the  simplest  and  the  most  general  primary  reaction  arc  in  a  given 
individual,  and  constitutes  the  physiological  basis  for  the  structural  and 
functional  development  of  all  other  arcs.1 

Amoebas  are  primitive  little  aquatic  animals  of  approximately 
spherical  symmetry  which  have  no  differentiated  organs  at  all ;  yet  they 
show  quite  complex  reactions  and  various  adaptive  activities  to  be  found 
in  higher  animals.  The  amoebas  can  pursue  their  victim,  show  prefer¬ 
ence  for  stimuli,  and  move  away  from  the  prick  of  a  pin,  select  their 
food , .  This  fact  shows  that  protoplasm,  so  little  differentiated,  and,  from 
the  organic  point  of  view,  undifferentiated,  exhibits  both  muscular  as 
well  as  neural  characteristics.  This  fact  is  fundamental.  It  shows  that 
in  colloids  which  happen  to  be  sensitive  and  which  possess  a  special  type 
of  conductivity,  which,  from  a  physico-chemical  point  of  view,  is  only  a 
special  aspect  of  one  mechanism,  there  is  already  present  the  potentiality 
for  any  further  development.  Professor  Child’s  physiological  gradients, 
the  structural  precursors  of  the  nervous  system,  are  a  necessity,  because 
of  the  dynamic  potentialities  of  the  plenum  and  the  necessary  relation 

VI.  ON  PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGY 

to  the  environment,  as  there  is  no  such  thing  as  anything  without  envir¬ 
onment.  The  stimulus,  in  the  meantime,  establishes  structurally  a  func¬ 
tional  polarity  as  a  fundamental  characteristic  of  all,  even  most  primitive, 
protoplasm,  and  as  the  result  of  the  contact  of  sensitive  and  conducting 
colloidal  structures  with  the  environment.2 

In  sponges,  which  have  primitive  muscular  tissue  but  no  nervous 
system,  the  muscular  tissue  exhibits  also  both  characteristics,  combining 
receptive  and  motor  functions,  showing  that  from  the  start  the  supposed 
muscles  are,  in  reality,  neuro-motor  organs.3  The  actinians  have  no 
central  nervous  system.  By  the  aid  of  an  incision,  we  may  produce  in 
them  special  additional  growths  of  tentacles  sometimes  with  a  mouth, 
sometimes  without.  If,  in  the  last  case,  we  place  a  piece  of  food  in  the 
tentacles,  they  will  bend  toward  where  the  mouth  should  be.  If  we  cut 
such  a  tentacle  away  from  the  body,  we  still  find  that  in  contact  with 
food  it  will  bend  in  the  one  direction.  But  here  we  are  dealing  not  only 
with  the  sub-microscopic  dynamic  structure  but  with  macroscopic  struc¬ 
ture,  where  the  irritability  and  the  structure  of  the  peripheral  organs 
determine  the  reaction.4 

When  we  experiment  with  animals  with  a  more  developed  nervous 
system,  such  as  ascidians  or  worms,  we  come  to  new  and  very  instructive 
facts.  Loeb  has  removed  the  ganglion  from  a  number  of  dona  intes - 
tinalis ,  a  large  transparent  ascidian,  which  normally,  when  touched  at 
the  oral  or  aboral  opening,  closes  the  openings,  and  the  whole  animal 
contracts  into  a  small  ball.  It  appears  that  a  few  hours  after  the  operation 
mentioned  they  relax.  If  a  drop  of  water  falls  on  such  an  animal,  the 
characteristic  reaction  appears  again,  showing  that  the  reaction  was  not 
due  to  the  ganglion  but  is  determined  by  the  structure  and  arrangement 
of  the  peripheral  parts  and  the  muscles.  The  nerves  and  the  ganglion 
play  only  the  main  role  as  a  quicker  conductor  for  the  stimulus. 

Even  in  higher  animals  we  find  vestiges  of  such  primitive  general¬ 
ized  mechanisms.  For  instance,  Loeb,  in  his  experiments  in  removing  the 
brain  from  sharks,  found  that,  even  after  death  and  when  signs  of  decom¬ 
position  had  already  begun,  light  produced  a  contraction  of  the  pupils.5 

In  a  decapitated  worm,  practically  all  normal  reactions  are  retained. 
If  we  cut  the  nervous  system  of  a  worm  in  two,  the  two  parts  of  the 
worm  move  in  a  co-ordinated  way  as  long  as  they  are  connected  by  a 
little  bit  of  tissue.  The  experiments  were  carried  further :  a  worm  was 
cut  in  two  completely,  the  two  halves  were  connected  by  a  string,  and 
they  still  moved  In  a  co-ordinated  way,  showing  once  more  that  originally 
the  nervous  system  was  a  specialization  of  general  protoplasmic  charac¬ 
teristics  of  irritability  and  conductivity  and  structure,  which,  at  present. 

ON  ‘INHIBITION* 

are  known  to  be  strictly  interconnected.8  Multiordinal  structure  is  the 
explanation  of  this  behaviour.  Similar  examples  could  be  given  in  great 
numbers,  all  of  which  would  support  the  above  well-established  view. 

Among  the  general  protoplasmic  characteristics  we  do  not  find 
‘inhibition’,  but  only  positive  excitation  and  conductivity.  This  issue  is 
fundamental  and  should  be  taken  as  a  foundation  for  further  analysis. 

If  a  wandering  amoeba  comes  to  an  illuminated  spot,  the  animal 
will  not  remain  in  that  region.  Here  is,  seemingly,  a  new  fact,  and  we 
must  select  the  language  we  want  to  use  in  this  connection.  If  we  follow 
the  old  animism  and  anthropomorphism,  we  could  say  the  animal 
‘knows’. ,  or  that  some  ‘demon*  has  forewarned  it,  or,  with  equal  justi¬ 
fication,  say  that  it  is  an  example  of  ‘internal  inhibition’  or  ‘prohibition*. 
The  introduction  of  such  terms,  of  course,  explains  nothing  physiologi¬ 
cally,  but  simply  multiplies  metaphysical  identifications  on  the  uncon¬ 
scious  yet  false  to  fact  assumption  that  a  word  ‘is*  the  thing  we  are 
talking  about — a  vestige  of  the  primitive  ‘magic  of  words*. 

Loeb  pointed  out  long  ago  that  to  be  forced  to  introduce  animism 
and  anthropomorphism  is  enough  to  neglect  the  analysis  of  an  external 
stimulus.  This  is  true  not  only  in  biology,  physiology,  neurology. ,  but 
also  in  physics.  The  difference  between  the  N  and  $  systems  depends 
on  the  fact  that  Newton  did  not  take  into  consideration  the  character  of 
the  stimulus,  the  finite  velocity  of  the  ray  of  light,  which  is  fundamental 
in  any  observation,  but  that  Einstein  did  take  this  into  consideration. 
The  oo -valued  determinism  (the  restricted  principle  of  uncertainty)  in 
the  newer  quantum  mechanics  depends  on  taking  into  account  the  dis¬ 
turbing  effects  an  ‘observation*  has  on  the  ‘observed*, . 

What  are  the  known  facts  in  the  meantime  ?  Let  us  start  with  the 
character  of  the  stimulus,  light.  We  know,  positively,  that  light  can  be 
considered  a  very  potent  stimulus,  and  so  the  behaviour  of  the  amoeba 
was  a  direct  response  to  this  stimulus.  In  fact,  we  know  a  little  about 
this  mechanism  without  introducing  any  ‘demons*  or  ‘internal  inhibition*. 

The  starfish  of  a  certain  species  has  a  symmetrical  structure  consist¬ 
ing  of  five  arms.  Its  nervous  system  consists  of  a  central  ring  around 
the  mouth  and  peripheral  nerves  radiating  from  the  ring  into  the  arms. 
If  such  an  animal  is  laid  upon  its  back,  it  will  right  itself,  but  it  is  essen¬ 
tial  that  not  all  arms  should  move  simultaneously.  In  a  normal  animal, 
having  five  arms,  usually  three  arms  do  the  work  and  two  of  them 
remain  quiet.  If  we  destroy  the  nervous  connection  between  the  arms, 
this  co-ordination  is  destroyed ;  all  five  arms  begin  to  struggle,  and  the 
starfish  cannot  right  itself,  unless  by  accident.  Should  we  again  invoke 
‘demons*  or  ‘inhibitions’,  or  analyse  the  stimulus-complex  and  its  effect  ? 

VI.  ON  PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGY 

Obviously,  when  the  starfish  is  put  on  its  back,  a  new  stimulus-complex 
is  operating  upon  it,  resulting  in  a  complex  adjustment.7 

As  we  already  know,  any  stimulus  applied  to  a  bit  of  living  proto¬ 
plasm,  because  of  the  colloidal  structure  and  of  the  inherent  irritability 
and  conductivity  of  the  plenum,  produces  a  physiological  gradient, 
establishing,  thus,  some  sort  of  polarity,  symmetry,  relations,  order,  and 
structure,  and  indicating  what  structure  our  language  should  have. 
Again,  no  trace  of  any  ‘inhibition*  or  ‘prohibition*  is  found,  and  on  the 
silent,  un-speakable,  objective  level  everything  happens  the  usual  way, 
without  any  regard  to,  or  respect  for,  our  talking .  Talking  only  becomes 
a  very  genuine  danger  when  on  language  of  primitive  structure  we  build 
our  creeds,  institutions,  rules  of  conduct . ,  and  our  methods  of  investiga¬ 
tion.  In  the  last  case,  our  sciences  are  nearly  as  slow,  halting,  perplexing, 
difficult,  non-co-ordinated,  and,  in  a  larger  sense,  ineffective,  as  our 
creeds  and  institutions  have  proven  to  be.  Our  sciences  may  have  added 
to  our  comfort,  but,  outside  of  psychiatry,  they  have  not  contributed 
much  to  human  happiness. 

As  structure  seems  so  fundamental  and  can  be  discovered  every¬ 
where,  we  should  not  be  surprised  to  find  that  in  structure,  or  perhaps, 
still  better,  in  the  general  structuro-sensitive-conductive  dynamic  com¬ 
plex  with  definite  structure  on  different  levels,  we  shall  find  the  solution 
for  obvious  positive  reactions  of  organisms,  as  well  as  for  the  lack  of 
them. 

It  is  not  possible  or  necessary  to  go  into  further  details  here.  The 
structural  data,  however,  although  they  are  not  particularly  emphasized, 
are  given  in  handbooks  of  physics,  colloidal  chemistry,  chemistry,  bio¬ 
physics,  biochemistry,  biology,  physiology,  neurology , .  At  present,  it  is 
realized  in  science  that  structure  is  of  extreme  importance ;  but,  because 
of  identification,  it  is  not  realized  that  structure  is  the  only  possible 
content  of  science  and  of  all  human  ‘knowledge*.  This  fact,  of  course, 
makes  the  quest  of  science  uniquely  structural.  Because  of  it,  we  come 
to  a  very  far-reaching  general  rule,  that  all  ‘understanding*,  to  be  such, 
must  exhibit  or  assume  structure,  thus  formulating  the  supreme  aim, 
and,  perhaps,  uniquely  indicating  the  only  possible  method,  of  science. 

Two  more  simple  examples  may  be  helpful.  Mnemiopsis  or 
Eucharis  have  swimming  plates  which  beat  rhythmically,  with  consid¬ 
erable  regularity.  When  the  plates  are  stimulated  mechanically,  the 
movement  ceases  in  the  presence  of  sufficient  calcium  salts  in  the  water. 
In  similar  media,  but  containing  no  calcium,  a  mechanical  stimulus  does 
not  stop  the  movement  of  the  plates,  but  just  the  opposite.  It  accelerates 
their  motion,  showing  clearly  that  the  effect  of  direct  stimulation  can 

ON  ‘INHIBITION’ 

be  reversed  when  the  structural  relations  are  altered.  Once  more,  no 
‘demons’  and  no  ‘inhibition’.8 

In  higher  animals,  we  usually  find  a  well-developed  symmetry  and 
muscles  of  which  the  activities  oppose  the  results  of  the  activity  of 
other  muscles.  Such  muscles  are  called  antagonists.  If  two  antagonists 
of  equal  strength  are  stimulated  equally,  no  macroscopic  effect  of  the 
stimulation  of  both  muscles  results.  If  one  of  the  antagonists  is  stronger 
than  the  other,  the  macroscopic  effect  of  the  stimulation  of  both  muscles 
results  not  in  some  general  convulsion,  but  in  a  one-sided  action  of  the 
stronger  muscle.  Obviously,  these  results  are  the  necessary  consequence 
of  structure  on  different  levels.  We  had,  in  the  first  case,  a  lack  of 
obvious  macroscopic  reaction,  although  stimulation  was  present  and  did 
its  work.  This  was  due  to  structure. 

It  is  known  that  some  drugs,  such  as  strychnine  or  the  toxin  pro¬ 
duced  by  the  tetanus  bacillus,  produce  a  state  of  general  and  high  irri¬ 
tability  of  the  nervous  system.  The  slightest  stimulus  to  the  surface 
will  produce  a  spasm  which  affects  practically  every  muscle  of  the  body. 
The  pinching  of  the  foot,  instead  of  producing  a  withdrawal,  results  in 
the  rigid  extension  of  the  legs,  arms,  and  back.  The  extension  is  no 
longer  a  co-ordinated  process,  but  is  associated  with  strong  contraction 
of  the  flexors,  the  final  state  of  the  limbs  being  determined  by  the  sur¬ 
passing  strength  of  the  stimulated  extensors.  The  effect  of  the  tetanus 
toxin  is  similar.  In  a  monkey,  under  normal  conditions,  the  electrical 
stimulus  of  a  certain  spot  of  the  cortex  will  produce  the  opening  of  the 
mouth;  similar  stimulation  of  another  spot  will  produce  the  closing  of 
the  jaws.  But,  under  the  effect  of  the  toxin,  the  stimulation  of  any  of 
these  spots  will  produce  the  closure  of  the  jaws,  because  any  attempt  to 
open  the  mouth  will  excite  the  stronger  masseter  muscles  and  effectively 
close  the  mouth.9 

The  above  examples  show  again  that  no  ‘demon’  or  ‘inhibition’  has 
prohibited  the  withdrawal  of  the  foot  or  opening  of  the  mouth,  but  that 
the  excitation  of  stronger  antagonists  is  responsible  for  the  result — or, 
if  we  wish,  for  the  lack  of  results.  All  of  which  is  obviously  structural. 

All  the  above  discussions  and  examples — and  they  could  be  ex¬ 
panded  and  extended  to  fill  volumes — show  clearly:  (1)  That  in  the 
structurally  more  complex  organisms  the  process  of  co-ordination  and 
adjustment  to  more  and  more  complex  environmental  conditions,  leading 
to  wider  activities  and  fuller  conditionality  of  reactions,  is  partially  based 
— to  the  extent  of  one-half,  or  even  more — on  the  lack  of  direct  response 
to  a  stimulus,  leading  to  delayed  action  and  involving  the  four-dimen¬ 
sional  order,  all  of  this  being  a  function  of  the  entirely  general  charac- 

VI.  ON  PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGY 

teristics  of  protoplasm  ;  namely,  its  structure,  excitability,  and  conductivity 
(the  last  two  characteristics  being  also  a  result  of  sub-microscopic  struc¬ 
ture)  without  the  intervention  of  ‘demons*  or  of  ‘inhibition’ ;  (2)  that 
in  every  case  there  is  an  excitation ,  no  matter  whether  the  result  is  a 
positive  or  a  negative  reaction,  or  whether  we  can,  at  present,  trace  it 
in  detail. 

As  Professor  Herrick  says :  ‘On  this  view  of  the  situation  the  sup¬ 
posed  inhibitory  effect  of  the  cerebral  cortex  resolves  itself  into  a  differ¬ 
ential  dynamogenic  cortical  influence.  This  is  partly  specific  and  phasic, 
acting  upon  particular  subcortical  functional  systems  while  these  are  in 
process  and  tending  to  depress  all  conflicting  activities  either  by  with¬ 
drawing  available  nervous  energy  from  their  apparatus  of  control  or  by 
equal  activation  of  agonist  and  antagonist  systems  with  resulting  stasis. 
It  is  partly  a  general  and  tonic  activation  or  reinforcement  of  all  lower 
reflex  systems.  Upon  removal  of  the  visual  cortex  the  specific  phasic 
activation  of  learned  reactions  is  abolished.  Upon  removal  of  the  entire 
cortex  the  general  tonic  cortical  effect  is  abolished.  The  operation  has 
not  stimulated  inhibitory  fibers,  as  some  have  supposed ;  it  has  removed 
the  sources  of  tonic  activation  which  normally  are  always  operating.* 10 

‘The  cerebral  cortex  from  its  inception  exerts  more  or  less  inhibi¬ 
tory  influence  upon  subcortical  functions.  In  the  simpler  learning 
processes  of  rats  there  seems  to  be  a  differential  activation  of  some  key 
factor  of  a  subcortical  learning  process  .  .  .  which  in  effect  draws  off  all 
available  cortical  energy,  leaving  other  and  irrelevant  sensori-motor 
processes  relatively  enfeebled  so  that  they  are  subordinated.  The  effect 
is  the  same  as  if  a  specific  inhibitory  action  were  exerted  by  the  cortex 
upon  the  inappropriate  movements  ...  It  may  be  suggested,  further,  that 
all  inhibition  is  in  reality  a  differential  activation,  the  mechanism  being  in 
some  cases  simply  the  “drainage**  phenomenon  .  .  .  and  in  other  cases  this 
effect  supplemented  by  positive  activation  of  two  antagonistic  motor 
mechanisms  so  that  their  interference  blocks  all  reactions  of  non-adaptive 
sorts.*11 

In  these  statements  of  Professor  Herrick,  we  find  a  language  of 
similar  structure  to  the  known  facts.  The  terms  of  differential  dynamo¬ 
genic  cortical  influence  and  differential  activation  cover  all  known  facts, 
and  may  cover  future  facts,  because  the  terms  are  structurally  very 
flexible,  and  will  always  allow  us  to  enlarge  our  knowledge  of  the 
mechanism  of  the  so  fundamental  differential  activation . 

The  difficulty  in  eliminating  the  term  ‘inhibition*  and  suggesting  a 
new  physiological  term  to  take  its  place  is  considerable,  because  this  term 
is  used  in  many  different  forms  and  meanings.  The  term  ‘inhibit’  is 

ON  ‘INHIBITION’ 

used  in  its  various  forms  as  a  substantive,  an  adjective,  a  verb,  an 
adverb,  sometimes  as  a  psycho-logical  term,  sometimes  as  a  physiological 
one,  yet  never  carrying  physiological  implications,  but  always  psycho¬ 
logical  and  anthropomorphic  ones  connected  with  its  origin  and  standard 
use.  It  was  introduced  into  science  when  physiology  and  neurology  were 
in  their  infancy,  and  so  were  still  under  the  influence  of  primitive  ani¬ 
mism  and  anthropomorphism. 

The  term,  because  of  its  character,  is  not  scientifically  descriptive. 
It  does  not  suggest  functional,  actional,  directional,  or  other  structural 
implications,  but  suggests  notions  irrelevant  to  science  connected  with  its 
origin  and  standard  use,  making  it  a  far-fetched  inferential  term,  the 
use  of  which  must  retard  the  advances  of  these  sciences. 

Once  we  introduce  a  physiological  term  with  physiological  and, 
therefore,  structural  implications,  our  expressions  will  have  to  be  re¬ 
shaped  to  make  the  use  of  the  term  possible.  Such  re-wording  will 
always  carry  quite  definite  structural  implications,  which,  in  turn,  sug¬ 
gest  further  experiments  in  the  search  for  stfucture  and  so  have  a 
creative  character,  not  to  be  disregarded.  Thus,  as  we  have  already  seen, 
the  term  of  ‘degrees  of  conditionality’  suggested  further  experiments 
and  the  revision  of  older  data. 

This  statement  is  quite  general  and  may  be  summed  up  as  follows : 
The  introduction  of  a  new  structural  term  may:  (1)  eliminate  the 
improper  implications  of  the  older  terms;  (2)  introduce  new  and  cre¬ 
ative  implications  which  suggest  the  need  of  verification  and  so  lead  to 
new  experiments. 

At  this  point,  I  suggest  a  term  which  may  be  useful  and  will,  per¬ 
haps,  be  acceptable  for  scientific  use.  As  the  fundamental  character  of 
‘inhibition’  seems  to  be  ‘differential  activation’,  the  term  to  be  coined 
should  possess  two  main  structural  implications :  ( 1 )  it  should  be  direc¬ 
tional,  or  indicate  the  sense  of  the  reaction,  and  (2)  it  should  imply 
activation. 

We  find  such  a  term  in  ‘negative  excitation’,  ‘negative  stimulation’, 
‘negative  activation’,  ‘negative  phase’. ,  and  it  is  possible  to  extend  the  use 
of  this  term  by  making  as  many  compound  terms  as  we  need. 

If  possible,  we  should  have  terms  which  help  us  to  keep  on  one 
level  of  analysis,  and  so  automatically  prevent  us  from  confusing  levels, 
since  modern  science  always  deals,  at  least  in  principle,  with  not  less 
than  three  levels,  the  macroscopic,  the  microscopic,  and  the  sub-micro¬ 
scopic,  thus  making  confusion  quite  easy.  If  we  call  the  positive  effect 
of  a  stimulation  on  the  macroscopic  level  ‘positive’,  any  other  stimulation 
which  might  fail  to  produce  the  positive  effect  on  this  level,  or  which 

VI.  ON  PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGY 

might  counteract  it,  would  be  negative.  The  implication  would  remain 
that  there  was  some  excitation,  but  that  it  did  not  produce  the  effect 
which  we  had  called  positive.  Structurally,  such  a  term  would  be  satis¬ 
factory,  especially  as  it  would  help  us  to  keep  on  one  level  of  analysis 
and  not  confuse  the  main  levels  through  verbal  structure. 

Such  a  language  would  help  us  to  study  the  mechanism  of  ‘differ¬ 
ential  activation’,  and  would  catry  helpful  implications.  If  any  cases 
appeared  in  which  this  term  did  not  cover  the  field,  either  the  term  could 
be  enlarged,  keeping  the  implications,  or  the  statements  should  be  altered 
so  as  to  be  expressible  by  such  terms.  The  last  would  always  prove  to 
carry  interesting  implications,  suggesting  experiments. 

In  the  processes  going  on  in  the  nervous  system,  there  is  no  occa¬ 
sion  for  the  application  of  terms  like  ‘prohibition1  or  ‘inhibition’.  There 
is  no  standstill  in  these  sub-microscopic  processes,  though  the  manifesta¬ 
tion  on  the  macroscopic  levels  can  be  either  of  a  positive  or  of  a  negative 
character.  On  the  sub-microscopic  levels,  there  is  a  nervous  excitation 
which  often  stimulates* antagonistic  processes.,  with  results  which  are 
not  always  obvious. 

The  implication  of  the  term  ‘negative  excitation’,  although  limited, 
is  structurally  correct  in  1933.  Without  going  into  full  detail  here,  I 
merely  suggest  a  few  considerations.  First  of  all,  the  term  preserves  its 
main  implication;  namely,  that  of  excitation,  ‘negative’  suggesting  that 
this  excitation  takes  an  opposite  course  to  the  positive  one.  If,  for  in¬ 
stance,  a  positive  excitation  produces,  let  us  say,  the  activities  of  the 
salivary  glands,  a  negative  excitation  in  this  respect  will  not  produce 
them  but  will  produce  other  activities,  such  as,  for  instance,  an  investiga¬ 
tory  reaction.  With  a  negative  excitation,  there  is  an  excitation,  but  it 
produces  different  results.  There  is  no  possibility  of  stopping  or  pro¬ 
hibiting  or  inhibiting  nervous  activities,  short  of  death  as-a- whole  or 
destruction  in  parts;  but  only  a  possible  deviation  of  activities,  owing  to 
enormous  possibilities  in  establishing  nervous  connections,  endlessly 
subtle  dynamogenic  effects , . 

In  some  instances,  ‘inhibition’  might  be  regarded  as  a  form  of 
nervous  exhaustion;  but  such  a  notion  cannot  always  be  structurally 
correct,  as  there  is  much  evidence  at  hand  that  ‘inhibition’  spreads  to 
other  cortical  elements  which  were  not  functionally  exhausted,  or  that 
it  can  be  counteracted  by  some  new  excitation.  ‘Inhibition’  thus  pre¬ 
serves  its  active  character.  The  origin  of  ‘inhibition’  is  also  very  instruc¬ 
tive,  and  a  mass  of  experimental  data  shows  that  it  can  be  produced 
experimentally.  Among  other  ways,  it  can  be  produced  by  very  weak, 
very  strong,  or  unusual  stimuli,  but  stimuli ,  anyway .  As  a  rule,  any 

ON  ‘INHIBITION’ 

extra  nervous  excitation  in  the  central  nervous  system  manifests  itself 
at  once,  either  in  diminishing,  or  in  completely  abolishing  (temporarily, 
at  least)  the  conditional  reflexes  prevailing  at  the  date.12  If  we  find  that 
exhaustion  is,  in  some  instances,  the  structurally  correct  term,  there  is 
no  reason  why  we  should  not  use  it,  instead  of  using  a  psycho-logical 
term  of  ‘inhibition’,  on  neurological  levels. 

That  the  terminology  of  positive  and  negative  excitation  is  struc¬ 
turally  appropriate  finds  its  further  support  in  the  so-called  ‘disinhibi- 
tion\  Thus,  an  ‘inhibition’  of  an  ‘inhibition’  reverses  the  neural  process 
prevailing  at  a  given  ‘time’  and  becomes  a  positive  excitatory  one.  In 
our  language,  because  of  structural  considerations,  we  should  say  that 
‘disinhibition’  should  be  labelled  as  ‘negative  excitation  of  second  degree ’, 
resulting  in  a  positive  excitation.  If  we  were  to  ‘inhibit’  ‘disinhibition’, 
we  should  have,  again,  ‘inhibition’, .  With  the  new  terminology,  it  would 
be  a  negative  excitation  of  the  third  degree,  which  would  give  negative 
results,  and  a  general  rule  could  be  established,  in  complete  accordance 
with  the  mathematical  language  in  which  the  even  degrees  of  a  negative 
excitation  would  have  positive  characteristics  and  the  uneven  would 
remain  negative  (‘inhibitory’). 

Such  a  language  would  not  just  borrow  ‘by  analogy’  some  mathe¬ 
matical  features.  Once  we  take  structure  into  consideration, — and  lin¬ 
guistic  issues  represent  an  adjustment  of  structure — when  a  systematic 
analogy  is  found,  it  has  always  structural  implications  which  should  be 
used  for  testing  structure.  There  can  be  no  serious  objection  to  the 
statement  that  mathematics  is,  at  present,  a  limited  language  of  which 
the  structure  in  1933  is  similar,  or  the  most  similar  we  have,  to  the 
known  structure  of  the  world  and  our  nervous  system.  The  use  of 
such  language  must  be  always  desirable,  as  it  is  a  test  of  structure  and 
so  leads  to  further  discoveries  of  the  unknown  structure  of  this  world. 
To  the  best  of  my  knowledge,  the  above  is  a  novel,  very  general,  struc¬ 
tural  use  of  mathematics  considered  as  a  prototype  of  languages.  Our 
emphasis  is  now  on  the  structure  of  mathematics,  and  not  on  the  numeri¬ 
cal  solutions  of  equations,  the  possibility  and  usefulness  of  which  is 
precisely  due  to  the  fact  that  equations  express  relatedness,  and  so 
necessarily  give  us  structural  glimpses. 

From  a  structural  and  linguistic  point  of  view,  the  historical  devel¬ 
opment  of  mathematics  shows  that  it  is  a  first  successful  attempt  to 
develop  a  language  with  a  structure  similar  to  the  empirical  structures, 
and  shows  the  ideal  conditions  of  producing  languages. 

When  we  had  only  positive  numbers,  we  could  add  two  and  three 
and  make  five,  we  could  subtract  two  from  three  and  have  the  remainder 

VI.  ON  PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGY 

one,  but  we  could  not  subtract  three  from  two.  Yet  the  structure  of 
this  world  is  such  that  a  further  development  in  the  structure  of  the 
language  was  imperative.  Thus,  if  an  object  moves  in  a  given  direction 
with  the  velocity  two  feet  per  second,  and  some  external  factor  imparts 
to  it  a  velocity  of  three  feet  per  second  in  the  opposite  direction,  the 
original  direction  of  motion  will  be  reversed,  and  the  object  will  move 
with  the  velocity  of  one  foot  per  second  in  the  opposite  direction.  Or, 
to  give  another  example,  some  one  has  two  units  of  money  and  he  buys 
something  which  costs  three  units  of  money.  He  is  then  in  debt  one  unit. 

Such  facts  necessitated  the  introduction  of  negative  numbers  and 
so  made  subtraction  always  possible.  If  the  motion  in  one  direction  or 
the  amount  of  money  in  our  pocket  was  called  ‘plus  two'  units,  and  we 
subtract  from  it  three  units,  the  results  were  ‘minus  one’,  meaning  a 
conventional  reversal  of  direction,  or  sense,  for  motion,  or  a  debt, 
instead  of  a  possession,  for  money. 

Experimental  facts  of  division  again  necessitated  the  expansion  of 
this  language.  Thus,  fractions  were  introduced  so  as  always  to  allow 
of  linguistic  division.  The  ‘imaginary*  number,  ^ / — i,  was  intro¬ 

duced  to  allow,  in  all  cases,  the  extraction  of  roots  , .  For  a  long  ‘time*,  the 
number  t  —  \/ — 1  was  considered  almost  mystical,  but,  of  late,  when 
a  physicist  or  an  engineer  finds  it  in  his  equations,  it  is  almost  an  un¬ 
mistakable  indication  for  him  to  look  for  some  wave-motion  in  the  world. 
More  extended  observation  of  the  empirical  world  and  structure  required 
further  structural  adjustment  of  our  languages. 

In  the  vector  calculus  we  have  the  so-called  scalar  product  which 
obeys  the  ordinary  laws  of  multiplication  and  a.b  ***b.a  where  the  order 
of  the  factors  is  of  no  importance^  The  vector  product  does  not  follow 
these  rules,  as  the  order  becomes  important;  thus,  in  a  vector  product, 
a.b  =  — b.a.  In  the  newer  quantum  mechanics,  to  account  structurally 
for  the  experiments,  still  newer  numbers  were  introduced.  Instead  of 
the  old  arithmetical  qp  =  pq  or  qp  —  pq  —  0,  we  introduce  new  numbers 

where  qp  —  pq  — _ ^  .1. 

27T 

It  is  very  significant  that  a  similar  linguistic  evolution  appears  jus¬ 
tifiable  in  the  case  of  the  function  of  the  nervous  system  in  general  and 
in  the  structure  and  function  of  the  conditional  reactions  in  particular. 
As  experience  and  theory  show,  the  fundamental  structures  and  func¬ 
tions  we  find  in  life  are  not  ‘plus*  affairs,  but  represent  some  higher- 
degree  functions  of  a  non-additive  character.  The  typical  functioning 
of  the  human  nervous  system  (time-binding)  is  represented  by  an  ex¬ 
ponential  function  of  ‘time*.13  Now  we  see  that  the  reversal  of  the  sign 

ON  'INHIBITION* 

of  negative  excitation  also  follows  exponential  rules,  and  experiments 
show  that  the  change  in  order  of  abstractions  which,  by  necessity,  must 
be  passing  from  even  to  uneven  numbers  of  orders  or  vice  versa,  also 
reverses  the  sign  of  the  reaction  (see  Part  VII). 

In  the  case  of  positive  excitation,  there  is  also  a  structural  parallel 
with  the  newer  languages  of  mathematics,  but  we  do  not  need  to  analyse 
it  here,  because  the  foundation  of  the  more  flexible,  adjustable  responses 
begins  with  a  negative  effect ;  and,  in  this  case,  the  language  I  suggest 
is  fully  justified  without  further  explanations.  The  neurological  im¬ 
portance  of  ‘consciousness  of  abstracting*  is  based  precisely  on  the  fact 
that  it  automatically  involves  a  fraction  of  a  second  of  psycho-logical 
delay,  and  thus  is  fundamentally  based  on,  and  introduces  in  training, 
a  wholesome  ‘inhibition*. 

We  come  thus  to  a  weighty  structural  conclusion  that  the  funda¬ 
mental  processes  of  the  nervous  system  are  not  only  non-plus  processes 
but  that  they  follow  the  exponential  rules  of  signs.  As  soon  as  we 
realize  that  from  a  structural  point  of  view  ‘structure’  and  ‘function* 
are  only  different  types  of  language  in  which  to  speak  about  two  aspects 
of  what  is  going  on,  on  the  silent  un-speakable  level,  and  that  on  this 
level  these  two  aspects  can  never  be  divided ,  we  must  also  build  a  non-el 
language.  Such  a  language  is  found  in  dynamic  structure,  out  of  which 
arises  function,  and  even  macroscopically  relatively  enduring  structures 
as  special  aspects,  and  the  exponential  character  of  the  fundamental 
activities  of  the  nervous  system  becomes  a  necessity. 

In  modern  mathematics  numbers  can  be  interpreted  as  operators . , 
which,  in  our  case,  suggests  great  freedom  of  structural  use,  and  widens 
the  application  of  these  notions. 

To  put  the  problems  as  simply  as  possible :  all  the  more  subtle  forms 
of  adjustment  in  organisms,  ‘intelligence*,  so-called  ‘civilization*,  our 
‘ethics*,  ‘happiness*. ,  and,  finally,  sanity ,  which  is  the  evidence  of  seman¬ 
tic  adjustment  or  proper  evaluation  on  human  levels,  are  based  on  the 
neurological  interplay,  the  number,  and  multi-dimensional  order  of 
superimposed  (not  added)  positive  and  negative  excitations.  The  posi¬ 
tive,  or  the  direct  and  obvious,  responses  are  the  more  primitive ;  the 
negative,  resulting  in  not  always  obvious  consequences,  are  the  result  of 
further  structural  complexities,  which  reach  their  culmination  in  the 
normally  developed  highly  cultured  man. 

Such  indefinitely  superimposed  negative  excitations  are  found 
physiologically  in  the  hierarchy  of  higher  and  higher  orders  of  abstrac¬ 
tions,  which  are  able  to  reverse  the  sign  of  the  s.r ,  and  so,  structurally, 
make  these  considerations  extremely  workable  and  neurologically  sound, 

VI.  ON  PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGY 

and  justify  their  introduction  and  use.  This  accounts  for  the  fact  that 
what  was  evaluated  as  tragic  or  painful,  or  joyful,  or  shameful . ,  to  one 
generation  or  culture,  does  not  seem  so  to  another.  Our  personal  dif¬ 
ficulty  usually  is  that,  at  present,  we  copy  animals  in  the  relative  un¬ 
conditionality  of  our  responses,  because  we  are  not  acquainted  with  this 
semantic  mechanism.  We  are  not  prepared  to  change  in  one  single 
generation  the  sign  from  a  minus  to  a  plus,  or  vice  versa,  without  a 
great  amount  of  struggle  and  semantic  discomfort. 

Now,  such  discomforts  are  usually  harmful  to  the  human  nervous 
system,  but  the  structural  understanding  of  this  mechanism  helps  us  to 
eliminate  these  semantic  pains,  and  so  leads  toward  nervous  balance 
and  sanity. 

It  seems  that  the  neurological  mechanism  operating  in  this  connec¬ 
tion  is  similar  to  the  one  formulated  by  Pavlov,  thus :  Two  facts  relat¬ 
ing  to  the  central  nervous  activities  stand  out  clearly.  The  first  is  that 
the  extraneous  stimulus  acting  on  the  positive  phase  of  the  reflex 
inhibits,  and  acting  on  the  negative  phase  dis-inhibits,  in  either  case, 
therefore,  reversing,  the  nervous  process  prevailing  at  the  time.  The 
second  is  that  the  inhibitory  process  is  more  labile  and  more  easily 
affected  than  the  excitatory  process,  being  influenced  by  stimuli  of 
much  weaker  physiological  strength.'14 

Negative  reactions  or  ‘inhibition’  must  be  interpreted  as  the  neuro¬ 
logical  foundation  of  ‘human  mentality’,  and  the  result  of  external  and 
internal  stimulations.  Because  of  structural  interrelations,  the  main  fac¬ 
tor  of  building  human  ‘mentality’  and  developing  internal  ‘inhibition’ 
must  be  more  labile  and  must  be  influenced  by  stimuli  of  much  weaker 
physiological  strength. 

This  explains  also  why  the  solution  of  our  problems  in  education, 
social  life.,  must  be  not  the  animalistic  external  ‘inhibition’  alone,  but 
must  become,  in  the  main,  special  internal  ‘inhibition’,  effective  and  yet 
harmless  to  the  individual  nervous  system.  All  of  us  possess  this  most 
general  nervous  mechanism.  The  problem  is  to  discover  the  means  to 
operate  it.  We  shall  see  later  that  in  consciousness  of  abstracting  we 
find  a  workable  semantic  solution,  allowing  an  automatic  change  of  sign 
of  the  reaction.  It  should  be  recalled  here  that  all  stimuli  and  all 
responses  are  complex,  the  word  ‘simple’  being  structurally  false  to  facts. 
On  the  human,  and  particularly  on  the  linguistic  level,  it  is  practically 
never  possible  to  ascertain  an  ‘absolute’  order  of  abstraction,  or  the 
degree  or  order  of  an  excitation.  These  are  often  the  results  of  racial 
time-binding,  and  extremely  complex,  nervous  processes,  and  every 
superimposition  of  a  new  neurological  process  (not  addition)  may  fun- 

ON  ‘INHIBITION’ 

damentally  alter  the  whole  character  of  the  s.r  and  reverse  the  sign.  In 
negative  excitations,  the  passing  from  one  degree  to  another  changes  the 
sign  of  the  reaction.  In  practice,  we  are  only  interested  in  two  neigh¬ 
bouring  levels  of  abstractions  or  in  two  neighbouring  degrees  of  negative 
excitation,  simply  because  these  involve,  by  necessity,  a  passing  from 
an  even  to  an  uneven  degree  or  vice  versa — in  both  cases  reversing  the 
sign  of  the  s.r. 

The  general  organismal  adjusting  mechanism  of  the  ‘investigatory 
reaction’  responds  positively  to  a  new  stimulus,  but  with  very  important 
survival  value  acts  negatively  on  established  positive  conditional  reactions 
in  animals.  It  is,  at  present,  much  weakened  and  often  ineffective  with 
man,  resulting  in  non-survival,  non-adjustment  and  ‘mental’  ills  for 
man.  It  is  a  well-established  fact  that  different  stimuli  either  interfere 
with  each  other,  resulting  in  modified  behaviour,  or  reinforce  each  other 
and  have  cumulative  effects.  On  the  human  level,  different  ‘mental’ 
factors  play  the  role  of  internal  positive  or  negative  excitatory  semantic 
complexes,  which,  because  of  verbal  conditions  (and  all  doctrines  are 
always  connected  with  an  affective  background),  may  reinforce  a  given 
stimulus,  thus  making  its  physiological  effect  variable  and  of  different 
strength.  Under  such  conditions  a  new  stimulus  does  not  produce  the 
investigatory  reaction  with  all  its  beneficial  results.  This  mechanism 
is,  perhaps,  responsible  for  the  well-known  fact  that  primary  instincts 
with  humans  are,  by  far,  weaker  and  more  variable  than  with  animals ; 
whence  it  comes  that  humans  seldom  know  by  themselves,  without 
science ,  what  is  bejt  for  them . 

We  should  not  be  surprised  to  find  that  under  these  more  complex 
conditions  human  investigatory  reactions  may  be  of  different  types, 
culminating  in  the  typically  human  investigatory  reaction,  which  would 
introduce  the  natural,  yet  more  important,  delay  in  an  immediate  reaction 
to  a  former  stimulus.  We  shall  find,  later,  that  consciousness  of  abstract¬ 
ing  is  such  a  distinctly  human  and  very  useful  investigatory  reaction 
that  on  the  human  complex  semantic  level  brings  relatively  as  much 
benefit  to  the  human  organism  as  it  does  on  the  animal  level  to  animals. 

It  seems  that  the  nervous  mechanisms  of  both  types  are  similar, 
except  for  the  fact  that  on  the  human  levels  we  have  more  factors 
which  are  external  and  internal  stimuli  than  on  the  animal  level.  If  we 
copy  animals  in  our  nervous  processes,  we  are,  in  reality,  worse  off 
than  the  animals,  because,  with  our  more  complicated  nervous  system, 
it  means  for  us  a  pathological  condition. 

CHAPTER  XXIII 

ON  CONDITIONAL  REACTIONS  OF  HIGHER  ORDERS  AND 
PSYCHIATRY 

In  the  dog  two  conditions  were  found  to  produce  pathological  distur¬ 
bances  by  functional  interference,  namely,  an  unusually  acute  clashing  of 
the  excitatory  and  inhibitory  processes,  and  the  influence  of  strong  and 
extraordinary  stimuli.  In  man  precisely  similar  conditions  constitute  the 
usual  causes  of  nervous  and  psychic  disturbances.  (394)  i.  p.  pavlov 

The  fact  that  the  maximum  disturbance  in  the  central  nervous  activity 
does  not  appear  immediately  on  administration  of  the  causative  stimulus, 
but  after  one  or  more  days  has  been  observed  in  many  animals.  (394) 

I.  P.  PAVLOV 

Psychiatrists  will  readily  understand  the  structurally  false  to  facts 
and  harmful  implications  of  the  term  ‘inhibition*  on  the  neurological 
level,  when  they  consider  that  often  ‘pain*,  ‘fright’,  and  different  ‘prohi¬ 
bitions’  and  ‘inhibitions’  on  the  psycho-logical  level  result  in  nervous 
processes  which  are  not  passive,  eliminated  factors,  but  remain  what  they 
were  originally — exciting  semantic  factors  ‘repressed’  on  human  levels — 
and  become  very  active  and  potent  causative  factors  in  many  ‘mental’ 
and  physical  ailments. 

If  the  non-el  point  of  view  and  language  are  seriously  applied,  there 
seems  to  be  no  escape  from  the  conclusion  that  the  future  physician,  on 
perfectly  scientific,  structural,  physico-chemical,  and  colloidal  grounds, 
will  never  attempt  to  divide  the  ‘physical’  from  the  ‘mental’,  and  different 
nervous  processes  now  called  ‘inhibition’  will  come  prominently  to  the 
fore  as  active,  to  be  taken  care  of  and  never  to  be  disregarded. 

That  the  mechanism  of  conditional  reactions  in  animals  bears  an 
astonishing  resemblance  to  the  mechanism  of  ‘mental’  ills  in  humans, 
because  of  the  relative  unconditionality  of  both,  is  exemplified  practically 
throughout  the  whole  work  of  Pavlov,  although  he  did  not  point  out  this 
particular  connection.  As  soon  as  this  is  understood,  we  shall  find  that 
some  of  the  experiments  of  Doctor  Zavadzki,  made  in  Pavlov’s  labora¬ 
tory  twenty- five  years  ago,  disclose  a  neurological  mechanism  which 
underlies  practically  all  psychotherapy,  and  which,  therefore,  appears 
very  important  and.  to  deserve  special  discussion. 

I  do  not  know  the  percentage  of  the  successful  application  of  psy¬ 
chotherapy  of  any  scientific  school,  or  of  extra-medical  cults,  because 
the  many  cases  of  failure  are  very  seldom  recorded.  We  usually  forget, 
or  do  not  realize,  that  the  successful  cases  teach  us,  structurally,  less 
than  the  failures,  because  there  is  always  an  infinity  of  ways  in  which 
we  can  account  for  a  positive  result,  which  is  structurally  entirely  invali- 

CONDITIONAL  REACTIONS  AND  PSYCHIATRY  359 

dated  as  such  by  a  single  failure,  if  the  possibility  of  it  is  not  foreseen 
by  the  structural  flexibility  of  the  general  method. 

From  what  I  gather  (though  I  may  be  mistaken)  of  every  hundred 
patients  who  seek  relief  in  psychotherapy,  fifty  fail  completely.  The 
remaining  fifty  can,  perhaps,  be  divided  into  two  groups ;  the  first  one 
of,  say,  ten,  who  become  entirely  relieved;  the  other  remaining  forty, 
who  improve  in  different  degrees.  The  analysis  in  the  present  work 
may,  perhaps,  explain  why  the  percentage  of  failures  is  so  high.  It  seems 
that  no  school  of  psychotherapists  has  analysed  ‘mental’  ills  from  the 
general  non-el  structural  and  semantic  point  of  view ;  and,  although  the 
physicians  struggle  in  every  case  to  abolish  the  relative  unconditionality 
of  the  reactions,  their  methods  are  neither  neurological,  nor  physiological, 
nor  fundamental  enough. 

The  language  used  in  these  scientific  theories  includes  such  terms 
as  ‘conscious’,  ‘unconscious’,  ‘repression’,  ‘inhibition’,  ‘transfer’,  ‘com¬ 
plex*,  .  There  seems  no  doubt  that  some  such  terms  cover  a  few  of  the 
facts  we  know  from  experience  and  observation,  and  that  they  may  be 
structurally  correct  on  the  psycho-logical  level.  The  nervous  mechanism 
involved,  although  discovered  twenty-five  years  ago,  has  not  generally 
attracted  the  attention  of  physicians,  and  the  postulated  theories,  lacking 
neurological  foundations,  are  often  called  ‘far-fetched  speculations’,  a 
fact  which  is  ultimately  harmful  to  the  whole  psychotherapeutic  and 
semantic  hygiene  movement. 

The  ‘psychologists’  and  the  psychiatrists  are  very  much  divided  as 
to  the  role  ‘introspection’  plays.  This  is  due  to  the  confusion  of  the 
orders  of  abstractions.  Animals  may  ‘feel’,  may  ‘suffer’,  but  they  cannot 
describe .  Humans  differ  in  this  respect;  the  given  person  may  feel  pain, 
the  pain  is  very  objective  to  the  given  individual,  and  it  is  not  words 
(objective  level);  but  we  can  describe  it,  this  description  being  valid  on 
the  descriptive  level ,  a  higher  order  abstraction  than  the  objective  level 
(which  is  un-speakable  for  the  given  individual).  If  we  ascribe  this 
process  to  others,  this  is  no  longer  a  description  but  an  inference,  or  a 
still  higher  order  abstraction,  which  statements  have  to  be  verified  by 
averaging.  Scientifically  (1933),  psycho-logics  are  impossible  without 
the  description  of  internal  processes,  and,  therefore,  some  ‘introspection’, 
so  that  the  United  States  Behaviourism  becomes  a  very  naive  discipline. 
The  Behaviourists  mean  well,  methodologically,  without  realizing  fully 
what  scientific  methodology  is.  They  completely  condemn  ‘introspection’, 
yet  they  continually  use  it.  Consciousness  of  abstracting  solves  the  rid¬ 
dles  of  pro-  or  anti-behaviouristic  attitudes,  because,  when  we  are  fully 

VI.  ON  PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGY 

conscious  of  abstracting,  we  should  never  confuse  description  with  infer¬ 
ence,  neurologically  processes  of  different  order. 

Any  discipline,  to  be  a  ‘science’,  must  start  with  the  lowest  abstrac¬ 
tions  available ;  which  means  descriptions  of  some  objective,  unspeakable 
level.  In  human  psycho-logics,  ‘introspection’  is  the  only  possible  descrip¬ 
tive  level,  all  other  methods  being  inferential. 

The  experiments  of  Doctor  Zavadzki  were  conducted  to  investigate 
the  mechanism  of  the  so-called  ‘delayed  reflexes’.  Speaking  roughly,  in 
experiments  in  which  the  interval  between  the  conditional  stimulus  and 
the  reinforcement  by  food  or  acid  is  short,  say,  one  to  five  seconds,  the 
salivary  secretion  follows  nearly  immediately  after  the  application  of  the 
conditional  stimulus.  If  the  delay  between  the  two  is  longer,  say,  several 
minutes,  the  appearance  of  salivary  secretions  is  also  delayed,  the  length 
of  this  delay  being  proportional  to  the  length  of  the  interval  between 
the  two  stimuli. 

In  these  experiments  there  were  two  phases :  the  one  in  which  the 
conditional  stimulus  has  apparently  no  effect;  the  other  in  which  the 
conditional  stimulus  becomes  effective.  The  investigation  was  continued 
to  discover  what  becomes  of  the  excitation  due  to  the  conditional  stimu¬ 
lus  during  its  apparent  inactivity. 

New  experiments  finally  disclosed  an  astonishing  mechanism.  A 
tactile  stimulation  was  used  for  three  minutes  as  a  conditional  stimulus 
for  acid,  and  reinforced,  as  usual,  by  the  application  of  acid,  and  a 
stable,  delayed  conditional  reaction  was  obtained.  But  when  a  perfectly 
neutral  stimulus,  say,  the  sound  of  a  metronome  or  a  noiselessly  rotating 
object,  never  connected  with  any  alimentary  stimulation,  was  superim¬ 
posed  upon  the  original  conditional  stimulus,  immediately  a  copious 
secretion  of  saliva,  together  with  the  motor  reactions  peculiar  to  a  given 
stimulus,  were  obtained. 

W e  see  that  the  excitatory  process  in  the  nervous  system  existed  all 
the  time  in  a  concealed,  non-manifest  form  and  was  released  by  an  extra 
and  neutral  stimulus* 

Similar  experiments  show  clearly  that  the  structure  and  function 
of  the  central  nervous  system  is  such  that  some  stimulations  can  be 
concealed  and  become  macroscopically  seemingly  inactive,  giving  no 
obvious  manifestation  or  response,  yet  preserving  their  active  exciting 
characteristics  which,  by  proper  treatment,  can  be  released  at  will.  In 
physics,  we  have  a  similar  phenomenon  in  the  case  of  ‘frozen’  light, 
galvanic  and  storage  batteries,  pear-shaped  drops  of  glass  resulting  from 
melting,  which  explode  when  the  end  is  broken  off,  and  many  others, 
although  probably  the  sub-microscopic  mechanisms  are  different. 

CONDITIONAL  REACTIONS  AND  PSYCHIATRY  361 

It  does  not  take  much  explanation  to  see  that  the  nervous  mechan¬ 
ism  revealed  in  the  experiments  of  Doctor  Zavadzki  accounts  on  human 
levels  for  a  great  many  /mental*  manifestations,  including  ‘recall*,  ‘un¬ 
conscious',  ‘repression*,  ‘complexes*. ,  and  allowing  a  further  generaliza¬ 
tion,  that  a  slight  nervous  disturbance  of  ‘recall’,  in  the  sense  of  negative 
unconditionality,  may  be  closely  connected  with  a  pathological  semantic 
‘complex’. 

Another  experiment  has  close  connection  with  the  problems  of  the 
human  ‘unconscious’,  ‘repressions*,  and  ‘complexes*.  The  positive  con¬ 
ditional  reactions  were  usually  obtained  by  combining  under  certain 
conditions  a  formerly  neutral  stimulus  with  food  or  with  a  mild  defense 
reaction  to  acid.  If  the  neutral  stimulus  is  not  reinforced,  it  loses  its 
significance  for  the  organism,  no  secretion  is  obtained,  and  it  becomes 
from  this  point  of  view  a  negative  stimulus.  If,  with  a  given  animal,  a 
negative  reaction  is  established,  it  can,  under  certain  conditions,  be 
transformed  into  a  positive  one  by  reinforcement.  In  the  experiment 
we  are  describing,  a  dog  was  used,  with  a  well-established  negative 
alimentary  reaction  to  the  beats  of  the  metronome  at  the  rate  of  sixty 
beats  per  minute,  while  the  rate  of  one  hundred  and  twenty  beats  per 
minute  was  used  as  a  positive  stimulus.  Both  reactions  were  constant  and 
precise.  The  process  of  transformation  from  negative  to  positive  went 
slowly;  after  the  seventeenth  application  with  reinforcement,  a  small 
secretion  of  saliva  was  obtained ;  after  the  twenty-seventh  reinforcement, 
the  secretions  of  saliva  were  already  considerable.  No  definite  disturb¬ 
ances  in  other  positive  reactions  were  observed  except  for  a  tendency  to 
the  equalization  of  strong  and  weak  conditional  stimuli. 

But  the  secretory  reaction  to  the  transformed  stimulus  of  sixty  beats 
did  not  remain  constant,  in  spite  of  reinforcement;  it  diminished,  and 
after  the  thirtieth  application  fell  to  zero.  It  was  noticed,  further,  that 
immediately  after  the  application  of  the  metronome  at  the  rate  of  sixty 
beats  per  minute*  practically  all  the  older  positive  reactions  disappeared. 
After  further  experimenting,  some  of  the  positive  effects  of  the  metro¬ 
nome  at  sixty  returned,  but  its  negative  or  depressing  effect  on  the  posi¬ 
tive  reactions  persisted.  In  all  cases  where  the  metronome  at  sixty  was 
not  used,  all  the  positive  conditional  reactions  maintained  their  strength, 
except  that  the  weaker  stimuli  had  an  inclination  to  produce  lesser  effects 
toward  the  end  of  the  experiment.  Although  the  metronome  at  sixty  or 
one  hundred  and  twenty  produced  salivary  secretions  in  varying  quanti¬ 
ties  when  used  alone,  whenever  the  metronome  was  used  there  fol¬ 
lowed  a  disturbance  of  all  conditional  reactions,  varying  from  complete 
extinction  to  a  diminution  of  secretions.  The  formerly  positive  stimulus 

VI.  ON  PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGY 

of  one  hundred  and  twenty  beats  of  the  metronome  produced  greater  dis¬ 
turbances  than  the  formerly  negative  of  sixty.  Further  experimentation 
disclosed  that  the  disturbance  of  the  cortex  was  profound,  and  that  it 
could  not  withstand  any  kind  of  stronger  stimuli  without  producing  com¬ 
pletely  negative  results.  It  became,  also,  obvious  that  the  maximum 
disturbance  in  the  central  nervous  activity  in  animals  (and  in  man)  does 
not  appear  immediately  after  the  application  of  the  injurious  factor  but 
after  a  delay. 

Since  other  auditory  stimuli  acted  during  these  experiments,  Pavlov 
concludes  that  ‘the  disturbance  must  be  regarded  as  a  result  of  a  strictly 
localized  functional  interference  in  the  acoustic  analyser,  a  chronic  func¬ 
tional  lesion  of  some  circumscribed  part,  the  stimulation  of  which  pro¬ 
duces  an  immediate  effect  upon  the  function  of  the  whole  cortex,  and 
finally  leads  to  a  protracted  pathological  state*,  and,  that  ‘it  is  obvious 
that  the  localized  disturbance  of  the  acoustic  analyser  is  again  the  result 
of  a  clash  between  excitation  and  inhibition*,  which  this  particular 
nervous  system  finds  difficult  to  adjust.2 

These  experiments  were  conducted  upon  a  dog  which  had  served 
in  the  laboratory  for  a  long  time  and  belonged  to  the  type  which  has  a 
very  negatively  excitable  nervous  system.  Experiments  on  dogs  with 
very  positively  excitable  nervous  systems,  although  different  in  details, 
led  to  similar  general  results;  namely,  that  a  clashing  of  the  two 
antagonistic  nervous  processes  led,  usually,  to  a  more  or  less  protracted 
disturbance  of  the  function  of  the  cortex,  in  the  form  of  a  lasting 
predominance  of  one  of  the  processes.8 

Experimenting  on  the  conditional  reactions  in  animals,  such  as  a 
dog,  by  inducing  pathological  states  of  the  nervous  system,  gives  us,  in  a 
simplified  form ,  a  means  to  understand  the  mechanism  which  underlies 
some  of  the  human  ‘mental*  illnesses,  provided  we  realize  the  funda¬ 
mental  fact  that  these  experiments  on  dogs  correspond,  in  their  simpler 
form,  to  ‘mental*  ills,  and  not  to  ‘mental*  health,  in  man.  The  above 
experiments  would  be  impossible  with  a  healthy  person ;  yet  they  depict 
exactly  what  happens  in  the  case  of  ‘mentally*  ill.  The  experiments 
started  with  a  healthy  animal,  and  they  ended  with  a  pathological  case. 
If  similar  experiments  were  undertaken  with  a  healthy  person,  no  patho¬ 
logical  results  would  follow,  owing  to  the  larger  conditionality  of  re¬ 
actions.;  but  similar  pathological  results  are  produced  in  humans  by 
different  means,  the  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions  being  a  standard 
semantic  mechanism  to  bring  about  the  ‘clash*  between  the  positive  and 
negative  excitations  which  the  nervous  system  of  man  cannot  resolve 
so  easily. 

CONDITIONAL  K INACTIONS  AND  PSYCHIATRY  363 

The  experiments  of  Pavlov  disclose,  also,  a  fact  which,  on  human 
levels,  introduces  serious  complications ;  namely,  that  some  animals  have 
highly  excitable  nervous  systems,  and  that  some  have  less  excitable  ones. 
Experiments  conducted  on  some  individuals  produce  one  effect ;  similar 
experiments  performed  on  individuals  with  different  nervous  systems 
produce  different  results.  In  some  instances,  the  nervous  systems  are 
so  sturdy  that  no  disturbances  appear  at  all. 

To  anticipate  a  little :  it  appears  that  under  the  present  linguistic, 
educational,  social,  economic.,  conditions,  nearly  all  of  us  suffer  from 
nervous  and  semantic  disturbances,  produced  by  copying  animals  in  our 
nervous  responses.  This  last  condition  occurs  because  the  larger  con¬ 
ditionality  of  human  responses  has  not  been  taken  into  consideration; 
its  mechanism  is  unknown,  and  we  do  our  best  to  teach  and  enforce  the 
animalistic  responses.  As  yet,  we  have  had  no  physiological  and  simple 
methods  by  which  to  train  in  this  larger  conditionality.  This  is  a  simple 
explanation  of  our  failure.  Only  a  few  of  us  have  such  sturdy  nervous 
systems  that  they  do  not  become  semantically  disturbed  in  any  marked 
degree,  and  these  are  exceptions.  Obviously,  even  an  attempt  to  build  a 
general  theory  dealing  with  these  semantic  problems  may  be  useful, 
for  the  very  mistakes  made  may  serve  others  as  an  incentive  for  further 
enquiries  in  a  field  which  is  practically  unexplored  and  extremely  large. 

In  the  formulation  of  the  present  general  theory,  theoretical  con¬ 
siderations  suggested  necessary  neurological  mechanisms ;  yet  the 
standard  books  on  physiology  and  neurology  did  not  give  enough  data. 
In  the  recent  work  of  Pavlov,  I  found  sufficient  experiments  and  data 
to  illustrate  the  neurological  mechanisms  which  underlie  the  present 
theory.  It  seems  likely  that  the  work  of  Pavlov  and  the  experiments 
described,  together  with  the  theoretical  issues  raised  in  the  present  sys¬ 
tem,  will  be  of  value  to  psycho-logicians  and  psychiatrists,  provided 
that  they  pay  attention  to  the  semantic  non-confusion  of  orders  of 
abstractions,  without  which  it  is  practically  impossible  to  translate  experi¬ 
ments  dealing  with  nervous  responses  of  animals  to  the  human  levels  and 
escape  verbal  fallacies.  The  language  of  the  structure,  as  introduced  in 
the  present  work,  is  essential  in  this  respect ;  in  fact,  the  present  writer 
could  not  have  carried  out  his  analysis  without  it. 

Pavlov  also  suggests  some  applications  to  human  pathological  cases 
which  are  recognized  as  such,  the  average  person  being  assumed  ‘normal* . 
The  present  work  is  an  independent  theoretical  enquiry,  and  the  results 
are  much  more  general,  as  they  show  that  the  general  neurological 
mechanism  allows  an  almost  universal  misuse  of  our  nervous  systems, 
because  of  the  disregard  of  structural,  linguistic,  and  semantic  issues. 

VI.  ON  PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGY 

In  several  chapters,  Pavlov  discusses  a  large  number  of  experiments 
dealing  with  functionally  induced  pathological  states  of  the  nervous 
system,  and  suggests,  also,  some  therapeutic  measures.  He  concludes: 
‘This  .  .  .  and  other  observations  suggest  that  a  gradual  development  of 
internal  inhibition  in  the  cortex  should  be  used  for  re-establishment  of  the 
balance  of  normal  conditions  in  cases  of  an  unbalanced  nervous  system 
...  I  do  not  know  whether  similar  therapeutic  measures  ...  are  applied 
in  human  neuro therapy.’4 

The  above  remark  is  vitally  important;  it  is  not  only  a  result  of  a 
lifetime  of  scientific  work,  but  it  expresses  a  principle  which  is  used, 
without  being  formulated  explicitly ,  all  through  psychotherapy.  In  the 
present  volume,  this  principle  is  not  only  formulated  in  physiological 
terms,  but  is  also  made  the  foundation  of  a  physiological  method  for  its 
semantic  application.  This  method  is  found  in  the  training  and  develop¬ 
ment  of  the  consciousness  of  abstracting  (see  Part  VII),  which,  when 
applied,  not  only  restores  nervous  balance  as  empirically  shown,  but  also 
gives  powerful  preventive  semantic  means  if  used  in  early  education. 

Further  consequences  and  conclusions  are  given  in  Part  VII.  At  this 
point,  we  shall  merely  state  that  the  above  explanations  also  show  why  a 
theory  of  universal  agreement ,  in  the  broadest  sense ;  namely,  agreement 
with  one’s  self,  eliminating  internal  ‘conflict’,  and  with  others,  eliminat¬ 
ing  family,  social,  and  international  conflicts . ,  is  neurologically  not  only 
possible,  but  also  a  necessary  semantic  consequence  of  using  the  human 
nervous  system  in  its  structurally  appropriate  way. 

It  is  well  known  that  the  use  of  the  terms  ‘positive’  and  ‘negative’ 
is  optional;  but  the  opposing  character  of  the  issues  involved  is  not 
optional,  because  these  are  experimental  and  structural.  In  former  days, 
we  not  only  made  our  selection,  and  called  some  issues  positive  and  some 
negative,  but  we  naturally  had  and  have  some  semantic  responses  con¬ 
nected  with  them.  Thus  something  ‘positive’  implied  certainty,  ‘reality’, 
‘truth’,  ‘absolute’.;  something  ‘negative’  implied  the  negation  of  these. 

In  1933,  it  appears  likely  that  we  shall  have  to  revise  in  toto  these 
semantic  orientations,  which  obviously  we  have  been  practicing  since  the 
days  of  savagery. 

What  are  the  facts  ?  Curiously  enough  : 

1 )  The  electricity  which  lights  our  lamps  or  runs  our  dynamos,  we 
call,  in  the  old  language,  ‘negative’  electricity. 

2)  The  numbers  which  are  the  foundation  of  the  most  important 
complex  numbers  in  mathematics  are  formally  based  on  negative 
numbers. 

CONDITIONAL  REACTIONS  AND  PSYCHIATRY  365 

3)  The  foundation  of  so-called  ‘human  mentality'  is  the  ‘negative' 
reaction. 

4)  Because  words  are  never  the  things  we  speak  about,  the  sole 
link  between  languages  and  the  objective  world  being  structural,  the  only 
‘positive’  facts  about  this  world  are  of  the  old  ‘negative’  character. 

5)  Finally,  the  main  difficulty  of  the  /I -system  can  be  found  in  the 
positive  ‘is’  of  identity,  involving  us  in  false  to  fact  evaluation  and 
semantic  disturbances;  on  the  other  hand,  a  ^-system  is  based  on  the 
complete  elimination  of  identity  formulated  as  a  negative  premise  of  the 
‘this  is  not  this’  type  (see  Part  VII). 

At  present,  only  in  technical  mathematics  can  people  behave  seman¬ 
tically  like  ‘gentlemen’.  They  analyse  and  agree ;  no  quarrels  are  possible. 
Linguistic  and  semantic  researches  show  that  the  structure  of  all  lan¬ 
guages  can,  and  must ,  be  made  similar  to  empirical  structures ;  and  then, 
also,  the  rest  of  humans  can,  and  probably  will,  behave  in  a  less  silly  and 
futile  way  than  they  have  done  in  the  past  and  are  doing  in  the  present. 

BOOK  II 

A  GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 
TO  NON-ARISTOTELIAN  SYSTEMS 
AND  GENERAL  SEMANTICS 

Of  all  men,  Aristotle  is  the  one  of  whom  his  followers  have  worshipped 
his  defects  as  well  as  his  excellencies:  which  is  what  he  himself  never  did 
to  any  man  living  or  dead;  indeed,  he  has  been  accused  of  the  contrary 
fault.  (354)  AUGUSTUS  DE  MORGAN 

There  is  one  very  mportant  fact  on  which  we  must  be  in  no  doubt,  and 
that  is  that  for  any  given  deductive  theory  there  is  not  any  one  system 
of  fundamental  notions  nor  any  one  system  of  fundamental  propositions; 
there  are  generally  several  equally  possible,  i.  e.  from  which  it  is  equally 
possible  to  deduce  correctly  all  the  theorems.  .  .  .  This  fact  is  very 
important,  because  it  shows  that  there  are  in  themselves  no  undefinable 
notions  nor  indemonstrable  propositions;  they  are  only  so  relatively  to  a  cer¬ 
tain  adopted  order,  and  they  cease  (at  any  rate  partly)  to  be  such  if  another 
order  is  adopted.  This  destroys  the  traditional  conception  of  fundamental 
ideas  an  fundamental  truthst  fundamental,  that  is  to  say,  absolutely  and 
essentially.  <i2o>  louis  couturat 

In  this  direction  finality  is  not  sought,  for  it  is  apparently  unattainable. 
All  that  we  can  say  is,  in  the  words  of  a  leading  analyst,  “sufficient  unto 
the  day  is  the  rigor  thereof.”  (23)  E.  t.  bell 

In  mathematics  it  is  new  ways  of  looking  at  old  things  which  seem  to  be 
the  most  prolific  sources  of  far-reaching  discoveries.  (23)  e.  t.  bell 

The  first  will  show  us  how  to  change  the  language  suffices  to  reveal 

generalizations  not  before  suspected.  <4i7>  h.  poincar& 

In  sum,  ail  the  scientist  creates  in  a  fact  is  the  language  in  which  he  enunci¬ 
ates  it .  (417)  H.  POINCARES 

This  long  discussion  brings  us  to  the  final  conclusion  that  the  concrete 
facts  of  nature  are  events  exhibiting  a  certain  structure  in  their  mutual 
relations  and  certain  characters  of  their  own.  The  aim  of  science  is  to  ex¬ 
press  the  relations  between  their  characters  in  terms  of  the  mutual  struc¬ 
tural  relations  between  the  events  thus  characterised.  (S73) 

A.  N.  WHITEHEAD 

We  cease  to  seek  resemblances;  we  devote  ourselves  above  all  to  the 
differences,  and  among  the  differences  are  chosen  first  the  most  accentu¬ 
ated,  not  only  because  they  are  the  most  striking,  but  because  they  will  be 
the  most  instructive.  (417)  h.  poincar£ 

The  materialistic  theory  has  all  the  completeness  of  the  thought  of  the 
middle  ages,  which  had  a  complete  answer  to  everything,  be  it  in  heaven 
or  in  hell  or  in  nature.  There  is  trimness  about  it,  with  its  instantaneous 

368  NON-ARISTOTELIAN  (GENERAL  SEMANTICS 

present,  its  vanished  past,  its  non-existent  future,  and  its  inert  matter. 
This  trimness  is  very  medieval  and  ill  accords  with  brute  fact.  (573) 

A.  N.  WHITEHEAD 

The  existence  of  analogies  between  central  features  of  various  theories 
implies  the  existence  of  a  general  theory  which  underlies  the  particular 
theories  and  unifies  them  With  respect  to  those  central  features. 

E.  H.  MOORE 

Neither  the  authority  of  man  alone  nor  the  authority  of  fact  alone  is 
sufficient.  The  universe,  as  known  to  us,  is  a  joint  phenomenon  of  the 
observer  and  the  observed;  and  every  process  of  discovery  in  natural  science 
or  in  other  branches  of  human  knowledge  will  acquire  its  best  excellence 
when  it  is  in  accordance  with  this  fundamental  principle.  (82) 

R.  D.  CARMICHAEL 

It  is  evident  that  if  we  adopt  this  point  of  view  toward  concepts,  namely 
that  the  proper  definition  of  a  concept  is  not  in  terms  of  its  properties  but 
in  terms  of  actual  operations,  we  need  run  no  danger  of  having  to  revise 
our  attitude  toward  nature.  (55)  p.  w.  BRIDGMAN 

To  say  the  facts  are  incomprehensible  is  a  rationalization  of  individual 
ignorance. 

Ignorance,  however,  may  be  no  fault.  It  becomes  so  only  when  the  in¬ 
dividual  permits  himself  to  rationalize  it,  i .  e.,  give  it  a  disguise,  which 
effectually  blocks  him  in  the  utilization  of  his  intelligence,  which  might 
otherwise  solve  the  problem  in  hand.  (24p  smith  ely  jelliffe 

The  symbol  A  is  not  the  counterpart  of  anything  in  familiar  life.  To 
the  child  the  letter  A  would  seem  horribly  abstract;  so  we  give  him  a 
familiar  conception  along  with  it.  “A  was  an  Archer  who  shot  at  a  frog.” 
This  tides  over  his  immediate  difficulty;  but  he  cannot  make  serious  prog¬ 
ress  with  word-building  so  long  as  Archers,  Butchers,  Captains,  dance 
round  the  letters.  The  letters  are  abstract,  and  sooner  or  later  he  has  to 
realise  it.  In  physics  we  have  outgrown  archer  and  apple-pie  definitions 
of  the  fundamental  symbols.  To  a  request  to  explain  what  an  electron 
really  is  supposed  to  be  we  can  only  answer,  “It  is  part  of  the  A  B  C  of 
physics'*.  U4?)  a.  s.  eddington 

No  previous  existing  system  of  thought  had  property  formed  a  working 
hypothesis  to  explain  why  for  this  or  that  individual  it  was  necessary  to 
“go  up  three  steps  or  else  be  constipated,”  “or  to  take  pills  in  multiples  of 
three,”  or  other  analogous  symptoms  which  will  occur  to  the  reader  and 
which  are  found  in  bewildering  profusion  in  all  pathological  cases,  be  they 
hysterias,  or  compulsion  neuroses,  phobias,  schizophrenias,  or  what  not. 
t241)  SMITH  ELY  JELLIFFE 

The  Dormouse  .  .  .  went  on;  “ — that  begins  with  an  M,  such  as  mouse¬ 
traps,  and  the  moon,  and  memory,  and  muchness — you  know  you  say 
things  are  ‘much  of  a  muchness’ — did  you  ever  see  such  a  thing  as  a  draw¬ 
ing  of  a  muchness!” 

“Really,  now  you  ask  me,”  said  Alice,  very  much  confused,  “I  don't 
think—” 

‘  “Then  you  shouldn’t  talk,"  said  the  Hatter.**  lewis  carrolL 

4.1212  What  can  be  shown  cannot  be  said.  (59o>  L.  Wittgenstein 

*  Introduction  to  a  Form  of  General  Analysis.  Yale  Univ.  Press, 

** Alice  in  Wonderland . 

PART  VII 

ON  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

There  should  be  no  theoretical  objection  to  the  hypothesis  of  the  forma¬ 
tion  of  new  physiological  paths  and  new  connections  within  the  cerebral 
hemispheres.  (394)  I.  p.  pavlov 

It  seems  desirable  in  this  place  to  clearly  emphasize  the  fact  that  in  the 
use  of  psychoanalysis  we  are  dealing  solely  with  a  method  for  gaining  data. 
One  occasionally  hears  the  statement  that  psychoanalysis  is  nonsense.  A 
method,  or  a  tool,  is  not  nonsense.  (241)  smith  ely  jelliffe 

It  is  by  means  of  internal  inhibition  that  the  signalizing  activity  of  the 
hemispheres  is  constantly  corrected  and  perfected.  (394)  i.  p.  pavlov 

We  are  dealing  here  with  types  of  associative  reaction  peculiar  to  the 
cortical  system,  correctly  opposed  to  the  unqualified  affective  reactivity 
of  the  thalamus  and  usefully  analysed  by  Head.  (4ii>  henri  pi£ron 

This  example  and  other  observations  suggest  that  a  gradual  development 
of  internal  inhibition  in  the  cortex  shoulabe  used  for  re-establishment  of 
the  balance  of  normal  conditions  in  cases  of  an  unbalanced  nervous  system. 

(394)  I.  P.  PAVLOV 

A  self-satisfied  rationalism  is  in  effect  a  form  of  anti-rationalism.  It 
means  an  arbitrary  halt  at  a  particular  set  of  abstractions.  (57S) 

A.  N.  WHITEHEAD 

.  .  .  the  *  fallacy  of  misplaced  concreteness*  .  ,  .  consists  in  neglecting  the 
degree  of  abstraction  involved  when  an  actual  entity  is  considered  merely 
so  far  as  it  exemplifies  certain  categories  of  thought.  (578) 

A.  N.  WHITEHEAD 

In  the  Garden  of  Eden  Adam  saw  the  animals  before  he  named  them: 
in  the  traditional  system,  children  named  the  animals  before  they  saw 
them.  (575)  A.  N.  WHITEHEAD 

The  negative  judgment  is  the  peak  of  mentality.  (578)  a.  n.  whitehead 

CHAPTER  XXIV 

ON  ABSTRACTING 

...  to  be  an  abstraction  does  not  mean  that  an  entity  is  nothing.  It 
merely  means  that  its  existence  is  only  one  factor  of  a  more  concrete  ele¬ 
ment  of  nature.  (573)  A.  n.  whitehead 

Aristotle,  in  building  his  theories,  had  at  his  disposal,  besides  his 
personal  gifts,  a  good  education  according  to  his  day  and  the  science 
current  in  400-300  b.c.  Even  in  those  days,  the  Greek  language  was  a 
very  elaborate  affair.  Aristotle  and  his  followers  simply  took  this  lan¬ 
guage  for  granted.  The  problems  of  the  structure  of  language  and  its 
effect  on  s.r  had  not  yet  arisen.  To  them,  the  language  they  used  was 
the  (unique)  language.  When  I  use  the  expression  ‘ the  language',  I  do 
not  mean  anything  connected  with  the  language,  as  Greek;  I  mean  only 
the  structure  of  it,  which  was  much  similar  in  the  other  national  lan¬ 
guages  of  this  group.  The  language  Aristotle  inherited  was  of  great 
antiquity,  and  originated  in  periods  when  knowledge  was  still  more 
scanty.  Being  a  keen  observer,  and  scientifically  and  methodologically 
inclined,  he  took  this  language  for  granted  and  systematized  the  modes 
of  speaking.  This  systematization  was  called  ‘logic'.  The  primitive 
structural  metaphysics  underlying  this  inherited  language,  and  expressed 
in  its  structure,  became  also  the  ‘philosophical'  background  of  this  sys¬ 
tem.  The  subject-predicate  form,  the  ‘is'  of  identity,  and  the  elemental- 
ism  of  the  -system  are  perhaps  the  main  semantic  factors  in  need  of 
revision,  as  they  are  found  to  be  the  foundation  of  the  insufficiency  of 
this  system  and  represent  the  mechanism  of  semantic  disturbances,  mak¬ 
ing  general  adjustment  and  sanity  impossible.  These  doctrines  have 
come  down  to  us,  and  through  the  mechanism  of  language  the  semantic 
disturbing  factors  are  forced  upon  our  children.  A  whole  procedure  of 
training  in  delusional  values  was  thus  started  for  future  generations. 

As  the  work  of  Aristotle  was,  at  his  date,  the  most  advanced  and 
'scientific',  quite  naturally  its  influence  was  wide-spread.  In  those  days, 
no  one  spoke  of  this  influence  as  ‘linguistic',  involving  s.r .  Aristotle’s 
work  was,  and  still  is,  spoken  of  as  ‘philosophy',  and  we  speak  mostly 
of  the  influence  of  A  ‘philosophy'  rather  than  of  the  A  structure  of 
language,  and  its  semantic  influence. 

As  we  have  already  seen,  when  we  make  any  proposition  whatsoever 
we  involve  creeds,  or  metaphysics,  which  are  embodied  silently  as  struc¬ 
tural  assumptions  and  in  our  undefined  terms.  The  use  of  terms  not 

V 1 1.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

definable  in  simpler  terms  at  a  given  date  is  inherent  and  seemingly 
unavoidable. 

When  our  primitive  ancestors  were  building  their  language,  quite 
naturally  they  started  with  the  lowest  orders  of  abstractions,  which  are 
the  most  immediately  connected  with  the  outside  world.  They  estab¬ 
lished  a  language  of  ‘sensations’.  Like  infants,  they  identified  their  feel¬ 
ings  with  the  outside  world  and  personified  most  of  the  outside  events. 

This  primitive  semantic  tendency  resulted  in  the  building  of  a  lan¬ 
guage  in  which  the  ‘is’  of  identity  was  fundamental.  If  we  saw  an  animal 
and  called  it  ‘dog’  and  saw  another  animal  roughly  resembling  the  first, 
we  said,  quite  happily,  ‘it  is  a  dog’,  forgetting  or  not  knowing  that  the 
objective  level  is  un-speakable  and  that  we  deal  only  with  absolute  indi¬ 
viduals,  each  one  different  from  the  other.  Thus  the  mechanism  of 
identification  or  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions,  natural  at  a  very 
primitive  stage  of  human  development,  became  systematized  and  struc¬ 
turally  embodied  in  this  most  important  tool  of  daily  use  called  ‘lan¬ 
guage’.  Having  to  deal  with  many  objects,  they  had  to  have  names  for 
objects.  These  names  were  ‘substantives’.  They  built  ‘substantives’, 
grammatically  speaking,  for  other  feelings  which  were  not  'substantives’, 
(‘colour’,  ‘heat’,  ‘soul’,.).  Judging  by  the  lower  order  abstractions,  they 
built  adjectives  and  made  a  completely  anthropomorphised  world-picture. 
Speaking  about  speaking,  let  us  be  perfectly  aware  from  the  beginning 
that,  when  we  make  the  simplest  statement  of  any  sort,  this  statement 
already  presupposes  some  kind  of  structural  metaphysics.  The  early 
vague  feelings  and  savage  speculations  about  the  structure  of  this  world, 
based  on  primitive  insufficient  scientific  data,  was  influencing  the  building 
of  the  language.  Once  the  language  was  built,  and,  particularly,  systema¬ 
tized,  these  primitive  structural  metaphysics  and  s.r  had  to  be  projected 
or  reflected  on  the  outside  world — a  procedure  which  became  habitual 
and  automatic. 

Was  such  a  language  structurally  reliable  and  safe  ?  If  we  investigate, 
we  can  easily  become  convinced  that  it  was  not.  Let  us  take  three  pails 
of  water ;  the  first  at  the  temperature  of  10°  centigrade,  the  second  at 
30°,  and  the  third  at  50°.  Let  us  put  the  left  hand  in  the  first  pail  and 
the  right  in  the  third.  If  we  presently  withdraw  the  left  hand  from  the 
first  pail  and  put  it  in  the  second,  we  feel  how  nicely  warm  the  water  in 
the  second  pail  is.  But,  if  we  withdraw  the  right  hand  from  the  third 
pail  and  put  it  in  the  second,  we  notice  how  cold  the  water  is.  The 
temperature  of  the  water  in  the  second  pail  was  practically  not  different 
in  the  two  cases,  yet  our  feelings  registered  a  marked  difference.  The 
difference  in  the  ‘feel’  depended  on  the  former  conditions  to  which  our 

ON  ABSTRACT! N(i 

hands  had  been  subjected.  Thus,  we  see  that  a  language  of  ‘senses'  is 
not  a  very  reliable  language,  and  that  we  cannot  depend  on  it  for  general 
purposes  of  evaluation. 

How  about  the  term  ‘dog’  ?  The  number  of  individuals  with  which 
any  one  is  directly  acquainted  is,  by  necessity,  limited,  and  usually  is 
small.  Let  us  imagine  that  someone  had  dealt  only  with  good-natured 
‘dogs’,  and  had  never  been  bitten  by  any  of  them.  Next  he  sees  some  ani¬ 
mal  ;  he  says,  ‘This  is  a  dog’ ;  his  associations  (relations)  do  not  suggest 
a  bite ;  he  approaches  the  animal  and  begins  to  play  with  him,  and  is 
bitten.  Was  the  statement  ‘this  is  a  dog'  a  safe  statement?  Obviously 
not.  He  approached  the  animal  with  semantic  expectations  and  evalua¬ 
tion  of  his  verbal  definition,  but  was  bitten  by  the  non-verbal,  un-speakable 
objective  level,  which  has  different  characteristics. 

Judging  by  present  standards,  knowledge  in  the  days  of  Aristotle 
was  very  meagre.  It  was  comparatively  easy  2300  years  ago  to  sum¬ 
marize  the  few  facts  known,  and  so  to  build  generalizations  which 
would  cover  those  few  facts. 

If  we  attempt  to  build  a  ^-system,  1933,  can  we  escape  the  difficul¬ 
ties  which  beset  Aristotle  ?  The  answer  is  that  some  difficulties  are  avoid¬ 
able,  but  that  some  are  inherent  in  the  structure  of  human  knowledge, 
and  so  cannot  be  entirely  evaded.  We  can,  however,  invent  new  methods 
by  which  the  harmful  semantic  effect  of  these  limitations  can  be  success¬ 
fully  eliminated. 

There  is  no  escape  from  the  fact  that  we  must  start  with  undefined 
terms  which  express  silent,  structural  creeds  or  metaphysics.  If  we  state 
our  undefined  terms  explicitly,  we,  at  least,  make  our  metaphysics  con¬ 
scious  and  public,  and  so  we  facilitate  criticism,  co-operation , .  The  mod¬ 
ern  undefined  scientific  terms,  such  as  ‘order’,  for  instance,  underlie  the 
exact  sciences  and  our  wider  world-outlook.  We  must  start  with  these 
undefined  terms  as  well  as  the  modern  structural  world-outlook  as  given 
by  science,  1933.  That  settles  the  important  semantic  point  of  our  struc¬ 
tural  metaphysics.  It  need  hardly  be  emphasized  that  in  a  human  class  of 
life,  where  creeds  are  characterized  by  having  dates,  they  should  always 
be  labelled  with  this  date.  For  sanity,  the  creeds  utilized  in  1933  should 
be  of  the  issue  of  1933. 

Now  as  to  the  structure  of  our  language.  What  structure  shall  we 
give  to  our  language?  Shall  we  keep  the  old  structure,  with  all  its  primi¬ 
tive  implications  and  corresponding  s.r,  or  shall  we  deliberately  build  a 
language  of  new  structure  which  will  carry  new  modern  implications 
and  s.r?  There  seems  to  be  only  one  reasonable  choice.  For  a  ^-system, 
we  must  build  a  new  language.  We  must  abandon  the  ‘is’  of  identity,  to 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

say  the  least.  We  have  already  seen  that  we  have  an  excellent  substitute 
in  an  actional,  behaviouristic,  operational,  functional  language.  This  type 
of  language  involves  modem  asymmetrical  implications  of  ‘order’,  and 
eliminates  the  ‘is’  of  identity,  which  always  introduces  false  evaluation. 

To  these  fundamental  starting  points,  we  must  add  the  principle 
that  our  language  should  be  of  non-el  structure.  With  these  minimum 
semantic  requirements,  we  are  ready  to  proceed. 

Let  us  take  any  object  of  ordinary  experience,  let  us  say  the  one  we 
usually  call  a  ‘pencil’,  and  let  us  briefly  analyse  our  nervous  relationship 
to  it.  We  can  see  it,  touch  it,  smell  it,  taste  it . ,  and  use  it  in  different 
ways.  Is  any  of  the  relationships  just  mentioned  an  ‘all-embracing’  one, 
or  is  our  acquaintance  through  any  of  them  only  partial ?  Obviously,  each 
of  these  means  provides  an  acquaintance  with  this  object  which  is  not 
only  partial,  but  is  also  specific  for  the  nerve  centres  which  are  engaged. 
Thus,  when  we  look  at  the  object,  we  do  not  get  odor  or  taste  stimuli, 
but  only  visual  stimuli , . 

If  the  object  we  call  ‘pencil*  were  lying  on  the  surface  of  this  paper 
and  we  were  to  look  at  it  along  the  surface  of  the  paper  in  a  perpendicu¬ 
lar  direction  to  its  length,  it  would  generally  be  seen  as  an  elongated 
object,  pointed  at  one  end.  But,  if  we  were  to  observe  it  along  the  plane 
of  the  paper  at  right  angles  to  our  former  direction,  it  would  be  seen  as 
a  disk.  This  illustration  is  rough,  but  serves  to  show  that  the  acquain¬ 
tance  derived  through  any  specific  means  (e.g.,  vision)  is  also  partial  in 
another  sense ;  it  varies  with  the  position . ,  of  any  specified  observer, 
Smith,  or  a  camera. 

Furthermore,  any  given  means  provides,  for  different  observers, 
different  acquaintances.  Thus,  vision  shows  the  pencil  to  one  observer, 
Smith,  as  a  pointed  rod,  and  to  another  observer,  Jones,  as  a  disk.  Feel¬ 
ing,  through  other  receptors,  is  just  as  dependent  upon  many  conditions ; 
and  different  observers  receive  different  impressions.  This  is  well  illus¬ 
trated  by  the  familiar  tale  of  the  five  blind  men  and  the  elephant. 

Because  of  differences  in  sensitivity  in  the  receptors  of  Smiths  and 
Browns  (partial  colour-blindness,  astigmatism,  far-sightedness.,),  any 
given  means  of  acquaintance  (e.g.,  vision)  gives  to  different  observers 
different  reports  of  the  one  object.  The  acquaintance  is  thus  personal 
and  individual. 

Again,  the  reports  received  through  particular  channels  are  influ¬ 
enced  by  the  kind  of  reports  that  have  already  come  through  that  channel. 
To  one  who  has  not  seen  trees  frequently,  a  spruce  and  a  balsam  are  not 
seen  to  be  different.  They  are  just  ‘evergreens’.  With  better  educated 
seeing,  this  individual  later  differentiates,  perhaps,  four  kinds  of  spruce. 

ON  ABSTRACTING 

Because  of  this  factor  of  experience,  the  response  of  each  individual  to 
similar  external  stimuli  is  individual.  We  can  only  agree  on  colours, 
shapes,  distances.,  by  ignoring  the  fact  that  the  effect  of  the  'same’ 
stimulus  is  different  in  different  individuals.  Besides  that,  we  have  no 
accurate  means  of  comparing  our  impressions. 

The  ‘time’  factor  enters,  in  that  we  cannot  become  acquainted  with 
our  pencil  on  all  sides  at  once .  Nor  can  we  observe  the  outer  form  and 
the  inner  structure  at  the  ‘same  time*.  We  may  even  neglect  to  examine 
the  inner  structure  entirely.  Even  more  important  is  the  fact  that  all  our 
means  together  give  us  only  a  partial  and  personal  acquaintance  with  the 
‘pencil*.  Continually  we  invent  extra-neural  means  which  reveal  new 
characteristics  and  finer  detail.  Nor  is  this  process  ever  completed.  No 
one  can  ever  acquire  a  ‘complete*  acquaintance  with  even  so  simple  an 
object  as  a  pencil.  The  chemistry,  the  physics,  the  uses  of  the  varieties .  , 
offer  fields  of  acquaintance  that  can  be  extended  indefinitely.  Nature  is 
inexhaustible;  the  events  have  infinite  numbers  of  characteristics,  and 
this  accounts  for  the  wealth  and  infinite  numbers  of  possibilities  in  nature. 

I  used  the  word  ‘acquaintance*  deliberately,  because  it  seems  vague, 
and,  as  yet,  el  gambling  on  words  have  not  spoiled  this  term.  I  had  to 
avoid  the  el  terms  ‘senses*  and  ‘mind*  as  much  as  possible  in  this  analysis. 
If  we  recall  the  example  of  paper  roses  in  the  case  of  hay  fever,  we 
shall  realize  that  the  terms  ‘senses*  and  ‘mind*  are  not  reliable,  particu¬ 
larly  in  humans.  As  a  further  instance,  we  have  but  to  remember  the 
experiment  with  newspaper  headlines,  also  cited  earlier. 

We  become  better  acquainted  with  the  object  by  exploring  it  in 
manifold  ways,  and  building  for  ourselves  different  pictures,  all  partial, 
and  supplied  by  direct  or  indirect  contact  with  different  nerve  cen¬ 
tres.  In  these  explorations,  different  nerve  centres  supply  their  specific 
responses  to  the  different  stimuli.  Other  higher  nerve  centres  summarize 
them,  eliminate  weaker  details,  and  so,  gradually,  our  acquaintance 
becomes  fuller  while  yet  remaining  specific  and  partial ,  and  the  semantic 
problems  of  evaluation,  meanings,  begin  to  be  important. 

If  we  try  to  select  a  term  which  would  describe  structurally  the 
processes  which  are  essential  for  our  acquaintance  with  the  object,  we 
should  select  a  term  which  implies  ‘non-allness*  and  the  specificity  of 
the  response  to  the  stimuli. 

If  we  pass  from  such  a  primitive  level  to  a  level  of  1933,  and 
enquire  what  we  actually  know  about  an  object  and  the  structure  of  its 
material,  we  find  that  in  1933  we  know  positively  that  the  internal  struc¬ 
ture  of  materials  is  very  different  from  what  we  gather  by  our  rough 
‘senses*  on  the  macroscopic  level.  It  appears  of  a  dynamic  character  and 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OE  TIME-BINDING 

of  an  extremely  fine  structure,  which  neither  light,  nor  the  nerve  centres 
affected  by  light,  can  register. 

What  we  see  is  structurally  only  a  specific  statistical  mass-effect  of 
happenings  on  a  much  finer  grained  level.  We  see  what  we  see  because 
we  miss  all  the  finer  details.  For  our  purpose,  it  is  usually  enough  to 
deal  only  with  sight;  this  simplifies  writing,  and  the  comments  made 
apply  to  all  other  'senses’,  though  perhaps  in  different  degrees. 

In  1933,  in  our  human  economy,  we  have  to  take  into  account  at 
least  three  levels.  The  one  is  the  sub-microscopic  level  of  science,  what 
science  ‘knows*  about  ‘it*.  The  second  is  the  gross  macroscopic,  daily 
experience  level  of  rough  objects.  The  third  is  the  verbal  level. 

We  must  also  evaluate  an  important  semantic  issue;  namely,  the 
relative  importance  of  these  three  levels.  We  know  already  that  to 
become  acquainted  with  an  object,  we  must  not  only  explore  it  from  all 
possible  points  of  view  and  put  it  in  contact  with  as  many  nerve  centres 
as  we  can,  as  this  is  an  essential  condition  of  ‘knowing*,  but  we  must 
also  not  forget  that  our  nerve  centres  must  summarize  the  different  par¬ 
tial,  abstracted,  specific  pictures.  In  the  human  class  of  life,  we  find  a 
new  factor,  non-existent  in  any  other  form  of  lif e ;  namely,  that  we  have 
a  capacity  to  collect  all  known  experiences  of  different  individuals.  Such 
a  capacity  increases  enormously  the  number  of  observations  a  single 
individual  can  handle,  and  so  our  acquaintance  with  the  world  around, 
and  in,  us  becomes  much  more  refined  and  exact.  This  capacity,  which 
I  call  the  time-binding  capacity,  is  only  possible  because,  in  distinction 
from  the  animals,  we  have  evolved,  or  perfected,  extra-neural  means  by 
which,  without  altering  our  nervous  system,  we  can  refine  its  operation 
and  expand  its  scope.  Our  scientific  instruments  record  what  ordinarily 
we  cannot  see,  hear,.  Our  neural  verbal  centres  allow  us  to  exchange 
and  accumulate  experiences,  although  no  one  could  live  through  all  of 
them  ;  and  they  would  be  soon  forgotten  if  we  had  no  neural  and  extra- 
neural  means  to  record  them. 

Again  the  organism  works  as-a- whole.  All  forms  of  human  activi¬ 
ties  are  interconnected.  It  is  impossible  to  select  a  special  characteristic 
and  treat  it  in  a  delusional  el  ‘isolation*  as  the  most  important.  Science 
becomes  an  extra-neural  extension  of  the  human  nervous  system.  We 
might  expect  the  structure  of  the  nervous  system  to  throw  some  light  on 
the  structure  of  science ;  and,  vice  versa,  the  structure  of  science  might 
elucidate  the  working  of  the  human  nervous  system. 

This  fact  is  very  important,  semantically,  and  usually  is  not  suffi¬ 
ciently  emphasized  or  analysed  enough.  When  we  take  these  undeniable 
facts  into  account,  we  find  the  results  already  reached  to  be  quite  natural 

ON  ABSTRACTING 

and  necessary,  and  we  understand  better  why  an  individual  cannot  be 
considered  entirely  sane  if  he  is  wholly  ignorant  of  scientific  method  and 
structure,  and  so  retains  primitive  s.r. 

For  a  theory  of  sanity,  all  three  levels  are  important.  Our  'senses* 
react  as  they  do  because  they  are  united  as-a-whole  in  one  living  struc¬ 
ture,  which  has  potentialities  or  capacities  for  language  and  science. 

If  we  enquire  what  we  do  in  science,  we  find  that  we  'observe* 
silently  and  then  record  our  observations  verbally .  From  a  neurological 
point  of  view,  we  abstract  whatever  we  and  the  instruments  can ;  then 
we  summarize ;  and,  finally,  we  generalize,  by  which  we  mean  the 
processes  of  abstracting  carried  further. 

In  our  'acquaintance*  with  daily  objects,  we  do  substantially  a  similar 
thing.  We  abstract  whatever  we  can,  and,  according  to  the  degree  of 
intelligence  and  information  we  have,  we  summarize  and  generalize. 
From  the  psychophysiological  point  of  view,  the  ignorant  is  neurologically 
deficient.  But  to  'know*  or  to  'believe*  something  which  is  false  to  facts 
is  still  more  dangerous  and  akin  to  delusions,  as  psychiatry  and  daily 
experience  teach  us.1  It  is  a  neurological  fallacy  to  treat  science  in 
'isolation*  and  disregard  its  psychophysiological  role. 

In  the  building  of  our  language,  a  similar  neurological  process 
becomes  evident.  If  we  were  to  see  a  series  of  different  individuals, 
whom  we  might  call  Smith,  Brown,  Jones . ,  we  could,  by  a  process  of 
abstracting  the  characteristics,  segregate  the  individuals  by  sizes  or 
colours . ;  then,  by  concentration  on  one  characteristic  and  disregarding 
the  others,  we  could  build  classes  or  higher  abstractions,  such  as  ‘whites*, 
'blacks*, .  Abstracting  again,  with  rejection  of  the  colour  difference . ,  we 
would  finally  reach  the  term  'man*.  This  procedure  is  general. 

Anthropological  studies  show  clearly  how  the  degree  of  'culture' 
among  primitive  peoples  can  be  measured  by  the  orders  of  the  abstrac¬ 
tions  they  have  produced.  Primitive  languages  are  characterized  particu¬ 
larly  by  an  enormous  number  of  names  for  individual  objects.  Some 
savage  races  have  names  for  a  pine  or  an  oak . ,  but  have  no  'tree*,  which 
is  a  higher  abstraction  from  'pines*,  'oaks*, .  Some  other  tribes  have  the 
term  'tree*,  but  do  not  have  a  still  higher  abstraction  'woods*.  It  does 
not  need  much  emphasis  to  see  that  higher  abstractions  are  extremely 
expedient  devices.  There  is  an  enormous  economy  which  facilitates 
mutual  understanding  in  being  able  to  be  brief  in  a  statement  and  yet 
cover  wider  subjects. 

Let  us  consider  a  primitive  statement  'I  have  seen  treei*,  followed 
by  a  description  of  the  individual  characteristics  'I  have  seen  tree2\  with 
minute  individual  description . ,  where  treei,  tree2 . ,  stand  for  names  of 

VII.  T1IK  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

the  individual  trees.  If  an  event  of  interest  had  happened  in  a  place 
where  there  were  a  hundred  trees,  it  would  take  a  long  while  to  observe 
fairly  well  the  individual  trees  and  still  longer  to  give  an  approximate 
description  of  them.  Such  a  method  is  non-expedient,  fundamentally 
endless ;  the  mechanism  is  cumbersome,  involves  many  irrelevant  charac¬ 
teristics  ;  and  it  is  impossible  to  express  in  a  few  words  much  that  might 
be  important .  Progress  must  be  slow;  the  general  level  of  development 
of  a  given  race  or  individual  must  be  low.  It  should  be  noticed  that  the 
problem  of  evaluation  enters,  at  once  implying  many  most  important 
psycho-logical  and  semantic  processes.  Similar  remarks  apply  to  the 
abstracting  of  infants,  ‘mentally*  deficient  grown-ups,  and  some  ‘men¬ 
tally*  ill. 

Indeed,  as  the  readers  of  my  Manhood  of  Humanity  already  know, 
the  ‘human  class  of  life*  is  chiefly  differentiated  from  ‘animals*  by  its 
rapid  rate  of  progress  through  the  rapid  rate  of  accumulation  of  past 
experiences.  This  is  possible  only  when  expedient  means  of  communi¬ 
cation  are  established ;  that  is,  when  higher  and  higher  orders  of  abstrac¬ 
tions  are  worked  out. 

All  scientific  ‘laws*,  and  other  generalizations  of  higher  order  (even 
single  words),  are  precisely  such  methods  of  expediency,  and  represent 
abstractions  of  very  high  order.  They  are  uniquely  important  because 
they  accelerate  progress  and  help  the  further  summarizing  and  abstract¬ 
ing  of  results  achieved  by  others.  Naturally,  this  process  of  abstracting 
has  also  unique  practical  consequences.  When  chemical  ‘elements*  were 
‘permanent*  and  ‘immutable*,  our  physics  and  chemistry  were  much 
undeveloped.  With  the  advent  of  higher  abstractions,  such  as  the  monis¬ 
tic  and  general  dynamic  theories  of  all  ‘matter*  and  ‘electricity*,  unitary 
field  theories.,  the  creative  freedom  of  science  and  the  control  over 
‘nature’  have  increased  enormously  and  will  increase  still  more. 

Psychiatry  also  seems  to  give  data  indicating  that  ‘mental*  illnesses 
are  connected  either  with  arrested  development  or  with  regression  to 
phylogenetically  older  and  more  primitive  levels,  all  of  which,  of  course, 
involves  lower  order  abstractions.  From  the  point  of  view  of  a  theory  of 
sanity,  a  sharp  differentiation  between  ‘man*  and  ‘animal*  becomes  im¬ 
perative.  For  with  ‘man*,  the  lack  of  knowledge  of  this  difference  may 
lead  to  the  copying  of  animals,  which  would  involve  semantic  regression 
and  ultimately  become  a  ‘mental*  illness. 

Although  organisms  have  had  acquaintance  with  objects  for  many 
hundreds  or  thousands  of  millions  of  years,  the  higher  abstractions 
which  characterize  ‘man’  are  only  a  few  hundreds  of  thousands  of  years 
old.  As  a  result,  the  nervous  currents  have  a  natural  tendency  to  select 

ON  ABSTRACTING 

the  older,  more  travelled,  nervous  paths.  Education  should  counteract 
this  tendency  which,  from  a  human  point  of  view,  represents  regression 
or  under-development. 

By  now  we  know  how  important  it  is  for  a  ^-system  to  abandon 
the  older  implications  and  adopt  an  actional,  behaviouristic,  operational, 
or  functional  language.  On  the  neurological  level,  what  the  nervous  sys¬ 
tem  does  is  abstracting,  of  which  the  summarization,  integration . ,  are 
only  special  aspects.  Hence,  I  select  the  term  abstracting  as  fundamental. 

The  standard  meaning  of  ‘abstract*,  ‘abstracting*  implies  ‘selecting’, 
‘picking  out*,  ‘separating*,  ‘summarizing*,  ‘deducting*,  ‘removing*,  ‘omit¬ 
ting*,  ‘disengaging*,  ‘taking  away’,  ‘stripping*,  and,  as  an  adjective,  not 
‘concrete*.  We  see  that  the  term  ‘abstracting*  implies  structurally  and 
semantically  the  activities  characteristic  of  the  nervous  system,  and  so 
serves  as  an  excellent  functional  physiological  term. 

There  are  other  reasons  for  making  the  term  ‘abstracting*  funda¬ 
mental,  which,  from  a  practical  point  of  view,  are  important.  A  bad 
habit  cannot  be  easily  eliminated  except  by  forming  a  new  semantic 
counter-reaction.  All  of  us  have  some  undesirable  but  thoroughly  estab¬ 
lished  linguistic  habits  and  s.r  which  have  become  almost  automatic, 
overloaded  with  unconscious  ‘emotional*  evaluation.  This  is  the  reason 
why  new  ‘non-systems*  are,  in  the  beginning,  so  extremely  difficult  to 
acquire.  We  have  to  break  down  the  old  structural  habits  before  we  can 
acquire  the  new  s.r.  The  E  geometries  or  the  N  systems  are  not  any 
more  difficult  than  the  older  systems  were.  Perhaps  they  are  even  simpler. 
The  main  semantic  difficulty,  for  those  accustomed  to  the  old,  consists 
in  breaking  the  old  structural  linguistic  habits,  in  becoming  once  more 
flexible  and  receptive  in  feelings,  and  in  acquiring  new  s.r .  Similar 
remarks  apply  in  a  more  marked  degree  to  a  ^-system.  The  majority  of 
us  have  very  little  to  do  directly  with  E  or  El  systems  (although  indirectly 
we  all  have  a  good  deal  to  do- with  them).  But  all  of  us  live  our  imme¬ 
diate  lives  in  a  human  world  still  desperately  A .  Hence  a  ^-system,  no 
matter  what  benefits  it  may  give,  is  much  handicapped  by  the  old  semantic 
blockages. 

In  building  such  a  system,  this  natural  resistance  or  persistence  of 
the  old  s.r  must  be  taken  into  consideration  and,  if  possible,  counter¬ 
acted.  One  of  the  most  pernicious  bad  habits  which  we  have  acquired 
‘emotionally*  from  the  old  language  is  the  feeling  of  ‘allness’,  of  ‘con¬ 
creteness’,  in  connection  with  the  ‘is’  of  identity  and  elementalism.  One 
of  the  main  points  in  the  present  ^-system  is  first  to  remove  entirely 
from  our  s.r  this  ‘allness*  and  ‘concreteness*,  both  of  which  are  struc¬ 
turally  unjustified  and  lead  to  identification,  absolutism,  dogmatism,  and 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

other  semantic  disturbances.  Usually,  the  term  'abstract'  is  contrasted 
with  'concrete',  which  is  connected  with  some  vague  feeling  of  'allness\ 
By  making  the  functional  term  abstracting  fundamental,  we  establish  a 
most  efficient  semantic  counter-reaction  to  replace  the  older  terms  which 
had  such  vicious  structural  implications.  Indeed,  it  is  comparatively  easy 
to  accept  the  term  ‘abstractions  of  different  orders',  and  any  one  who 
does  so  will  see.  how  much  clarity  and  how  much  semantic  balance  he 
will  automatically  acquire. 

From  a  non-el  point  of  view,  the  term  'abstracting'  is  also  very 
satisfactory.  The  structure  of  the  nervous  system  is  in  ordered  levels, 
and  all  levels  go  through  the  process  of  abstracting  from  the  other  levels. 

The  term  implies  a  general  activity,  not  only  of  the  nervous  system 
as-a-whole,  but  even  of  all  living  protoplasm,  as  already  explained.  The 
characteristic  activities  of  the  nervous  system,  such  as  summarizing, 
integrating . ,  are  also  included  by  implication. 

If  we  wish  to  use  our  terms  in  the  strictly  non-el  way,  we  must 
abandon  the  older  division  of  ‘physiological  abstractions',  which  implies 
'body',  and  of  ‘mental  abstractions',  which,  in  turn,  implies  ‘mind',  both 
taken  in  an  el  way.  We  can  easily  do  that  by  postulating  abstractions  of 
different  orders.  We  should  notice  that  the  above  use  of  the  term 
‘abstracting'  differs  from  the  old  usage.  The  semantic  difference  is  in 
uniting  all  the  abstractions  our  nervous  system  performs  under  the  one 
term,  and  in  distinguishing  between  different  abstractions  by  the  order 
of  them,  which  is  functionally,  as  well  as  structurally,  justified. 

The  term  ‘first  order  abstractions’  or  ‘abstractions  of  lower  order' 
does  not  distinguish  between  ‘body'  and  ‘mind'.  Practically,  it  corres¬ 
ponds  roughly  to  ‘senses'  or  immediate  feelings,  except  that  by  implica¬ 
tion  it  does  not  eliminate  ‘mind\  Neither  does  the  term  ‘abstractions  of 
higher  orders’  eliminate  ‘body'  or  ‘senses’,  although  it  corresponds 
roughly  to  ‘mental’  processes. 

From  the  point  of  view  of  ‘order’,  the  term  ‘abstracting’  has  a  great 
deal  in  its  favor.  We  have  seen  what  serious  structural  and  semantic 
importance  the  term  ‘order’  has,  and  how  the  activity  of  the  nervous 
system  has  to  be  spoken  of  in  terms  of  order.  If  we  establish  the  term 
‘abstracting’  as  fundamental  for  its  general  semantic  implications,  we  can 
easily  make  the  meanings  more  definite  and  specific  in  each  case  by 
having  ‘abstractions  of  different  orders'. 

We  have  seen  also  that  the  terms  we  select  should  involve  environ¬ 
ment  by  implication:  it  is  not  difficult  to  see  that  the  term  ‘abstracting* 
implies  ‘abstracting  from  something'  and  so  involves  the  environment 
as  an  implication. 

ON  ABSTRACTING 

The  term  ‘abstractions  of  different  orders’  is,  in  this  work,  as 
fundamental  as  the  term  ‘time-binding’  was  in  the  author’s  earlier 
Manhood  of  Humanity.  Hence,  it  is  impossible  to  be  comprehensive 
about  it  at  this  stage ;  more  will  be  forthcoming  as  we  proceed. 

But  we  have  already  come  to  some  important  semantic  results.  We 
have  selected  our  structural  metaphysics,  and  decided  that  in  1933  we 
should  accept  the  metaphysics  of  1933,  which  is  given  exclusively  by 
science.  We  have  decided  to  abandon  the  false  to  facts  ‘is*  of  identity 
and  to  use,  instead,  the  best  available  language;  namely,  an  actional, 
behaviouristic,  functional,  operational  language,  based  on  ‘order’.  And, 
finally,  we  have  found  a  term  which  is  functionally  satisfactory  and  has 
the  correct  structural  and  neural  implications,  and  which  represents  a 
non-el  term,  and  of  which  the  meanings  can  be  expanded  and  refined 
indefinitely  by  assigning  to  them  different  orders. 

In  passing  on  to  the  general  scientific  outlook,  similar  structural 
remarks  upon  a  non-el  point  of  view  apply,  and  are  semantically  of 
importance.  Because  of  the  non-el  character  of  the  work  of  the  writers 
on  the  Einstein  and  new  quantum  theories,  much  use  is  made  of  this 
material  in  the  present  work.  There  is  a  marked  structural,  methodo¬ 
logical,  and  semantic  parallelism  between  all  modern  non-el  strivings, 
which  are  extremely  effective  psycho-logically.  More  material  on  this 
subject  is  given  in  Parts  IX  and  X. 

Now,  returning  to  the  analysis  of  the  object  which  we  called  ‘pencil’, 
we  observe  that,  in  spite  of  all  ‘similarities’,  this  object  is  unique,  is 
different  from  anything  else,  and  has  a  unique  relationship  to  the  rest  of 
the  world.  Hence,  we  should  give  the  object  a  unique  name .  For¬ 
tunately,  we  have  already  become  acquainted  with  the  way  mathema¬ 
ticians  manufacture  an  endless  array  of  individual  names  without  unduly 
expanding  the  vocabulary.  If  we  call  the  given  object  ‘pencil/,  we 
could  call  another  similar  object  ‘pencil2’, .  In  this  way,  we  produce 
individual  names,  and  so  cover  the  differences .  By  keeping  the  main 
root  word  ‘pencil’,  we  keep  the  implications  of  daily  life,  and  also  of 
similarities.  The  habitual  use  of  such  a  device  is  structurally  and  seman- 
lically  of  extreme  importance.  It  has  already  been  emphasized  repeatedly 
that  our  abstracting  from  physical  objects  or  situations  proceeds  by  miss¬ 
ing,  neglecting,  or  forgetting,  and  that  those  disregarded  characteristics 
usually  produce  errors  in  evaluation,  resulting  in  the  disasters  of  life. 
If  we  acquire  this  extensional  mathematical  habit  of  using  special 
names  for  unique  individuals,  we  become  conscious,  not  only  of  the 
similarities,  but  also  of  the  differences,  which  consciousness  is  one  of  the 

VII.  TIIK  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

mechanisms  for  helping  the  proper  evaluation  and  so  preventing  or 
eliminating  semantic  disturbances. 

So  we  now  have  before  us  a  unique  object  which  we  call  by  a 
unique  name  ‘pencili'.  If  we  enquire  what  science  1933  has  to  say  about 
this  object,  we  find  that  this  object  represents  structurally  an  extremely 
complex,  dynamic  process.  For  our  purpose,  which  is  intuitive ,  it  is  of 
little  importance  whether  we  accept  the  object  as  made  up  of  atoms  and 
the  atom  as  made  up  of  whirling  electrons . ,  or  whether  we  accept  the 
newer  quantum  theory,  as  given  in  Part  X,  according  to  which  the  atom 
is  formulated  in  terms  of  ‘electrons'  but  the  ‘electron'  is  the  region 
where  some  waves  reinforce  each  other,  instead  of  being  a  ‘bit'  of  some¬ 
thing.  It  is  of  no  importance  from  our  point  of  view  whether  the  atoms 
are  of  a  finite  size  or  whether  they  extend  indefinitely  and  are  noticeable 
to  us  only  in  the  regions  of  reinforcement  of  the  waves.  Naturally,  this 
last  hypothesis  has  a  strong  semantic  appeal,  since  it  would  account, 
when  worked  out,  for  many  other  facts,  such  as  ‘fulness’,  in  a  non-el 
language ;  but  probably  it  would  necessitate  a  postulation  of  some  sub- 
electronic  structures. 

What  is  important  for  our  s.r  is  that  we  realize  the  fact  that  the 
gross  macroscopic  materials  with  which  we  are  familiar  are  not  simply 
what  we  see,  feel . ,  but  consist  of  dynamic  processes  of  some  extremely 
fine  structure;  and  that  we  realize  further  that  our  ‘senses'  are  not 
adapted  to  register  these  processes  without  the  help  of  extra-neural 
means  and  higher  order  abstractions. 

Let  us  recall,  in  this  connection,  the  familiar  example  of  a  rotary 
fan,  which  is  made  up  of  separate  radial  blades,  but  which,  when  rotat¬ 
ing  with  a  certain  velocity,  gives  the  impression  of  a  solid  disk.  In  this 

case  the  ‘disk'  is 
not  ‘reality*,  but  a 
nervous  integration, 
or  abstraction  from 
the  rotating  blades. 
We  not  only  see  the 
‘disk'  (b)  where 
there  is  no  disk, 
but,  if  the  blades 
rotate  fast  enough, 
we  could  not  throw 
sand  through  them, 
as  the  sand  would  be  too  slow  to  get  through  before  being  struck  by  one 
of  the  blades. 

Fig.  la  Fig.  lb 

ON  ABSTRACTING 

The  ‘disk*  represents  a  joint  phenomenon  of  the  rotating  blades  (a) 
and  of  the  abstracting  power  of  our  nervous  system,  which  registers 
only  the  gross  macroscopic  aspects  and  slow  velocities,  but  not  the  finer 
activities  on  subtler  levels.  We  cannot  blame  ‘the  finite  mind'  for  the 
failure  to  register  the  separate  blades,  because  physical  instruments  may 
behave  similarly.  For  instance,  the  illustrations  (a)  and  ( h )  are  photo¬ 
graphs  of  a  small  fan  which  I  use  -in  lectures,  and  the  photographic 
camera  also  missed  the  rotating  blades  and  registered  only  a  ‘disk',  in 
Fig.  lb. 

Something  roughly  similar  may  be  assumed  for  our  purpose  as 
going  on  in  what  we  usually  call  ‘materials’.  These  are  composed  of 
some  dynamic,  fine-grained  processes,  not  unlike  the  ‘rotating  blades’  of 
our  example ;  and  what  we  register  is  the  ‘disk’,  be  it  a  table  or  a  chair 
or  ourselves. 

For  a  similar  reason,  we  may  assume  that  we  cannot  put  our  finger 
through  a  table,  as  our  finger  is  too  thick  and  too  slow,  and  that,  for 
some  materials,  it  takes  X-rays  to  be  agile  enough  to  penetrate. 

The  above  analogies  are  helpful  for  our  purpose  only,  but  are  over¬ 
simplified  and  should  not  be  taken  as  a  scientific  explanation. 

This  neural  process  seems  to  be  very  general,  and  in  all  our  daily 
experiences  the  dynamic  fine  structures  are  lost  to  our  rough  ‘senses’. 
We  register  ‘disks’,  although  investigation  discovers  not  ‘disks’,  but 
rotating  ‘blades’.  Our  gross  macroscopic  experience  is  only  a  nervous 
abstraction  of  some  definite  order. 

As  we  need  to  speak  about  such  problems,  we  must  select  the  best 
language  at  our  disposal.  This  ought  to  be  non-el  and,  structurally,  the 
closest  to  facts.  Such  a  language  has  been  built,  and  is  to  be  found  in 
the  differential  and  four-dimensional  language  of  space-time,  and  in  the 
new  quantum  mechanics.  In  practice,  it  is  simple  to  ascribe  to  every 
‘point  of  space’  a  date,  but  it  takes  some  training  to  get  this  s.r.  The 
language  of  space-time  is  non-el.  To  the  new  notion  of  a  ‘point’  in 
‘space-time’,  such  a  ‘point’,  always  having  a  date  associated  with  it  and 
hence  never  identical  with  any  other  point,  the  name  of  ‘point-event*,  or 
simply  ‘event’,  has  been  given. 

How  to  pass  from  point-events  to  extended  macroscopic  events  is  a 
problem  in  mathematical  ‘logic’.  Several  quite  satisfactory  schemes  have 
been  given,  into  the  details  of  which  we  do  not  need  to  enter  here.  As 
the  non-el  structure  of  the  language  of  space-time  appears  different  from 
the  older  el  language  of  ‘space’  and  ‘time’,  quite  obviously  the  old  term 
‘matter’,  which  belonged  to  the  descriptive  apparatus  of  ‘space’  and 
‘time’,  should  be  abandoned  also,  and  the  ‘bits’  of  materials  we  dealt  with 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

should  be  referred  to  by  structurally  new  terms.  In  fact,  we  know  that 
the  old  term  'matter*  can  be  displaced  by  some  other  term  connected  with 
the  'curvature*  of  'space-time*. 

There  is  on  record  a  striking  example  of  what  the  structure  of  a 
form  of  representation  means.  In  a  paper  printed  in  the  Proceedings  of 
the  National  Academy  of  Science,  February,  1926,  Professor  G.  Y. 
Rainich,  the  mathematician,  tried -to  introduce  'mass*  into  space-time, 
the  terms  belonging  to  forms  of  representation  of  different  structure. 
He  succeeded,  but  at  the  price  of  splitting  space-time  into  the  original 
space  and  time.  This  is,  as  far  as  my  knowledge  goes,  the  first  proof  of 
how  intimately  a  form  of  representation  is  inwardly  and  structurally 
interconnected.  This  fact  is  of  extraordinary  semantic  importance  for 
psycho-logicians  and  psychiatrists,  who  always  study  symbolism  of  some 
sort.  It  would  be  of  great  interest  to  have  such  problems  worked  out 
by  them. 

As  abstracting  in  many  orders  seems  to  be  a  general  process  found 
in  all  forms  of  life,  but  particularly  in  humans,  it  is  of  importance  to  be 
clear  on  this  subject  and  to  select  a  language  of  proper  structure.  As 
we  know  already,  we  use  one  term,  say  'apple*,  for  at  least  four  entirely 
different  entities;  namely,  (1)  the  event,  or  scientific  object,  or  the 
sub-microscopic  physico-chemical  processes,  (2)  the  ordinary  object  manu¬ 
factured  from  the  event  by  our  lower  nervous  centres,  (3)  the  psycho¬ 
logical  picture  probably  manufactured  by  the  higher  centres,  and  (4)  the 
verbal  definition  of  the  term.  If  we  use  a  language  of  adjectives  and 
subject-predicate  forms  pertaining  to  'sense*  impressions,  we  are  using 
a  language  which  deals  with  entities  inside  our  skin  and  characteristics 
entirely  non-existent  in  the  outside  world.  Thus  the  events  outside  our 
skin  are  neither  cold  nor  warm,  green  nor  red,  sweet  nor  bitter . ,  but 
these  characteristics  are  manufactured  by  our  nervous  system  inside  our 
skins,  as  responses  only  to  different  energy  manifestations,  physico¬ 
chemical  processes , .  When  we  use  such  terms,  we  are  dealing  with  char¬ 
acteristics  which  are  absent  in  the  external  world,  and  build  up  an 
anthropomorphic  and  delusional  world  non-similar  in  structure  to  the 
world  around  us.  Not  so  if  we  use  a  language  of  order,  relations,  or 
structure,  which  can  be  applied  to  sub-microscopic  events,  to  objective 
levels,  to  semantic  levels,  and  which  can  also  be  expressed  in  words.  In 
using  such  language,  we  deal  with  characteristics  found  or  discovered  on 
all  levels  which  give  us  structural  data  uniquely  important  for  knowledge. 
The  ordering  on  semantic  levels  in  the  meantime  abolishes  identification. 
It  is  of  extreme  importance  to  realize  that  the  relational.,  attitude  is 
optional  and  can  be  applied  everywhere  and  always,  once  the  above- 

UN  AHSTKACTINt; 

mentioned  benefits  are  realized.  Thus,  any  object  can  be  considered  as  a 
set  of  relations  of  its  parts . ,  any  ‘sense’  perception  may  be  considered  as 
a  response  to  a  stimulus . ,  which  again  introduces  relations , .  As  relations 
are  found  in  the  scientific  sub-microscopic  world,  the  objective  world, 
and  also  in  the  psycho-logical  and  verbal  worlds,  it  is  beneficial  to  use 
such  a  language  because  it  is  similar  in  structure  to  the  external  world 
and  our  nervous  system;  and  it  is  applicable  to  all  levels.  The  use  of 
such  a  language  leads  to  the  discovery  of  invariant  relations  usually 
called  ‘laws  of  nature*,  gives  us  structural  data  which  make  the  only 
possible  content  of  ‘knowledge*,  and  eliminates  also  anthropomorphic, 
primitive,  and  delusional  speculations,  identifications,  and  harmful  s.r. 

CHAPTER  XXV 

ON  THE  STRUCTURAL  DIFFERENTIAL 

You  cannot  recognise  an  event;  because  when  it  is  gone,  it  is  gone  .  .  . 
But  a  character  of  an  event  can  be  recognised.  .  .  .  Things  which  we  thus 
recognise  I  call  objects.  (573)  A.  N.  whitehead 

When  there  is  a  judgment  of  identity  or  difference,  it  is  because  a  par¬ 
ticular  associative  reaction  of  the  second  order  is  occurring,  conditioned 
by  the  primary  reaction,  whether  the  same  or  different;  this  is  a  gain  in 
perceptive  knowledge.  (4ii)  henri  pi£ron 

To  some  extent,  the  practice  of  thinking,  deciding,  feeling,  appreciating, 
and  sympathizing  molds  the  personality  of  the  thinker.  Presumably,  the 
stable  patterns  of  cortical  association  are  changed  by  the  performance  of 
these  acts  just  as  on  a  lower  plane  muscles  are  changed  by  systematic 
exercises.  (222)  c.  judson  herrick 

Experimental  analysis  of  the  memory  of  forms  insusceptible  of  symbolic 
schematization  has  convinced  me  of  the  great  importance  of  ocular  kinaes- 
thesia  and  the  small  part  played  by  visualization  in  nearly  all  individuals, 
with  the  general  illusion  of  really  visual  representations,  a  very  strong 
illusion,  especially  when  symbolic  and  verbal  schematization  is  possible. 
Ideas  which  are  substituted  for  visual  representation,  and  play  tne  same 
part,  are  easily  mistaken  for  it.  <4ii)  henri  pi£ron 

The  eyes  of  the  dog  give  to  him  sometimes  a  more  intelligent  expression 
than  that  of  his  master,  and  there  is  no  doubt  that  he  uses  them  to  very 
good  advantage;  but  they  are  not  our  eyes.  (221)  c.  judson  herrick 

Before  I  recapitulate,  in  the  form  of  a  structural  diagram,  what 
has  been  said  in  the  previous  chapter,  I  must  explain  briefly  the  use  of 
the  term  ‘event’.  The  introduction  of  new  terms  in  a  language  always 
represents  initial  difficulties  to  the  student.  It  is  always  advisable,  if 
only  possible,  to  introduce  terms  which  are  structurally  close  to  our 
daily  experience.  At  present,  in  physics,  we  have  a  dual  language ;  one 
of  ‘space-time*,  in  which  ‘matter*  is  connected  somehow  with  its  ‘curva¬ 
ture*,  the  other  of  the  quanta.  The  structure  of  both  languages  is  quite 
different,  and  at  present  scientists  have  not  succeeded  in  translating  one 
language  into  the  other.  Einstein,  in  his  latest  unified  field  theory,  has 
succeeded,  by  the  introduction  of  new  notions,  in  amalgamating  the 
electromagnetic  phenomena  with  the  general  theory  of  relativity;  but 
even  this  new  language  does  not  include  the  quantum  theory.  For  my 
purpose,  it  is  important  to  amalgamate  both  languages  as  an  intuitive  pic¬ 
torial  device,  which,  from  a  technical  point  of  view,  still  awaits  formula¬ 
tion.  As  the  ‘space-time*  continuum  is  the  closest  to  our  daily  experience, 
I  accept  the  language  of  ‘events*  as  fundamental  and  add  only  a  few 

ON  THE  STRUCTURAL  DIFFERENTIAL 

pictorial  notions  taken  from  the  quantum  theory.  There  is  no  doubt  that 
the  day  is  not  far  off  when  the  unified  field  theory  will  be  extended  to 
include  the  new  quantum  theory,  and  so  this  anticipation  does  not 
appear  illegitimate. 

If  we  take  something,  anything,  let  us  say  the  object  already  re¬ 
ferred  to,  called  ‘pencil1,  and  enquire  what  it  represents,  according  to 
science  1933,  we  find  that  the  ‘scientific  object'  represents  an  ‘event’,  a 
mad  dance  of  ‘electrons',  which  is  different  every  instant,  which  never 
repeats  itself,  which  is  known  to  consist  of  extremely  complex  dynamic 
processes  of  very  fine  structure,  acted  upon  by,  and  reacting  upon,  the 
rest  of  the  universe,  inextricably  connected  with  everything  else  and 
dependent  on  everything  else.  If  we  enquire  how  many  characteristics 
( m.o )  we  should  ascribe  to  such  an  event,  the  only  possible  answer  is 
that  we  should  ascribe  to  an  event  infinite  numbers  of  characteristics,  as 
it  represents  a  process  which  never  stops  in  one  form  or  another; 
neither,  to  the  best  of  our  knowledge,  does  it  repeat  itself. 

In  our  diagram,  Fig.  1,  we  indicate  this  by  a  parabola  (A),  which 
is  supposed  to  extend  indefinitely,  which  extension  we  indicate  by  a 
broken  off  line  (B).  We  symbolize  the  characteristics  by  small  circles 
(C),  the  number  of  which  is  obviously  indefinitely  great. 

Underneath,  we  symbolize  the  ‘object’  by  the  circle  (O),  which  has 
a  finite  size.  The  characteristics  of  the  object  we  also  denote  by  similar 
little  circles  (C').  The  number  of  characteristics  which  an  object  has 
is  large  but  finite,  and  is  denoted  by  the  finite  number  of  the  small 
circles  (C). 

Then  we  attach  a  label  to  the  object,  its  name,  let  us  say  ‘pencil ', 
which  we  indicate  in  our  diagram  by  the  label  (L).  We  ascribe,  also, 
characteristics  to  the  labels,  and  we  indicate  these  characteristics  by  the 
little  circles  (C"). 

The  number  of  characteristics  which  we  ascribe  by  definition  to  the 
label  is  still  smaller  than  the  number  of  characteristics  the  object  has. 
To  the  label  ‘pencil/  we  would  ascribe,  perhaps,  its  length,  thickness, 
shape,  colour,  hardness , .  But  we  would  mostly  disregard  the  accidental 
characteristics,  such  as  a  scratch  on  its  surface,  or  the  kind  of  glue  by 
which  the  two  wooden  parts  of  the  objective  ‘pencil'  are  held  together, . 
If  we  want  an  objective  ‘pencil'  and  come  to  a  shop  to  purchase  one, 
we  say  so  and  specify  verbally  only  these  characteristics  which  are  of 
particular  immediate  interest  to  us. 

It  is  clear  that  the  object  is  often  of  interest  to  us  for  some  special 
characteristics  of  immediate  usefulness  or  value.  If  we  enquire  as  to  the 
neurological  processes  involved  in  registering  the  object,  we  find  that  the 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIM K- BINDING 

Fig.  1 

ON  THK  STRUCTURAL  1)1  IT  LKKNT1 AL  3W) 

nervous  system  has  abstracted,  from  the  infinite  numbers  of  sub-micro¬ 
scopic  characteristics  of  the  event,  a  large  but  finite  number  of  macro¬ 
scopic  characteristics.  In  purchasing  a  ‘pencil’  we  usually  are  not 
interested  in  its  smell  or  taste.  But  if  we  were  interested  in  these 
abstractions,  we  would  have  to  find  the  smell  and  the  taste  of  our  object 
by  experiment. 

But  this  is  not  all.  The  object  represents  in  this  language  a  gross 
macroscopic  abstraction,  for  our  nervous  system  is  not  adapted  for 
abstracting  directly  the  infinite  numbers  of  characteristics  which  the  end¬ 
lessly  complex  dynamic  fine  structure  of  the  event  represents.  We  must 
consider  the  object  as  a  ‘first  abstraction’  (with  a  finite  number  of  char¬ 
acteristics)  from  the  infinite  numbers  of  characteristics  an  event  has. 
The  above  considerations  are  in  perfect  accord  not  only  with  the  func¬ 
tioning  of  the  nervous  system  but  also  with  its  structure.  Our  nervous 
system  registers  objects  with  its  lower  centres  first,  and  each  of  these 
lower  specific  abstractions  we  call  an  object.  If  we  were  to  define  an 
object,  we  should  have  to  say  that  an  object  represents  a  first  abstrac¬ 
tion  with  a  finite  number  of  m.o  characteristics  from  the  infinite  num¬ 
bers  oi  m.o  characteristics  an  event  has. 

Obviously,  if  our  inspection  of  the  object  is  through  the  lower 
nervous  centres,  the  number  of  characteristics  which  the  object  has  is 
larger  (taste,  smell . ,  of  our  pencili)  than  the  number  of  characteristics 
which  we  need  to  ascribe  to  the  label.  The  label,  the  importance  of  which 
lies  in  its  meanings  to  us,  represents  a  still  higher  abstraction  from  the 
event,  and  usually  labels,  also,  a  semantic  reaction. 

We  have  come  to  some  quite  obvious  and  most  important  structural 
conclusions  of  evaluation  of  the  non-el  type.  We  see  that  the  object 
is  not  the  event  but  an  abstraction  from  it,  and  that  the  label  is  not  the 
object  nor  the  event,  but  a  still  further  abstraction.  The  nervous  process 
of  abstracting  we  represent  by  the  lines  (N),  (N').  The  characteristics 
left  out ,  or  not  abstracted,  are  indicated  by  the  lines  (B'),  (B"). 

For  our  semantic  purpose,  the  distinction  between  lower  and  higher 
abstractions  seems  fundamental ;  but,  of  course,  we  could  call  the  object 
simply  the  first  order  abstraction,  and  the  label,  with  its  meanings,  the 
second  order  abstraction,  as  indicated  in  the  diagram. 

If  we  were  to  enquire  how  this  problem  of  abstracting  in  different 
orders  appears  as  a  limiting  case  among  animals,  we  should  select  a  defi¬ 
nite  individual  with  which  to  carry  on  the  analysis.  For  our  analysis,  which 
is  deliberately  of  an  extensional  character,  we  select  an  animal  with  a 
definite,  proper  name,  corresponding  to  ‘Smith’  among  us.  Such  an 
animal  suggests  itself  at  once  on  purely  verbal  grounds. 

VJ1.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

It  is  the  one  we  call  ‘Fido’.  Practically  all  English  speaking  people 
are  acquainted  with  the  name  ‘Fido’.  Besides,  most  of  us  like  dogs  and 
are  aware  of  how  ‘intelligent’  they  are. 

Investigations  and  experimenting  have  shown  that  the  nervous 
system  of  a  Fido  presents,  in  structure  and  function,  marked  similarities 
to  that  of  a  Smith.  Accordingly,  we  may  assume  that,  in  a  general  way, 
it  functions  similarly.  We  have  already  spoken  of  the  event  in  terms 
of  recognition;  namely,  that  we  can  never  recognize  an  event,  as  it 
changes  continually.  Whitehead  points  out  the  fundamental  difference 
between  an  event  and  an  object  in  terms  of  recognition ;  namely,  that 
an  event  cannot  be  recognized,  and  that  an  object  can  be  recognized. 
He  defines  the  object  as  the  recognizable  part  of  the  event.  The  use  of 
this  definition  helps  us  to  test  whether  Fido  has  'objects’.  Since  experi¬ 
ments  show  that  Fido  can  recognize,  we  have  to  ascribe  to  Fido  objects 
by  definition.  If  we  enquire  what  the  objects  of  Fido  represent,  the 
structure  and  function  of  his  nervous  system,  which  are  very  similar  to 
ours,  would  suggest  that  Fido’s  objects  represent,  also,  abstractions  of 
some  low  order,  from  the  events.  Would  his  objects  appear  the  ‘same’ 
as  ours?  No.  First  of  all,  the  abstractions  from  events  which  we  call 
objects  are  not  the  ‘same’,  even  when  abstracted  by  different  individuals 
among  humans.  An  extreme  example  of  this  can  be  given  in  that  lim¬ 
ited  form  of  colour-blindness  which  is  called  Daltonism,  when  an  object 
which  appears  green  to  most  persons  appears  red  to  the  certain  few 
who  suffer  from  this  disease.  There  is,  at  present,  no  doubt  that  the 
nervous  abstractions  of  all  organisms  are  individual,  not  only  with  each 
individual,  but  at  different  'times’  with  one  individual,  and  differ,  also, 
for  these  higher  groups  (abstractions)  which  we  call  species.  We  can 
infer  how  the  world  appears  to  a  particular  organism  only  if  its  nervous 
structure  is  quite  similar  to  our  own.  With  species  widely  separated 
neurologically,  such  inferences  are  entirely  unjustified.  So,  on  general 
grounds,  the  'objects’  of  Fido  are  not  the  'same’  as  ours ;  on  neurologi¬ 
cal  grounds,  they  appear  only  similar.  In  daily  experience,  we  know  that 
we  should  have  difficulty  in  recognizing  our  own  glove  among  a  thou¬ 
sand,  but  Fido  could  perform  this  detection  for  us  much  better.  So  the 
'same’  glove  must  have  been  registered  in  the  nervous  system  of  Fido 
differently  from  the  way  it  has  been  in  ours. 

We  indicate  this  similarity  of  the  human  object  (O*)  and  the  ani¬ 
mal  object  (Oa)  by  making  the  circle  (Oa)  smaller,  and  emphasize  the 
difference  between  the  objects  by  differently  spacing  the  holes  represent¬ 
ing  the  characteristics.  Whether  we  call  the  objects  (O*)  and  (Oa) 
'first  order’  abstractions  or  '100th  order’  abstractions,  or  simply  'lower 

ON  TIIK  STRUCTURAL  I )1  FFKKKNT1AI 

Fig.  2 

order*  abstractions,  is  mainly  optional.  There  is  no  neurological  doubt 
that  all  'objects’  represent  low  order  abstractions  and  the  use  of  a  num¬ 
ber  to  indicate  the  order  is  simply  a  matter  of  convention  and  con¬ 
venience.  If  we  were  to  start  with  the  simplest  living  cell,  we  might 
ascribe  to  its  abstractions  the  term  'first  order*  abstractions.  If  we  were 
to  survey  in  this  way  all  known  forms  of  life,  we  might  ascribe  to  Fido 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

and  Smith  very  large  numbers  as  their  orders  of  abstractions.  But  this 
is  unnecessary,  as  we  shall  presently  see. 

We  note  that  Fido  dpes  abstract  from  events,  at  any  rate,  in  lower 
orders,  ‘has  objects’  (Oa)  which  he  can  recognize.  The  question  is, 
does  he  abstract  in  higher  orders  ?  We  might  answer  that  he  does  within 
certain  limits.  Or,  we  might  prefer  to  take  the  limits  of  his  abstracting 
capacities  for  granted  and  to  include  them  all  as  lower  order  abstractions. 
For  the  sake  of  convenience  and  simplicity,  we  select  the  last  method  and 
say  that  he  does  not  abstract  in  higher  orders.  In  our  schematic  repre¬ 
sentation,  we  shall  discover  some  very  important  differences  between 
the  abstracting  capacities  of  humans  and  animals,  and  so  we  introduce 
here  only  as  much  complexity  as  we  need.  As  animals  have  no  speech, 
in  the  human  sense,  and  as  we  have  called  the  verbal  labelling*  of  the 
object  ‘second  order  abstraction’  we  say  that  animals  do  not  abstract  in 
higher  orders. 

If  we  compare  our  diagram  and  what  it  represents  with  the  well- 
known  facts  of  daily  life,  we  see  that  Smith’s  abstracting  capacities  are 
not  limited  to  two  orders,  or  to  any  V  orders  of  abstractions. 

In  our  diagrams,  the  label  (L)  stands  for  the  name  which  we 
assigned  to  the  object.  But  we  can  also  consider  the  level  of  the  first 
label  (L)  as  a  descriptive  level  or  statement.  We  know  very  well  that 
Smith  can  always  say  something  about  a  statement  (L),  on  record. 
Neurologically  considered,  this  next  statement  (Li)  about  a  statement 
(L)  would  be  the  nervous  response  to  the  former  statement  (L)  which 
he  has  seen  or  heard  or  even  produced  by  himself  inside  his  skin.  So  his 
statement  (L*),  about  the  former  statement  (L),  is  a  new  abstraction 
from  the  former  abstraction.  In  my  language,  I  call  it  an  abstraction 
of  a  higher  order.  In  this  case,  we  shall  be  helped  by  the  use  of  num¬ 
bers.  If  we  call  the  level  (L)  an  abstraction  of  second  order ,  we  must 
call  an  abstraction  from  this  abstraction  an  abstraction  of  third  order , 
(Li).  Once  an  abstraction  of  third  order  has  been  produced,  it  becomes, 
in  turn,  a  fact  on  record,  potentially  a  stimulus,  and  can  be  abstracted 
further  and  a  statement  made  about  it,  which  becomes  an  abstraction  of 
the  fourth  order  (L2).  This  process  has  no  definite  limits,  for,  when¬ 
ever  statements  of  any  order  are  made,  we  can  always  make  a  statement 
about  them,  and  so  produce  an  abstraction  of  still  higher  order.  This 
capacity  is  practically  universal  among  organisms  which  we  call 
‘humans*.  Here  we  reach  a  fundamental  difference  between  ‘Smith* 

*In  the  present  system  the  terms  ‘label’,  ‘labelling’.,  are  always  connected  with 
their  meanings,  and  so,  for  simplicity,  from  now  on  the  reference  to  meanings 
will  be  omitted. 

ON  THE  STRUCTURAL  DIFFERENTIAL 

Fig.  3 

The  Structural  Differential 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

and  ‘Fido’.  Fido’s  power  of  abstracting  stops  somewhere ,  although  it 
may  include  a  few  orders.  Not  so  with' ‘Smith* ;  his  power  of  abstracting 
has  no  known  limit  (see  Part  VI). 

Perhaps  the  reader  is  semantically  perplexed  by  the  unfamiliarity 
of  the  language  of  this  analysis.  It  must  be  granted  that  the  introduction 
of  any  new  language  is  generally  perplexing,  and  it  is  justified  only  if 
the  new  language  accomplishes  something  structurally  and  semantically 
which  the  old  languages  did  not  accomplish.  In  this  case,  it  has  brought 
us  to  a  new  sharp  distinction  between  ‘man*  and  ‘animal*.  The  number 
of  orders  of  abstractions  an  ‘animal’  can  produce  is  limited.  The  number 
of  orders  of  abstractions  a  ‘man*  can  produce  is,  in  principle,  unlimited . 

Here  is  found  the  fundamental  mechanism  of  the  ‘time-binding* 
power  which  characterizes  man,  and  which,  allows  him,  in  principle,  to 
gather  the  experiences  of  all  past  generations.  A  higher  order  abstrac¬ 
tion,  let  us  say,  of  the  n- (-1  order,  is  made  as  a  response  to  the  stimulus 
of  abstractions  of  the  «th  order.  Among  ‘humans*  the  abstractions  of 
high  orders  produced  by  others,  as  well  as  those  produced  by  oneself 
are  stimuli  to  abstracting  in  still  higher  orders.  Thus,  in  principle,  we 
start  where  the  former  generation  left  off.  It  should  be  noticed  that,  in 
the  present  analysis,  we  have  abandoned  the  structurally  el  methods  and 
language,  and  the  whole  analysis  becomes  simple,  although  non^familiar 
because  it  involves  new  non-el  s.r. 

The  preceding  explanation  justifies  my  former  statement  that  the 
ascribing  of  absolute  numbers  to  the  orders  of  abstractions  of  /animal* 
and  of  ‘man*  is  unnecessary.  In  our  diagram  we  could  ascribe  as  many 
orders  of  abstractions  to  the  animal  as  we  please  ;  yet  we  should  have 
to  admit,  for  the  structural  correctness  of  description  of  experimental 
facts,  that  the  ‘animal’s’  power  of  abstracting  has  limits,  while  the  num¬ 
ber  of  orders  of  abstractions  a  ‘man*  can  produce  has  no  known  limits. 

From  an  epistemological  and  semantic  point  of  view,  there  is  an 
important  benefit  in  this  method.  In  this  language,  we  have  discovered 
sharp  verbal  and  analytical  methods,  in  terms  of  the  non-el  ‘orders  of 
abstractions*,  by  which  these  two  ‘classes  of  life’,  or  these  two  high 
abstractions,  can  be  differentiated.  The  terms  ‘animal*  and  ‘man*  each 
represent, a  name  for  an  abstraction  of  very  high  order,  and  not  a  name 
for  an  objective  individual.  To  formulate  the  difference  between  these 
‘classes*  becomes  a  problem  of  verbal  structural  ingenuity  and  methods , 
as  in  life  we  deal  only  with  absolute  individuals  on  the  un-speakable, 
objective  levels.  In  our  diagram,  we  could  hang  on  the  ‘animal*  object 
as  many  levels  of  labels,  which  stand  for  higher  order  abstractions,  as 

ON  THE  STRUCTURAL  DIFFERENTIAL 

we  please ;  yet  somewhere  we  would  have  to  stop ;  but  with  ‘man'  we 
could  continue  indefinitely. 

This  sharp  difference  between  ‘man’  and  ‘animal’  may  be  called  the 
1 horizontal  difference?.  The  habitual  use  of  our  hands  in  showing  these 
different  horizontal  levels  is  extremely  useful  in  studying  this  work,  and 
it  facilitates  greatly  the  acquiring  of  the  structurally  new  language  and 
corresponding  s.r.  The  solution  of  the  majority  of  human  semantic 
difficulties  (evaluation),  and  the  elimination  of  pathological  identifica¬ 
tion,  lie  precisely  in  the  maintenance,  without  confusion,  of  the  sharp 
differentiation  between  these  horizontal  levels  of  orders  of  abstractions. 

Let  us  now  investigate  the  possibility  of  a  sharp  ‘vertical  differ¬ 
ence \  We  have  already  come  to  the  conclusion  that  Fido  abstracts 
objects  from  events,  and  that,  if  his  nervous  system  is  similar  to  ours, 
his  lower  order  abstractions  are  similar  to  ours.  Here  we  may  ask  the 
question:  Does  Fido  ‘know’,  or  can  he  ‘know’,  that  he  abstracts?  It 
seems  undeniable  that  Fido  does  not  ‘know’  and  cannot  ‘know/  that 
he  abstracts,  because  it  takes  science  to  ‘know*  that  we  abstract,  and 
Fido  has  no  science.  It  is  semantically  important  that  we  should  be 
entirely  convinced  on  this  point.  We  do  not  argue  about  the  kind  of 
‘knowledge’  animals  may  have  or  about  the  relative  value  of  this  ‘knowl¬ 
edge’  as  compared  with  ours.  Science  was  made  possible  by  the  human 
nervous  system  and  the  invention  of  extra-neural  means  for  investiga¬ 
tion  and  recording,  which  animals  lack  entirely.  Whoever  claims  that 
animals  have  science  should,  to  say  the  least,  show  libraries  and  scientific 
laboratories  and  instruments  produced  by  animals. 

We  see  that,  although  Fido  has  abstracted,  he  not  only  does  not 
‘know’  but  cannot  ‘know’  that  he  abstracts,  as  this  last  ‘knowledge’  is 
given  exclusively  by  science,  which  animals  do  not  have.  In  this  con¬ 
sciousness  of  abstracting,  we  find  a  most  important  ‘ vertical  difference ’ 
between  Smith  and  Fido .  The  difference  is  sharp  again. 

If,  in  our  diagram,  Fig.  4,  we  ascribe  to  Fido  more  horizontal 
orders  of  abstractions,  let  us  say  two,  (Hi)  and  (H2),  nevertheless,  the 
‘animal’  stops  somewhere.  This  extended  diagram  illustrates  that  ‘man’ 
is  capable  of  abstracting  in  higher  and  higher  orders  indefinitely.  In 
this  diagram,  we  symbolize  the  fact  that  Fido  does  not  and  cannot 
‘know’  that  he  abstracts,  by  not  connecting  the  characteristics  of  his 
object  (Oa)  by  lines  (An)  with  the  event  (E).  Without  science ,  we 
have  no  event;  Fido’s  gross  macroscopic  object  (Oa)  represents  ‘all’ 
that  he  ‘knowsf  or  cares  about .  We  see  that  the  vertical  difference  (Vi) 
formulated  as  consciousness  of  abstracting  for  Smith  appears  sharp,  and 
completely  differentiates  Fido  from  Smith.  In  it,  we  find  the  semantic 

VII.  Till':  MKCHANISM  OF  T1MK-HINDING 

,VX» 

Pvent  t 

Fig.  4 

mechanism  of  all  proper  evaluation,  based  on  non-identification  or  the 
differentiation  between  orders  of  abstractions,  impossible  with  animals. 

In  this  diagram  we  have  introduced  more  objects,  because  each 
individual  abstracts,  in  general,  from  an  event  different  objects,  in  the 
sense  that  they  are  not  identical  in  every  respect.  We  must  be  aware 
continuously  that  in  life  on  the  un-speakable  objective  level  we  deal 
only  with  absolute  individuals,  be  they  objects,  situations,  or  s.r .  The 
vertical  stratification  not  only  gives  us  representation  for  the  sharp 
difference  between  ‘man’  and  ‘animal’,  but  also  allows  us  to  train  our 
s.r  in  the  absolute  individuality  of  our  objects  and  those  of  different 
observers,  and  for  the  differences  between  their  individual  abstractions. 
What  has  been  said  here  applies  equally  to  all  first  order  effects  on  the 
objective  level,  such  as  immediate  feelings , . 

The  present  theory  can  only  be  fully  beneficial  when  the  reader 
acquires  in  his  system  the  habitual  feeling  of  both  the  vertical  and  the 
horizontal  stratifications  with  which  identification  becomes  impossible. 

ON  THE  STRUCTURAL  DIFFERENTIAL  $)7 

In  the  experiments  of  Doctor  Philip  S.  Graven  with  the  'mentally*  ill, 
training  in  the  realization  of  this  stratification  has  either  resulted  in 
complete  recovery  or  has  markedly  improved  the  conditions  of  the 
patient. 

The  diagram  is  used  in  two  distinct  ways.  One  is  by  showing  the 
abstracting  from  the  event  to  the  object,  and  the  applying  of  a  name  to 
the  object.  The  other  is  by  illustrating  the  level  of  statements  which 
can  be  made  about  statements.  If  we  have  different  objects,  and  label 
them  with  different  names,  say,  Alt  A2,  A3  .  .  .  An,  we  still  have  no 
proposition.  To  make  a  proposition,  we  have  to  accept  some  undefined 
relational  term,  by  which  we  relate  one  object  to  the  other.  The  use  of 
this  diagram  to  illustrate  the  levels  or  orders  of  statements  implies  that 
we  have  selected  some  metaphysics  as  expressed  in  our  undefined  rela¬ 
tional  terms.  We  should  be  fully  aware  of  the  difference  between  these 
two  uses  of  the  one  diagram  for  the  structural  illustration  of  two  aspects 
of  one  process. 

If  we  enquire:  What  do  the  characteristics  of  the  event  represent? 
We  find  that  they  are  given  only  by  science  and  represent  at  each  date 
the  highest,  most  verified,  most  reliable  abstractions  ‘Smith*  has 
produced. 

Theory  and  practice  have  shown  that  the  points  illustrated  by  the 
above  structural  diagrams  have  a  crucial  semantic  significance,  as,  with¬ 
out  using  them,  it  is  practically  impossible  to  train  ourselves  or  others 
and  to  accomplish  the  psychophysiological  re-education.  For  this  reason, 
the  diagrams  have  been  produced  for  home  and  school  use,  separately, 
in  the  simplified  form  illustrated  in  Fig.  5.  This  structural  diagram  is 
called  the  ‘Anthropometer*  or  the  ‘Structural  Differential*,  as  it  illus¬ 
trates  the  fundamental  structural  difference  between  the  world,  and  so 
the  environment,  of  the  animal  and  man.  If  we  live  in  such  a  very 
complex  human  world,  but  our  s.r ,  owing  to  wrong  evaluation,  are 
adjusted  only  to  the  simpler  animal  world,  free,  to  say  the  least,  from 
man-made  complications,  then  adjustment  and  sanity  for  humans  is 
impossible.  Our  s.r  are  bound  to  follow  the  simpler  animalistic  patterns, 
pathological  for  man .  All  human  experience,  scientific  or  otherwise, 
shows  that  we  still  copy  animals  in  our  nervous  reactions,  trying  to 
adjust  ourselves  to  a  world  of  fictitious,  simple  animal  structure,  while 
actually  we  live  in  a  world  of  very  complex  human  structure  which  is 
quite  different.  Naturally,  under  such  conditions,  which,  ultimately, 
turn  out  to  be  delusional,  human  adjustment  is  impossible  and  results  in 
false  evaluations,  animalistic  s.r ,  and  the  general  state  of  un-sanity. 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

Fig.  5 

The  Structural  Differential 

ON  THE  STRUCTURAL  D1  FI*' EKKNT1AL 

Any  one  who  will  work  out  the  present  analysis  with  the  aid  of  the 
Differential  will  find  clearly  that  the  majority  of  human  difficulties,  the 
preventable  or  curable  ‘mental’  or  semantic  disturbances  included,  are 
due  to  this  fatal  structural  error,  resulting  in  false  evaluation  due  to 
identification  or  lack  of  differentiation. 

The  Structural  Differentials  are  manufactured  in  two  forms:  (1) 
in  a  printed  map-like  scroll  for  hanging  on  the  walls  or  black-board ;  (2) 
in  relief  form  with  detachable  labels.  As  the  main  problem  is  to  train 
and  re-educate  the  semantic  psychophysiplogical  reactions  in  non-iden¬ 
tity,  the  relief  form  is  the  most  effective  because  of  the  freely  hanging 
strings,  detachable  labels.,  which  give  means  to  engage  more  nerve 
centres  in  the  training.  I  shall  describe  the  latter  type  in  some  detail. 

For  the  event  we  have  a  parabola  in  relief  (E),  broken  off  to  indi¬ 
cate  its  limitless  extension.  The  disk  (O*)  symbolizes  the  human  object ; 
the  disk  (Oa)  represents  the  animal  object.  The  label  (L)  represents 
the  higher  abstraction  called  a  name  (with  its  meaning  given  by  a  defini¬ 
tion).  The  lines  (An)  in  the  relief  diagram  are  hanging  strings  which 
are  tied  to  pegs.  They  indicate  the  process  of  abstracting.  The  free 
hanging  strings  (B»)  indicate  the  most  important  characteristics  left  out, 
neglected,  or  forgotten  in  the  abstracting.  The  Structural  Differentials 
are  provided  with  a  number  of  separate  labels  attached  to  pegs.  These 
are  hung,  one  to  the  other,  in  a  series,  and  the  last  one  may  be  attached 
by  a  long  peg  to  the  event,  to  indicate  that  the  characteristics  of  the 
event  represent  the  highest  abstractions  we  have  produced  at  each  date. 
The  objective  level  is  not  words,  and  cannot  be  reached  by  words  alone . 
We  must  point  our  Unger  and  be  silent,  or  we  shall  never  reach  this 
level .  Our  personal  feelings,  also,  are  not  words,  and  belong  to  the  objec¬ 
tive  level. 

The  whole  of  the  present  theory  can  be  illustrated  on  the  Struc¬ 
tural  Differential  by  the  childishly  simple  operation  of  the  teacher  point¬ 
ing  a  finger  to  the  event  and  then  to  the  object,  saying  This  is  not  this’ 
and  insisting  on  silence  on  the  pupil’s  part.  One  should  continue  by 
showing  with  the  finger  the  object  and  the  label,  saying  again  This  is  not 
this’,  insisting  on  silence  on  the  objective  level ;  then,  showing  the  first 
and  the  second  label,  saying  again  This  is  not  this’, . 

In  a  more  complex  language,  one  would  say  that  the  object  is  not 
the  event,  that  the  label  is  not  the  un-speakable  object,  and  that  a  state¬ 
ment  about  a  statement  is  not  the  ‘same’  statement,  nor  on  one  level.  We 
see  and  are  made  to  visualize  that  the  ^-system  is  based  on  the  denial 
of  the  fis*  of  identity,  which  necessitates  the  differentiation  of  orders  of 
abstractions. 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

The  little  word  ‘to  be'  appears  as  a  very  peculiar  word  and  is,  per¬ 
haps,  responsible  for  many  human  semantic  difficulties.  If  the  anthro¬ 
pologists  are  correct,  only  a  few  of  the  primitive  peoples  have  this  verb. 
The  majority  do  not  have  it  and  do  not  need  it,  because  all  their  s.r  and 
languages  are  practically  based  on,  and  involve,  literal  identification.1  In 
passing  from  the  primitive  stage  of  human  society  to  the  present  slightly 
higher  stage,  which  might  be  called  the  infantile  stage,  or  infantile 
period,  too  crude  identification  was  no  longer  possible.  Languages  were 
built,  based  on  slightly  modified  or  limited  identification,  and,  for  flexibil¬ 
ity,  the  ‘is*  of  identity  was  introduced  explicitly.  Although  very  little 
has  been  done  in  the  structural  analysis  of  languages  in  general,  and 
of  those  of  primitive  peoples  in  particular,  we  know  that  in  the  Indo- 
European  languages  the  verb  ‘to  be1,  among  others,  is  used  as  an  auxil¬ 
iary  verb  and  also  for  the  purpose  of  positing  false  to  facts  identity. 
With  the  primitive  prevalent  lack  of  consciousness  of  abstracting,  and 
the  primitive  belief  in  the  magic  of  words,  the  s.r  were  such  that  words 
were  identified  with  the  objective  levels.  Perhaps  it  is  not  too  much  to 
say  that  the  primitive  ‘psychology '  peculiarly  required  such  a  fundamen¬ 
tal  identity.  Identity  may  be  defined  as  ‘absolute  sameness  in  all  respects’ 
which,  in  a  world  of  ever-changing  processes  and  a  human  world  of 
indefinitely  many  orders  of  abstractions,  appears  as  a  structural  impos¬ 
sibility.  Identity  appears,  then,  as  a  primitive  ‘over-emotional’  generaliza¬ 
tion  of  similarity,  equality,  equivalence,  equipollence . ,  and,  in  no  case, 
does  it  appear  in  fact  as  ‘absolute  sameness  in  all  respects’.  As  soon  as 
the  structurally  delusional  character  of  identity  is  pointed  out,  it  becomes 
imperative  for  sanity  to  eliminate  such  delusional  factors  from  our 
languages  and  s.r.  With  the  advent  of  ‘civilization’,  the  use  of  this  word 
was  enlarged,  but  some  of  the  fundamental  primitive  implications  and 
psycho-logical  semantic  effects  were  preserved.  If  we  use  the  ‘is’  at  all, 
and  it  is  extremely  difficult  to  avoid  entirely  this  auxiliary  verb  when 
using  languages  which,  to  a  large  extent,  depend  on  it,  we  must  be  par¬ 
ticularly  careful  not  to  use  ‘is’  as  an  identity  term. 

In  1933,  the  amount  of  knowledge  we  have  about  the  primitive 
peoples  is  considerable.  Anthropologists  have  gathered  an  enormous  num¬ 
ber  of  descriptive  facts,  on  which  they  practically  all  agree,  but  the 
several  schools  of  anthropology  differ  widely  as  to  the  interpretation  of 
these  facts.  Roughly  speaking,  the  British  school  tries  to  interpret  the 
facts  from  the  point  of  view  of  ascribing  to  the  primitives  the  deficient 
‘psychology’  and  ‘logic’  of  the  white  man.  The  French  and  Polish 
schools  avoid  these  unjustified  tendencies,  and  attempt  to  reconstruct  the 
original  primitive  ‘psychologies'  and  ‘logics’  which  could  be  responsible 

ON  Tll!C  STRUC  TURAL  DIFFERENTIAL 

for  the  developments,  or  the  lack  of  developments,  of  the  primitive 
peoples.  All  schools  accept,  as  yet,  the  existing  el  ‘psychologies’  and  two¬ 
valued  A  ‘logic’  as  the  standard,  normal,  and,  perhaps,  even  as  the  final 
disciplines  for  an  adult  human  civilization.  No  school  suspects  that  an 
A  stage  of  civilization  appears  to  be  built,  to  a  large  extent,  on  the 
slightly  refined  primitive  identifications  which  produced  only  an  infantile 
period  of  human  development.  They  do  not  suspect  that  a  future  A 
society  may  differ  as  greatly  from  the  present  A  society  as  the  latter 
differs  from  the  primitive  society. 

In  my  work,  I  prefer  to  follow  the  French  and  Polish  schools  of 
anthropology,  as  it  seems  to  me  that  these  schools  are  freer  from  seman¬ 
tic  identification  and  aristotelianism  than  the  others. 

In  1933,  it  seems,  beyond  doubt,  that  if  any  single  semantic  charac¬ 
teristic  could  be  selected  to  account  for  the  primitive  state  of  the  indi¬ 
viduals  and  their  societies,  we  could  say,  without  making  too  great  a 
mistake,  that  it  would  be  found  in  identification ,  understood  in  the  more 
general  sense  as  it  is  used  in  the  present  work.  There  is  very  little  doubt, 
at  present,  that  different  physico-chemical  factors,  environment,  climate, 
kind  of  food,  colloidal  behaviour,  endocrine  secretions . ,  are  fundamental 
factors  which  condition  the  potentialities,  as  well  as  the  behaviour,  of  an 
organism.  It  is  equally  certain  that,  as  an  end-result,  these  physico¬ 
chemical  factors  are  connected  with  definite  types  of  s.r.  It  is  known  that 
the  reverse  is  also  true ;  namely,  that  s,r  affect  colloidal  behaviour,  endo¬ 
crine  secretions,  and  metabolism.  The  exact  type  of  dependence  is  not 
known,  because  too  little  experimenting  on  humans  has  been  made.  The 
present  analysis  is  conducted  from  the  semantic  point  of  view,  and  its 
results,  no  matter  how  far-reaching,  are  limited  to  this  special  aspect. 

Simple  analysis  shows  that  identification  is  a  necessary  condition 
which  underlies  the  reactions  of  animals,  of  infants,  and  of  primitives. 
If  found  in  ‘civilized’  grown-ups,  it  equally  indicates  some  remains  of 
earlier  periods  of  development,  and  can  always  be  found  in  the  analysis 
of  any  private  or  public  difficulties  which  prevent  any  satisfactory  solu¬ 
tion.  Identification  in  a  slightly  modified  form  represents,  also,  the  very 
foundation  of  the  ^-system  and  those  institutions  which  are  founded 
on  this  system. 

Mathematics  gives  us  practically  the  only  linguistic  system  free 
f  rom  pathological  identifications,  although  mathematicians  use  this  term 
uncritically.  The  more  identification  is  eliminated  from  other  sciences, 
the  more  the  mathematical  functional  semantics  and  method  are  applied, 
and  the  further  a  given  science  progresses. 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

The  best  we  know  in  1933  is  that  the  general  structure  of  the  world 
was  not  different  in  prehistoric  times  from  what  we  find  it  today.  We 
have  no  doubt  that  the  materials  in  great  antiquity  consisted  of  mole¬ 
cules,  molecules  of  atoms,  and  atoms  of  electrons  and  protons . ,  or  what¬ 
ever  else  we  shall  be  able  to  discover  some  day.  We  have  no  doubt  that 
blood  was  circulating  in  the  higher  animals’  and  humans,  that  vitamins 
exhibited  very  similar  characteristics  as  today,  that  different  forms  of 
radiant  energy  influenced  colloidal  behaviour. ,  .,  regardless  of  whether 
or  not  the  given  animal,  primitive  man  or  infant  ‘knew*  or  ‘knows’  about 
them. 

How  about  the  primitive  physical  needs  and  wants  of  an  animal, 
a  primitive  man,  and  an  infant?  Besides  all  mystical  and  mythological 
reasons  for  identification,  the  structural  facts  of  life  necessitated  identi¬ 
fication  on  this  level  of  development.  Without  modern  knowledge,  what 
a  hungry  animal,  primitive  man,  or  an  infant  ‘wants’  ‘is’  an  ‘object’,  say, 
called  an  ‘apple’.  He  would  ‘define’  his  ‘apple’  the  best  he  could  as  to 
shape,  colour,  smell,  taste , .  Was  this  what  his  organism  needed  ?  Ob¬ 
viously  not.  We  could,  at  present,  produce  an  undigestible  synthetic 
apple  which  would  satisfy  his  eventual  objective  definitions ;  he  might 
eat  it,  many  such  ‘apples’,  and  eventually  die  of  hunger.  Is  an  abundant 
and  pleasant  diet  free  from  unsuspected  and  unseen  ‘vitamins’  satisfac¬ 
tory  for  survival  ?  Again,  no !  Thus,  we  see  clearly  that  what  the  organ¬ 
ism  needed  for  survival  were  the  physico-chemical  processes,  not  found 
in  the  ‘ordinary  object’,  but  exclusively  in  the  ‘scientific  object’,  or  the 
event.  Here  we  find  the  age  old  and  necessary,  on  this  early  level, 
identification  of  the  ordinary  object  with  the  scientific  object.  This  form 
of  identification  is  extremely  common  even  in  1933,  and,  to  a  large  extent, 
responsible  for  our  low  development,  because,  no  matter  what  we  ‘think* 
or  feel  about  an  object,  an  object  represents  only  an  abstraction  of  low 
order,  only  a  general  symbol  for  the  scientific  object ,  which  remains 
the  only  possible  survival  concern  of  the  organism.  But,  obviously,  such 
identification,  being  false  to  facts,  can  never  be  entirely  reliable.  If 
any  one  fancies  that  he  deals  with  ‘ultimate  reality’,  yet  that  m.o  reality 
represents  only  a  shadow  cast  by  the  scientific  object;  he  begins,  with 
experience,  to  distrust  the  object  and  populates  his  world  with  delusional 
mysticism  and  mythologies  to  account  for  the  mysteries  of  the  shadow. 

As  any  organism  represents  an  abstracting  in  different  orders  pro¬ 
cess,  which,  again,  the  animal,  the  primitive  man,  and  the  infant  cannot 
know,  they,  by  necessity,  identify  different  orders  of  abstractions.  Thus, 
names  are  identified  with  the  un-speakable  objects,  names  for  action 
with  the  un-speakable  action  itself,  names  for  a  feeling  with  the  un- 

ON  Til K  STRUCTURAL  DIKFKRKNTIAL 

Hpoakablc  feelings  themselves , .  By  confusing  descriptions  with  inferences 
and  descriptive  words  with  inferential  words,  the ‘judgements*,  ‘©pinions*, 
'beliefs’,  and  similar  s.r ,  which  represent  mostly,  if  not  exclusively, 
inferential  semantic  end-products,  are  projected  with  varying  pathologi¬ 
cal  intensity  on  the  outside  world.  By  this  method  pre-‘logicaT  primitive 
semantic  attitudes  were  built.  Mere  similarities  were  evaluated  as  iden¬ 
tities,  primitive  syllogisms  were  built  of  the  type:  ‘stags  run  fast,  some 
Indians  run  fast,  some  Indians  are  stags’.  It  is  common  to  find  among 
primitive  peoples  a  kind  of  ‘logic’  based  on  the  post  hoc ,  ergo  propter 
hoc  (after  this  and,  therefore,  because  of  this)  fallacy  which  obviously 
represents  an  identification  of  an  ordinal  description  with  an  inference. 
The  ‘question  begging  epithets’,  which  exercise  a  tremendous  semantic 
influence  on  primitive  and  immature  peoples  and  represent  a  semantic 
factor  in  many  primitive  as  well  as  modern  taboos,  are  also  based  on 
such  confusions  of  orders  of  abstractions. 

Identification  is  one  of  the  primitive  characteristics  which  cannot 
be  eliminated  from  the  animal  or  the  infant,  because  we  have  no  means 
to  communicate  with  them  properly.  It  cannot  be  eliminated  from  primi¬ 
tive  peoples  as  long  as  they  preserve  their  languages  and  environments. 
Identification  is  extremely  wide-spread  among  ourselves,  embodied 
strongly  in  the  structure  of  our  inherited  language  and  systems.  To 
change  that  primitive  state  of  affairs,  we  need  special  simple  means,  such 
as  a  ^-system  may  offer,  to  combat  effectively  this  serious  menace  to 
our  s.r .  It  should  never  be  forgotten  that  identification  is  practically 
never  dangerous  in  the  animal  world,  because  unaided  nature  plays  no 
tricks  on  animals  and  the  elimination  by  non-survival  is  very  sharp.  It 
is  dangerous  in  the  primitive  stage  of  man,  however,  as  it  prevents  the 
primitive  man  to  become  more  civilized,  but  under  his  primitive  condi¬ 
tions  of  life  his  dangers  are  not  so  acute.  It  becomes  only  very  danger¬ 
ous  to  the  infant  if  not  taken  care  of,  and  to  the  modern  white  man  in 
the  midst  of  a  very  far  advanced  industrial  system  which  affects  all 
phases  of  his  life,  when  his  s.r  are  left  unchanged  from  the  ages  gone 
by,  and  still  remain  on  the  infantile  level. 

The  present  ^-system  is  not  only  based  on  the  complete  rejection 
of  the  ‘is’  of  identity,  but  every  important  term  which  has  been  intro¬ 
duced  here,  as  well  as  the  Structural  Differential,  is  aimed  at  the  elimina¬ 
tion  of  these  relics  of  the  animal,  the  primitive  man,  and  the  infant  in  us. 

Thus,  the  primitive  ‘mentality’  does  not  differentiate  relations 
enough ;  to  counteract  this,  I  introduce  the  Structural  Differential ,  The 
primitive  identifies ;  I  introduce  a  system  based  on  the  denial  of  the  ‘is’ 
of  identity  ail  through.  The  primitive  man  pays  most  attention  to  what 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OE  TIME-BINDING 

is  conveyed  to  him  through  the  eye  and  the  ear ;  I  introduce  the  Struc¬ 
tural  Differential  which  indicates  to  the  eye  the  stratification  of  human 
knowledge,  which  represents  to  the  eye  the  verbal  denial  of  the  ‘is’  of 
identity.  If  we  identify,  we  do  not  differentiate.  If  we  differentiate, 
we  cannot  identify ;  hence,  the  Structural  Differential. 

The  terms  used  also  convey  similar  processes.  Once  we  have 
order ,  we  differentiate  and  have  orders  of  abstractions.  Once  we 
abstract,  we  eliminate  ‘all ness’,  the  semantic  foundation  for  identifica¬ 
tion.  Once  we  abstract,  we  abstract  in  different  orders,  and  so  we 
order,  abolishing  fanciful  infinities.  Once  we  differentiate,  differen¬ 
tiation  becomes  the  denial  of  identity.  Once  we  discriminate  between 
the  objective  and  verbal  levels,  we  learn  ‘silence’  on  the  un-speak- 
able  objective  levels,  and  so  introduce  a  most  beneficial  neurological 
‘delay*  —  engage  the  cortex  to  perform  its  natural  function.  Once 
we  discriminate  between  the  objective  and  verbal  levels,  structure 
becomes  the  only  link  between  the  two  worlds.  This  results  in  search 
for  similarity  of  structure  and  relations,  which  introduces  the  aggregate 
feeling,  and  the  individual  becomes  a  social  being.  Once  we  differentiate, 
we  discriminate  between  descriptions  and  inferences.  Once  we  discrimi¬ 
nate,  we  consider  descriptions  separately  and  so  are  led  to  observe  the 
facts,  and  only  from  description  of  facts  do  we  tentatively  form  infer¬ 
ences  , .  Finally,  the  consciousness  of  abstracting  introduces  the  general 
and  permanent  differentiation  between  orders  of  abstractions,  intro¬ 
duces  the  ordering,  and  so  stratifications,  and  abolishes  for  good  the 
primitive  or  infantile  identifications.  The  semantic  passing  from  the 
primitive  man  or  infantile  state  to  the  adult  period  becomes  a  semantic, 
accomplished  fact.  It  should  be  noticed  that  these  results  are  accom¬ 
plished  by  starting  with  primitive  means,  the  use  of  the  simplest  terms, 
such  as  ‘this  is  not  this*,  and  by  the  direct  appeal  to  the  primitive  main 
receptors — the  eye  and  the  ear. 

The  elimination  of  the  ‘is*  of  identity  appears  as  a  serious  task, 
because  the  A- system  and  ‘logic*  by  which  we  regulate  our  lives,  and  the 
influence  of  which  has  been  eliminated  only  partially  from  science,  rep¬ 
resent  only  a  very  scholarly  formulation  of  the  restricted  primitive  iden¬ 
tification.  Thus,  we  usually  assume,  following  A  disciplines,  that  the  ‘is* 
of  identity  is  fundamental  for  the  ‘laws  of  thought*,  which  have  been 
formulated  as  follows; 

1)  The  Law  of  Identity:  whatever  is,  is. 

2)  The  Law  of  Contradiction :  nothing  can  both  be  and  not  be. 

3)  The  Law  of  Excluded  Middle:  everything  must  either  be  or 
not  be. 

ON  TIIK  STRUCTURAL  Dl IT'KRKNTI AL 

It  is  impossible,  short  of  a  volume,  to  revise  this  ‘logic’  and  to 
formulate  a  A,  ao-valued,  non-elemcntalistic  semantics  which  would  be 
structurally  similar  to  the  world  and  our  nervous  system;  but  it  must  be 
mentioned,  even  here,  that  the  ‘law  of  identity’  is  never  applicable  to 
processes.  The  ‘law  of  excluded  middle’,  or  ‘excluded  third’,  as  it  is 
sometimes  called,  which  gives  the  two-valued  character  to  A  ‘logic’, 
establishes,  as  a  general  principle,  what  represents  only  a  limiting  case 
and  so,  as  a  general  principle,  must  be  unsatisfactory.  As  on  the  objec¬ 
tive,  un-speakable  levels,  we  deal  exclusively  with  absolute  individuals 
and  individual  situations,  in  the  sense  that  they  are  not  identical,  all 
statements  which,  by  necessity,  represent  higher  order  abstractions  must 
only  represent  probable  statements.  Thus,  we  are  led  to  oo-valued 
semantics  of  probability,  which  introduces  an  inherent  and  general  prin¬ 
ciple  of  uncertainty. 

It  is  true  that  the  above  given  ‘laws  of  thought’  can  and  have  been 
expressed  in  other  terms  with  many  scholarly  interpretations,  but  fun¬ 
damentally  the  semantic  state  of  affairs  has  not  been  altered. 

From  a  non-el  point  of  view,  it  is  more  expedient  to  treat  the 
A -system  on  a  similar  footing  with  the  ^-system;  namely,  to  consider 
the  above  ‘laws  of  thought’  as  postulates  which  underlie  that  system  and 
which  express  the  ‘laws  of  thought*  of  a  given  epoch  and,  eventually, 
of  a  race.  We  know  other  systems  among  the  primitive  peoples  which 
follow  other  ‘laws’,  in  which  identity  plays  a  still  more  integral  part  of 
the  system.  Such  natives  reason  quite  well;  their  systems  are  consistent 
with  their  postulates,  although  these  are  quite  incomprehensible  to  those 
who  try  to  apply  A  postulates  to  them.  From  this  point  of  view,  we 
should  not  discuss  how  ‘true*  or  ‘false’  the  ^-system  appears,  but  we 
should  simply  say  that,  at  a  different  epoch,  other  postulates  seem 
structurally  closer  to  our  experience  and  appear  more  expedient.  Such 
an  attitude  would  not  retard  so  greatly  the  appearance  of  new  systems 
which  will  supersede  the  present  /?-system. 

In  the  present  system,  ‘identification’  represents  a  label  for  the 
semantic  process  of  inappropriate  evaluation  on  the  un-speakable  levels, 
or  for  such  ‘feelings’,  ‘impulses’,  ‘tendencies’,.  As  in  human  life,  we 
deal  with  many  orders  of  abstractions,  we  could  say  in  an  ordinal  lan¬ 
guage  that  identification  originates  or  results  in  the  confusion  of  orders 
of  abstractions.  This  conclusion  may  assume  different  forms:  one  repre¬ 
sented  by  the  identification  of  the  scientific  object  or  the  event  with  the 
ordinary  object,  which  may  be  called  ignorance,  pathological  to  man; 
another,  the  identification  of  the  objective  levels  with  the  verbal  levels, 
which  I  call  objectification ;  a  third,  the  identification  of  descriptions  with 

VII.  TIIIC  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

inferences,  which  I  call  confusion  of  higher  order  abstractions.  In  the 
latter  case,  we  should  notice  that  inferences  involve  usually  more  intense 
semantic  components,  such  as  ‘opinions’,  ‘beliefs’,  ‘wishes’. ,  than  descrip¬ 
tions.  These  inferences  may  have  a  definite,  objective,  un-speakable 
character  and  may  represent,  then,  a  semantic  state  which  is  not  words, 
and  so  objectifications  of  higher  order  may  be  produced. 

When  we  introduce  the  ordinal  language,  we  should  notice  that  under 
known  conditions  we  deal  with  an  ordered  natural  series ;  namely,  events 
first,  object  next;  object  first,  label  next;  description  first,  inferences 
next , .  This  order  expresses  the  natural  importance,  giving  us  the 
natural  base  for  evaluation  and  so  for  our  natural  human  s.r.  If  we 
identify  two  different  orders,  by  necessity,  we  evaluate  them  equally, 
which  always  involves  errors,  resulting  potentially  in  semantic  shocks. 
As  we  deal  in  life  with  an  established  natural  order  of  values  which  can 
be  expressed,  for  my  purpose,  by  a  series  decreasing  in  value :  events  or 
scientific  objects,  ordinary  objects,  labels,  descriptions,  inferences.; 
identification  results  in  a  very  curious  semantic  situation. 

Let  us  assume  that  the  scientifically  established  value  of  any  level 
could  be  expressed  as  100,  and  the  value  of  the  next  as  1.  With  the  con¬ 
sciousness  of  abstracting  we  could  not  disregard,  nor  identify,  these 
values,  nor  forget  that  100  >1.  If  we  confuse  the  orders  of  abstrac¬ 
tions,  this  can  be  expressed  as  the  identification  in  value  and  we  have 
a  semantic  equation:  (I)  100=  100,  or  (2)  1  =  1,  or  any  other  num¬ 
ber,  say  (3)  50  =  50. 

As  we  deal  fundamentally  with  a  natural,  directed  inequality,  say, 
100  >  1,  and,  under  some  semantic  pressure,  ‘want’,  ‘wishful  thinking', 
or  ignorance,  or  lack  of  consciousness  of  abstracting,  or  ‘mental’  ill¬ 
ness  . ,  we  identified  the  two  in  value,  we  produce  in  the  first  and  third 
cases  an  over-ev aluation  oil  the  right-hand  side,  and,  in  the  second  and 
third  cases,  an  twcter-evaluation.  on  the  left-hand  side.  Thus,  on  the 
semantic  level ,  any  identification  of  essentially  different  in  value  differ¬ 
ent  orders  of  abstractions,  appears  as  the  reversal  of  the  natural  order 
of  evaluation,  with  different  degrees  of  intensity.  If  the  natural  order 
of  scientific  evaluation  would  be  100  >  1,  and  we  would  evaluate 
through  identification  as  2  =  2,  or  3  =  3.,  50  =  50 . ,  100  =  100,  we 
would  be  ascribing  twice,  or  three  times,  or  fifty  times,  or  a  hundred 
times . ,  more  delusional  values  to  the  right-hand  side  and  under-evaluate 
the  left-hand  side,  than  the  natural  order  of  evaluation  would  require. 
Nature  exhibits,  in  my  language  and  in  this  field,  an  asymmetrical  rela¬ 
tion  of  ‘more’,  or  ‘less’  inaccessible  to  A  procedure.  Under  the  influence 
of  aristotelianism,  when,  through  identification,  we  ascribe  to  nature 

ON  THR  STRUCTURAL  DfKRKRKNTlAL 

delusional  values,  adjustment  becomes  very  difficult,  particularly  under 
modern  complex  life-conditions. 

The  above  example  indicates  the  degrees  of  intensity  which  we  find 
in  life  in  the  reversal  of  the  natural  order  of  evaluation  through  iden¬ 
tification,  produced  by,  and  resulting  in„  the  lack  of  consciousness  of 
abstracting.  Un-sanity,  which  affects  practically  all  of  us,  represents  the 
reversal  of  lesser  intensity;  the  reversal  of  greater  intensity — the  more 
advanced  ‘mental’  ills. 

We  should  realize  that  experimentally  we  find  in  this  field  a  fun¬ 
damental  difference  in  value,  which,  on  semantic  levels,  can  be  expressed 
as  an  asymmetrical  relation  of  ‘more’  or  ‘less’,  establishing  some  natural 
order.  If  any  one  should  claim  a  natural  ‘identity’,  the  burden  of  proof 
falls  on  him.  If  ‘absolute  sameness  in  all  respects’  cannot  be  found  in 
this  world,  then  such  a  notion  appears  as  false  to  facts,  and  becomes  a 
structural  falsification,  preventing  sanity  and  adjustment.  If  he  accepts 
the  fundamental,  natural  differences  in  value,  but  prefers  to  assume  a 
different  order  of  evaluation  depending  on  his  metaphysics,  be  it  the 
elementalistic  materialism,  or  equally  elementalistic  idealism,  the  seman¬ 
tic  results  are  not  changed,  because  identification  in  the  second  case 
would  also  ascribe  delusional  identity  to  essentially  different  orders  of 
abstractions.  It  should  be  noticed  that  the  A  formulation  applies  equally 
to  the  older  different,  opposite  doctrines  and  renders  them  illegitimate 
on  similar  grounds. 

The  status  of  the  event,  or  the  scientific  object,  is  slightly  more 
complex,  because  the  event  is  described  at  each  date  by  very  reliable, 
constantly  revised  and  tested,  hypothetical ,  structural,  inferential  terms, 
exhibiting  the  peculiar  circularity  of  human  knowledge.  If  we  should 
treat  these  inferential  structures,  not  as  hypothetical,  but  should  identify 
them  semantically  with  the  eventual  processes  on  the  level  of  the  sub- 
microscopic  event,  we  would  have  semantic  disturbances  of  identification. 

I  have  selected  the  above  given  order,  not  only  for  convenience  and 
simplicity,  but  because  of  its  experimental  character.  When  we  identify 
in  values,  we  always  exhibit  in  our  s.r  the  reversed  natural  order,  intro¬ 
duced  here  on  space-time  structural  and  evaluational  grounds. 

The  above  analysis  represents  a  very  rough  outline,  but  is  sufficient 
for  my  purpose.  Any  attentive  and  informed  reader  can  carry  it  further 
as  far  as  desired.  The  main  point  appears  that  different  orders  of  ab¬ 
stractions  exhibit  different  characteristics,  and  so  any  identification  of 
entities  essentially  different  in  one  or  more  aspects  must  introduce  delu¬ 
sional  semantic  factors.  I  speak  mostly  about  evaluation,  because  evalu¬ 
ation  appears  experimentally  as  an  essential  factor  in  all  s.r  and  can  be 

408  VII.  TI-IE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME- RINDING 

applied  even  profitably  in  those  cases  of  'mental'  illness  where  no  definite 
evaluation  appears,  the  absence  of  evaluation  being  a  form  of  evaluation 
(m.o).  In  training,  it  is  of  utmost  importance  to  eliminate  identification 
entirely,  which  invariably  appears  as  a  delusional  semantic  factor.  To 
achieve  these  ends,  all  and  every  available  means  should  be  employed. 

When  one  studies  carefully  the  older  disciplines,  one  is  amazed 
to  learn  to  what  an  extent  the  recorded  ‘thinkers'  rebelled  against  the 
limitations  and  insufficiencies  of  aristotelianism,  which  system,  naturally, 
became  antiquated  a  short  time  after  its  formulation.  One  is  amazed 
to  find  that  'everything  has  already  been  said',  and  that,  to  a  large  extent, 
these  important,  separated  statements  were  inoperative .  It  is  of  little 
importance  that  some  ‘wise  statements'  had  been  made  by  some  one, 
somewhere,  if  they  had  no  influence  on  the  great  masses  of  the  race. 
The  reason  for  this  tremendous  public  waste  of  private  efforts  is  that 
aristotelianism,  with  its  further  elaborations  and  its  delusional  identi¬ 
fication,  elementalism . ,  represents  a  co-ordinated  system  which  moulded 
our  s,rt  languages,  and  institutions,  and  which  influenced  every  phase 
of  our  lives.  Under  such  conditions,  isolated  doctrines,  no  matter  how 
wise,  become  powerless  in  the  face  of  such  a  system,  or,  more  correctly, 
a  system  of  interlocked  systems.  Only  a  revision  of  the  system  and  the 
tentative  formulation  of  a  ^-system  can  make  many  older  fundamental 
clarifications  workable,  which,  although  known  to  a  few  specialists, 
appear  generally  unknown  to  the  great  masses  and  unavailable  in  ele¬ 
mentary  education,  which  alone  can  be  generally  effective.  One  is  also 
amazed  at  the  power  of  structurally  correct  terminology,  and  feels  full 
of  sympathy  toward  the  primitive  interpretation  as  the  ‘magic  of 
words'!  Happy,  structural  high  abstractions  really  have  a  strong  cre¬ 
ative  character.  Since,  for  instance,  the  principle  of  ‘least  action',  or  the 
‘general  principle  of  relativity'  (the  theory  of  the  absolute) . ,  have  been 
formulated,  all  of  our  structural  knowledge  has  been  recast,  clarified, 
and  we  constantly  hear  of  some  remarkable  applications  of  the  new 
knowledge.  Similarly,  if  it  is  pointed  out  that  our  main  private  and 
public  difficulties  are  due  to  infantilism  produced  by  ‘aristotelianism',  in 
general,  and,  in  particular,  by  identification  and  elementalism,  we  at 
once  have  practical  means  for  a  revision  and  applications.  In  such  a 
first  and  novel  attempt  over-subtlety  is  impossible  and  even  not  desir¬ 
able.  It  is  preferable,  as  well  as  expedient,  to  formulate  the  general 
outline  and,  thereby,  draw  more  men  into  the  work  for  the  details. 

For  thousands  of  years,  millions  upon  millions  of  humans  have 
used  a  great  deal  of  their  nervous  energy  in  worrying  upon  delusional 
questions,  forced  upon  them  by  the  pernicious  ‘is’  of  identity,  such  as: 

ON  T1IK  STRUCTURAL  IMFFKRKNTIAL  40!) 

'What  is  an  object?’,  ‘What  is  life?’,  ‘What  is  hell?’,  ‘What  is  heaven?’, 
‘What  is  space?’  ‘What  is  time?’,  and  an  endless  array  of  such  irritants. 
The  answer,  based  on  the  human  discrimination  of  orders  of  abstractions 
and  so  proper  human  evaluation ,  is  definite,  undeniable,  simple,  and 
unique:  ‘Whatever  one  might  say  something  “is”,  it  is  not/  Whatever 
we  might  say  belongs  to  the  verbal  level  and  not  to  the  un-speakable, 
objective  levels. 

Let  me  repeat  once  more  that  the  ‘is’  of  identity  forces  us  into 
semantic  disturbances  of  wrong  evaluation .  We  establish,  for  instance, 
the  identity  of  the  un-speakable  objective  level  with  words,  which,  once 
stated,  becomes  obviously  false  to  facts.  The  ‘is’  of  identity,  if  used  as 
indicating  ‘identity’  (structurally  impossible  on  the  objective  levels), 
says  nothing.  Thus,  the  question,  ‘What  is  an  object  ?’,  may  be  answered, 
‘An  object  is  an  object’ — a  statement  which  says  nothing.  If  used  in 
definitions  or  classifications,  such  as  ‘Smith  is  a  man’,  a  type  of  state¬ 
ment  used  even  in  the  Principia  Mathematica,  or  ‘A  is  B  or  not  B’,  as 
in  the  formulation  of  the  law  of  ‘excluded  third’  in  the  two-valued  A 
‘logic’,  it  always  establishes  an  identity ,  false  to  facts.  The  first  state¬ 
ment  expresses  the  identity  of  a  proper  name  with  a  class  name  which 
must  lead  to  the  confusion  of  classes  (higher  order  abstractions)  with 
individuals  (lower  order  abstractions).  This  confusion  leads  automati¬ 
cally  to  disturbed  evaluation  in  life,  because  the  characteristics  of  a  class 
are  not  the  ‘same’  as,  nor  identical  with,  the  characteristics  of  the  indi¬ 
vidual.  I  shall  not  analyse  in  detail  the  ‘A  is  B’,  because,  obviously,  it 
is  not. 

How  about  Fido?  Fido  has  no  science  and,  therefore,  no  ‘event*. 
For  him,  the  object  is  not  an  abstraction  of  some  order,  but  fis  all*  he 
‘knows’  and  cares  about.  Smith  not  only  abstracts  in  indefinite  numbers 
of  different  orders,  and  does  it  automatically  and  habitually,  but  if  he 
enquires  he  may  also  become  conscious  of  abstracting — 4 is  not  all*,  and 
' this  is  not  this*.  Now,  Fido  can  never  be  conscious  of  abstracting,  as 
his  nervous  system  is  incapable  of  being  extended  by  extra-neural 
means,  and  this  extension  appears  to  be  a  necessary  condition  for  the 
acquiring  of  consciousness  of  abstracting. 

Although  for  Smith,  ‘This  is  not  this’,  as  illustrated  on  the  Struc¬ 
tural  Differential,  for  Fido,  that  diagram  would  eventually  mean  ‘this  is 
this’,  the  structure  of  his  world  being  represented  by  the  single  disk  (On). 
Fido  cannot  be  conscious  of  abstracting,  he  must  identify,  because  he 
‘knows’  nothing  of  this  process,  and  there  is  no  means  of  informing  him 
of  these  relations  and  structure. 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

If  we  are  not  conscious  of  abstracting,  we  must  identify — in  other 
words,  whenever  we  confuse  the  different  orders  of  abstractions,  un¬ 
avoidable  if  we  use  the  'is’  of  identity,  we  duplicate  or  copy  the  animal 
way  of  ‘thinking’,  with  similar  ‘emotional’  responses.  In  the  following 
chapters,  this  tragedy  will  be  explained  in  detail,  and  it  will  be  shown 
that  practically  all  human  difficulties  involve  this  semantic  factor  of 
copying  animals  in  our  nervous  reactions  and  evaluation  as  a  component. 

A  theory  which  not  only  throws  light  on  this  serious  problem,  but 
which  also  gives  means  of  replacing  the  old  harmful  s.r  by  more  bene¬ 
ficial  ones,  may  be  useful,  in  spite  of  various  temporary  difficulties  which 
are  due  to  the  old  identity-reactions  and  the  lack  of  familiarity  with 
the  new. 

The  old  identity-reactions  are  extremely  ingrained,  particularly  with 
grown-ups.  Serious  effort  and  permanent  reminders  are  necessary  to 
overcome  them.  The  Structural  Differential  represents  such  a  structural 
visual  reminder,  which  we  should  keep  constantly  before  our  eyes  until 
the  pernicious  disturbances  of  evaluation  have  been  overcome.  For 
Smith,  the  fundamental  evaluation  can  be  expressed  in  simple  and  quite 
primitive  language — ‘This  is  not  this’. 

The  above  most  vital  semantic  factors  of  evaluation  indispensable 
for  adjustment  and  sanity  are  conveyed  to  him  whenever  he  looks 
at  the  stratification  indicated  on  the  Differential.  The  hanging  free 
strings  indicating  the  non-abstract ed  characteristics  train  his  s.r  to  be 
aware  of  the  non-allness  of,  and  the  lack  of  identity  between,  his 
abstractions. 

Our  old  s.r  were  similar  to  Fido’s ;  we  were  never  fully  conscious 
of  abstracting.  Through  wrong  evaluation  we  identified  what  is  inher¬ 
ently  different  and  longed  for,  or  assumed  some  impossible  ‘allness’  in 
our  ‘knowings’. 

Practice  has  shown  me,  definitely,  that  to  acquire  these  new  reac¬ 
tions  of  consciousness  of  abstracting  is  difficult  and  requires  ‘time’  and 
effort  to  accomplish,  in  spite  of  the  exceptional,  nearly  primitive,  sim¬ 
plicity  of  the  means  employed.  The  ‘silence  on  the  objective  levels’ 
sounds  very  innocent;  yet  it  is  extremely  difficult  to  acquire,  as  it  in¬ 
volves  a  complete  checking  of  all  semantic  disturbances,  identifications, 
confusions  of  orders  of  abstractions,  habitual  ‘emotions’,  ‘preconceived 
ideas’. ,  practically  impossible  without  the  use  of  the  objective  Differen¬ 
tial  to  which  we  can  point  our  finger  and  be  silent,  to  begin  with.  In 
fact,  to  disregard  this  point,  actually  means  failure  in  accomplishing  the 
desired  semantic  results.  At  present,  as  far  as  experience  has  gone,  the 
main  results  were  achieved  when  a  given  individual  had  conquered  this 

ON  THE  STRUCTURAL  DIFFERENTIAL 

first,  simple,  and  obvious  semantic  obstacle.  If  the  simple  rules  and 
conditions  given  in  the  present  system  for  abolishing  identification  are 
followed  persistently  in  the  training  with  the  Differential,  a  complete 
and  very  beneficial  structural  and  semantic  change  in  the  character  and 
‘mental’  capacities  of  a  given  individual  occurs,  seemingly  all  out  of  pro¬ 
portion  with  the  simplicity  of  the  training.  But  if  we  consider  the  con¬ 
tent  of  all  knowledge  as  uniquely  structural,  and  if  the  majority  of  us 
are  semantically  tied  up,  blocked,  with  antiquated,  animalistic,  primitive, 
infant-like,  ‘mentally ’-ill  and  A  structure  and  identity-reactions,  owing 
to  the  lack  of  consciousness  of  abstracting,  which  we  renounce  in  toto 
by  acquiring  the  consciousness  of  abstracting,  such  remarkable  trans¬ 
formation  becomes  intelligible. 

The  publication  of  the  Structural  Differential  in  separate,  con¬ 
veniently  large  copies  has  been  forced  upon  me  by  experience  and  by 
various  difficulties  found  in  the  re-educating  of  our  s.r,  without  which 
a  ^-system,  adjustment,  sanity,  and  all  the  desirable  results  which  depend 
on  them,  are  impossible. 

CHAPTER  XXVI 

ON  ‘CONSCIOUSNESS’  AND  CONSCIOUSNESS  OF  ABSTRACTING 

But  a  felt  ‘contrary’  is  consciousness  in  germ.  .  .  .  Consciousness  re¬ 
quires  more  than  the  mere  entertainment  of  theory.  It  is  the  feeling  of 
the  contrast  of  theory,  as  mere  theory,  with  fact,  as  mere  fact.  This  con¬ 
trast  holds  whether  or  no  the  theory  be  correct.  (578)  A.  n.  whitehead 

A  language,  to  be  most  useful,  should  be  similar  in  its  structure  to 
the  structure  of  the  events  which  it  is  supposed  to  represent.  The  lan¬ 
guage  of  ‘abstractions  of  different  orders*  appears  to  be  satisfactory  in 
point  of  structure.  It  is  a  non-el  language,  since  it  does  not  discriminate 
between  ‘senses*  and  ‘mind’, .  It  is  a  functional  language,  since  it  de¬ 
scribes,  by  implication,  what  is  going  on  in  the  nervous  system  when  it 
reacts  to  stimuli.  It  is  a  language  which  can  be  made  as  flexible  and  as 
sharp  as  desired,  thus  making  it  possible  to  establish  sharp  verbal  differ¬ 
ences,  of  both  horizontal  and  vertical  type,  between  the  terms  ‘man* 
and  ‘animal*. 

The  last  semantic  characteristic  of  potential  sharpness  is  extremely 
important  for  a  theory  of  sanity.  Evidence  of  1933  leads  us  to  conclude 
that,  under  the  influence  of  external  stimuli,  the  most  primitive  and 
simplest  forms  of  life  were  moulded,  transformed,  and  influenced  in  the 
process  of  survival,  and,  therefore,  of  adjustment.  In  this  way,  more 
and  more  complex  structures  evolved.  It  should  be  emphasized  that 
organisms  represent  functional  units,  and  that  an  additive  change  in 
structure  does  not  necessarily  involve  a  simply  additive  change  in  func¬ 
tion.  By  physico-chemical,  structural,  colloidal  necessity  the  organism 
works  as-a- whole.  Being  a  relative  whole,  any  additive  structural  factor 
becomes  a  reactive  and  functional  factor  which  influences  the  working 
of  the  whole.  This  is,  perhaps,  best  illustrated  by  the  boy  who  was  born 
without  a  cortex,  but  with  no  other  obvious  defects.  He  was  incom¬ 
parably  more  helpless  and  unadjusted  than  animals  who  have  no  cortex, 
or  even  no  nervous  system  at  all.  Although  we  could  speak  in  additive 
terms  of  the  difference  between  this  boy  and  a  normal  boy,  as  one  having 
no  cortex  and  the  other  ‘plus  a  cortex*,  yet  the  functioning  was  so  differ¬ 
ent  as  not  to  be  expressible  in  a  ‘plus*  language. 

Similar  remarks  could  be  generalized  to  all  life.  We  must  be  very 
careful  in  building  sharp  distinctions,  since  the  anatomical  differences 
alone  are  unreliable.  If  we  want  to  have  more  reliable  differences,  we 
should  look  for  functional  differences. 

CONSCIOUSNESS  OK  AI1S TUACTJNC 

Wc  have  already  discovered  functional  differences  that  are  ex¬ 
pressed  by  the  horizontal  and  by  the  vertical  differences  between  the 
abstracting  capacities  of  Smith  and  Fido.  The  analysis  of  these  differ¬ 
ences  is  the  subject  of  the  present  chapter. 

*rl  bought'  represents  a  reaction  of  the  organism-as-a-whole,  pro¬ 
duced  by  the  working  of  the  whole,  and  influencing  the  whole.  From 
our  daily  experience,  we  are  familiar  with  what  we  usually  denote  as 
l»eing  ‘conscious’;  in  other  words,  we  are  aware  of  something,  be  it  an 
object,  a  process,  an  action,  a  ‘feeling1,  or  an  ‘idea’.  A  reaction  that  is 
very  habitual  and  semi-automatic  is  not  necessarily  ‘conscious’.  The  term 
‘consciousness’,  taken  separately,  is  not  a  complete  symbol ;  it  lacks  con¬ 
tent,  and  one  of  the  characteristics  of  ‘consciousness’  is  to  have  some 
content.  Usually,  the  term  ‘consciousness’  is  taken  as  undefined  and 
unde  finable,  because  of  its  immediate  character  for  every  one  of  us. 
Such  a  situation  is  not  desirable,  as  it  is  always  semantically  useful  to 
try  to  define  a  complex  term  by  simpler  terms.  We  may  limit  the  general 
imd  undefined  term  ‘consciousness’  and  make  it  a  definite  symbol  by  the 
deliberate  ascribing  of  some  content  to  this  term.  For  this  ‘consciousness 
of  something’  I  take  ‘consciousness  of  abstracting’  as  fundamental.  Per¬ 
haps  the  only  type  of  meanings  the  term  ‘consciousness’  has  is  covered 
by  the  functional  term  ‘consciousness  of  abstracting’,  which  represents 
a  general  process  going  on  in  our  nervous  system.  Even  if  this  is  not 
the  only  type  of  meanings,  the  term  ‘consciousness  of  abstracting’  ap¬ 
pears  to  be  of  such  crucial  semantic  importance  that  its  introduction  is 
necessary. 

The  term  ‘consciousness*,  because  of  its  hitherto  undefined  and 
traditionally  unde  finable  character,  did  not  allow  us  further  analysis. 
Neither  did  we  have  any  workable,  educational,  semantic  means  to  handle 
the  vast  field  of  psycho-logical  processes  which  this  incomplete  symbol 
indicated.  If  we  now  select  the  term  ‘consciousness  of  abstracting*  as 
fundamental,  we  not  only  make  the  last  symbol  complete  by  assigning 
functional  content  to  it,  but  we  also  find  means  to  define  it  more  spe¬ 
cifically  in  simpler  terms .  Through  understanding  of  the  processes  we 
gain  educational  means  of  handling  and  influencing  a  large  group  of 
semantic  psycho-logical  reactions. 

Let  us  analyse  this  new  term  by  aid  of  the  diagram  called  the  Struc- 
tural  Differential  referred  to  in  the  previous  chapter.  Here  the  object 
(0*)  represents  a  nervous  abstraction  of  a  low  order.  In  this  abstract¬ 
ing,  some  characteristics  of  the  event  were  missed  or  not  abstracted  ; 
these  are  indicated  by  the  not  connected  lines  (B').  When  we  abstracted 
from  our  object  further,  by  coining  a  definition  or  ascribing  ‘meanings’ 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OK  TIM E-1U N  1)1  NG 

to  the  label  (L),  again  we  did  not  abstract  ‘all’  the  characteristics  of  the 
object  into  the  definition;  but  some  characteristics  were  left  out,  as  indi¬ 

cated  by  the  lines  (B").  In  other  words,  the 

number  of  characteristics 
which  we  ascribe  to  the 
label,  by  some  process  of 
‘knowing',  or  ‘wanting’,  or 
‘needing’,  or  ‘interest*. , 
does  not  cover  the  number 
of  characteristics  the  ob¬ 
ject  has.  The  ‘object’  has 
more  characteristics  than 
we  can  include  in  the  ex¬ 
plicit  or  implicit  definition 
of  the  label  for  the  ‘ob¬ 
ject*.  Besides,  the  defini¬ 
tion  (implicit  or  explicit) 
of  the  ‘object’  is  not  the 
object  itself,  which  always 
holds  many  surprises  for 
us.  The  latter  has  the  ‘in¬ 
dividuality  of  the  object 
as  we  may  call  it.  Every 
one  who  uses  a  car,  or  a 
gun,  or  a  typewriter,  or 
who  has  had  a  number  of 
wives,  or  husbands,  or 
children,  knows  that  well. 
In  spite  of  the  fact  that 
these  objects  are,  to  a  large 
extent,  standardized,  every 
individual  object  has  indi¬ 
vidual  peculiarities.  With 

Fig.  1 

The  Structural  Differential 

modern  methods  of  physi¬ 
cal,  chemical,  and  astro¬ 

nomical  investigation,  scientists  find  that  even  their  special  materials  and 
equipments  have  also  peculiar  individualities  which  must  be  taken  into 
account  in  the  more  refined  researches. 

If  we  take  any  ordinary  object  and  expect  to  find  such  and  such 
characteristics,  ascribed  to  the  objects  by  definition ,  we  may  be  disap¬ 
pointed.  As  a  rule,  we  find  or  can  find,  if  our  analysis  is  subtle  enough, 
these  peculiar  individualities.  The  reader  can  easily  convince  himself 

CONSCIOUSNESS  OK  ABSTRACTING 

by  looking  over  a  box  of  matches,  and  by  noticing  the  peculiar  individu¬ 
ality  of  each  match.  But  since*  by  definition ,  we  expect  that  when  we 
strike  a  match  it  should  ignite,  we  may  disregard  all  other  characteristics 
as  irrelevant  for  our  purpose.  A  similar  process  is  at  work  in  other 
phases  of  life.  We  often  live,  feel  happy  or  unhappy,  by  what  actually 
amounts  to  a  definition,  and  not  by  the  empirical,  individual  facts  less 
coloured  by  semantic  factors.  When  Smithi  marries  Smith2,  they  mostly 
do  so  by  a  kind  of  definition.  They  have  certain  notions  as  to  what  ‘man’, 
‘woman’,  and  ‘marriage*  ‘are*  by  definition.  They  actually  go  through 
the  performance  and  find  that  the  Smithi  and  his  wife,  Smith2,  have 
unexpected  likes,  dislikes,  and  particularities — in  general,  characteristic 
and  semantic  reactions  not  included  in  their  definition  of  the  terms  ‘man’, 
‘woman’,  ‘husband’,  ‘wife’,  or  ‘marriage’.  Characteristics  ‘left  out’  in  the 
definitions  make  their  appearance.  ‘Disappointments’  accumulate,  and  a 
more  or  less  unhappy  life  begins. 

The  above  analysis  applies  to  all  phases  of  human  life,  and  appears 
entirely  general  because  of  the  structure  of  ‘human  knowledge’.  Charac¬ 
teristics  are  discovered  when  it  is  too  late.  The  not  knowing  or  the  for¬ 
getting  of  the  relations  explained  above  does  the  semantic  havoc.  On 
verbal,  ‘definitional’,  or  doctrinal  semantic  grounds,  we  expect  something 
else  than  what  the  experiences  of  life  give  us.  The  non-fulfillment  of 
expectation  produces  a  serious  affective  and  semantic  shock.  If  such 
shocks  are  repeated  again  and  again,  they  disorganize  the  normal  work¬ 
ing  of  the  nervous  system,  and  often  lead  to  pathological  states.  An 
indefinitely  large  number  of  experimental  facts  fully  supports  the  above 
conclusions.  Many  of  them  have  been  supplied  during  the  World  War, 
Curiously  enough,  when  the  soldier  did  expect  horrors,  and  later  experi¬ 
enced  them,  he  seldom  became  deranged  ‘mentally’.  If  he  did  not  fully 
expect  them,  and  yet  had  to  experience  them,  he  often  broke  down 
nervously. 

The  attack  of  hay  fever  at  the  sight  of  paper  roses,  referred  to 
already,  gives  a  similar  semantic  example.  The  attack  followed  from  the 
semantic  ‘ definition *  of  ‘roses’,  of  ‘hay  fever’,  and  from  the  situation 
as-a- whole,  and  was  not  due  to  inspection  of  the  objective  ‘roses',  or  to 
the  physico-chemical  action  of  the  ‘roses’.  If  the  patient  had  been  blind¬ 
folded  when  the  paper  ‘roses’  were  brought  into  his  presence,  no  attack 
would  have  occurred. 

We  are  now  ready  to  define  ‘consciousness  of  abstracting’  in  simpler 
terms;  namely,  in  terms  of  ‘memory’.  The  term  ‘memory’  is  structurally 
a  physico-chemical  term.  It  implies  that  the  events  are  interconnected, 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

that  everything  in  this  world  influences  everything  else,  and  that  hap¬ 
penings  leave  some  traces  somewhere. 

A  similar  analysis  can  be  carried  on  in  connection  with  the  object 
and  the  event.  Briefly,  the  object  represents  structurally  an  abstraction 
of  some  order,  does  not,  and  cannot,  include  all  the  characteristics  of  the 
event ;  and  so,  again,  we  have  some  characteristics  left  out  as  indicated 
by  the  lines  (B'). 

Here  we  have  the  possibility  of  making  a  series  of  most  general, 
and  yet  entirely  true,  negative  statements  of  great  semantic  importance ; 
that  the  label  is  not  the  object,  and  that  the  object  is  not  the  event , .  For 
the  number  of  m.o  characteristics  which  we  ascribe  to  the  label  by 
definition  does  not  cover  all  the  characteristics  we  recognize  in  the  ob¬ 
ject  ;  and  the  number  of  characteristics  which  we  perceive  in  the  object 
is  also  not  equal  to  the  infinite  numbers  of  characteristics  the  event  has. 
The  differences  are  still  more  profound.  Not  only  do  the  numbers  of 
m.o  characteristics  differ,  but  also  the  character  of  these  abstractions 
differs  from  level  to  level  of  the  successive  abstractions. 

We  can  now  define  ‘consciousness  of  abstracting'  as  ‘ awareness  that 
in  our  process  of  abstracting  we  have  left  out  characteristics'.  Or,  con¬ 
sciousness  of  abstracting  can  be  defined  as  ‘remembering  the  “is  not ", 
and  that  some  characteristics  have  been  left  ouf.  It  should  be  noticed 
that  in  this  formulation,  with  the  aid  of  the  Structural  Differential,  we 
have  succeeded  in  translating  a  negative  process  of  forgetting  into  a 
positive  process  of  remembering  the  denial  of  identity  and  that  charac¬ 
teristics  are  left  out.  Such  a  positive  formulation  makes  the  whole  sys¬ 
tem  workable  and  available  for  the  semantic  training  and  education. 

The  use  of  the  Structural  Differential  becomes  a  necessity  for  any 
one  who  wants  to  receive  full  semantic  benefit  from  the  present  work. 
A  book  is,  by  necessity,  verbal.  Whatever  any  author  can  say  is  verbal, 
and  nothing  whatsoever  can  be  said  which  is  not  verbal.  It  seems  entirely 
obvious  that  in  life  we  deal  with  an  enormous  number  of  things  and 
situations,  ‘feelings'. ,  which  are  not  verbal.  These  belong  to  the  ‘objec¬ 
tive  level'.  The  crucial  difficulty  is  found  in  the  fact  that  whatever  can 
be  said  is  not  and  cannot  be  on  the  objective  level,  but  belongs  only  to 
the  verbal  levels.  This  difference,  being  inexpressible  by  words,  cannot 
be  expressed  by  words.  We  must  have  other  means  to  indicate  this  dif¬ 
ference.  We  must  show  with  our  hand,  by  pointing  our  finger  to  the 
object,  and  by  being  silent  outwardly  as  well  as  inwardly,  which  silence 
we  may  indicate  by  closing  our  lips  with  the  other  hand.  The  verbal 
denial  of  the  ‘is'  of  identity  covers  this  point  also  when  shown  on  the 
Differential.  If  we  burst  into  speech  based  on  the  ‘is'  of  identity,  as  we 

CONSCIOUSNESS  OK  ABSTRACTING 

usually  do,  we  find  ourselves  obviously  on  the  verbal  levels  indicated 
by  the  labels  L,  Lx,  La,  .  .  .  L»,  but  never  on  the  objective  level  (O*). 
On  this  last  level,  we  can  look,  handle . ,  but  must  be  silent .  The  reason 
that  we  nearly  all  identify  the  two  levels  is  that  it  is  impossible  to  train 
an  individual  in  this  semantic  difference  by  verbal  means  alone ,  as  all 
verbal  means  belong  to  the  levels  of  labels  and  never  to  the  objective  un¬ 
speakable  levels.  With  a  visual  and  tactile  actual  object  and  labels  on 
the  Structural  Differential,  to  point  our  finger  at,  handle . ,  we  now  have 
simple  means  to  convey  the  tremendously  important  semantic  difference 
and  train  in  non-identity . 

We  should  notice  that  the  consciousness  of  abstracting,  or  the 
remembering  that  we  abstract  in  different  orders  with  omission  of  char¬ 
acteristics,  depends  on  the  denial  of  the  ‘is’  of  identity  and  is  connected 
with  limitations  or  ‘non-allness’,  so  characteristic  of  the  new  non-systems. 

The  consciousness  of  abstracting  eliminates  automatically  identifica¬ 
tion  or  ‘confusion  of  the  orders  of  abstractions1,  both  applying  to  the 
semantic  confusion  on  all  levels.  If  we  are  not  conscious  of  abstracting, 
we  are  bound  to  identify  or  confuse  the  object  with  its  finite  number 
of  characteristics,  with  the  event,  with  its  infinite  numbers  of  different 
characteristics.  Confusion  of  these  levels  may  misguide  us  into  semantic 
situations  ending  in  unpleasant  shocks.  If  we  acquire  the  consciousness 
of  abstracting,  and  remember  that  the  object  is  not  the  event  and  that 
we  have  abstracted  characteristics  fewer  than,  and  different  from,  those 
the  event  has,  we  should  expect  many  unforeseen  happenings  to  occur. 
Consequently,  when  the  unexpected  happens,  we  are  saved  from  painful 
and  harmful  semantic  shocks. 

If,  through  lack  of  consciousness  of  abstracting,  we  identify  or  con¬ 
fuse  words  with  objects  and  feelings,  or  memories  and  ‘ideas’  with 
experiences  which  belong  to  the  un-speakable  objective  level,  we  iden¬ 
tify  higher  order  abstractions  with  lower.  Since  this  special  type  of 
semantic  identification  or  confusion  is  extremely  general,  it  deserves  a 
special  name.  I  call  it  objectification ,  because  it  is  generally  the  confusion 
of  words  or  verbal  issues  (memories,  ‘ideas’. ,)  with  objective,  un-speak- 
able  levels,  such  as  objects,  or  experiences,  or  feelings , .  If  we  objectify, 
we  forget ,  or  we  do  not  remember  that  words  are  not  the  objects  or 
feelings  themselves,  that  the  verbal  levels  are  always  different  from  the 
objective  levels.  When  we  identify  them,  we  disregard  the  inherent 
differences,  and  so  proper  evaluation  and  full  adjustment  become  im¬ 
possible. 

Similar  semantic  difficulties  arise  from  the  confusion  of  higher 
order  abstractions;  for  instance,  the  identification  of  inferences  with 

Vll.  THE  MECHANISM  OE  TIME-BINDING 

descriptions.  This  may  be  made  clearer  by  examples.  In  studying  these 
examples,  it  should  be  remembered  that  the  organism  acts  as-a-whole, 
and  that  ‘emotional1  factors  are,  therefore,  always  present  and  should 
not  be  disregarded.  In  this  study,  the  reader  should  try  to  put  himself 
‘ emotionally ’  in  the  place  of  the  Smith  we  speak  about ;  then  he  cannot 
fail  to  understand  the  serious  semantic  disturbances  these  identifications 
create  in  everybody's  life. 

Let  us  begin  with  a  Smith  who  knows  nothing  of  what  has  been 
said  here,  and  who  is  not  conscious  of  abstracting.  For  him,  as  well  as 
for  Fido,  there  is,  in  principle,  no  realization  of  the  ‘characteristics  left 
out'.  He  is  ‘emotionally'  convinced  that  his  words  entirely  cover  the 
‘object'  which  ‘is  so  and  so'.  He  identifies  his  lower  abstractions  with 
characteristics  left  out,  with  higher  abstractions  which  have  all  char¬ 
acteristics  included.  He  ascribes  to  words  an  entirely  false  value 
and  certitude  which  they  cannot  have.  He  does  not  realize  that  his 
words  may  have  different  meanings  for  the  other  fellow.  He  ascribes 
to  words  ‘emotional'  objectivity  and  value,  and  the  verbal,  A  ‘perma¬ 
nence',  ‘definiteness',  ‘one- value'. ,  to  objects.  When  he  hears  something 
that  he  does  not  like,  he  does  not  ask  ‘what  do  you  mean?',  but,  under 
the  semantic  pressure  of  identification,  he  ascribes  his  own  meanings 
to  the  other  fellow’s  words.  For  him,  words  ‘are1  ‘emotionally'  over¬ 
loaded,  objectified  semantic  fetishes,  even  as  to  the  primitive  man  who 
believed  in  the  ‘magic  of  words'.  Upon  hearing  anything  strange,  his  s.r 
is  undelayed  and  may  appear  as,  ‘I  disagree  with  you',  or  T  don't  believe 
you', .  There  is  no  reason  to  be  dramatic  about  any  unwelcome  statement. 
One  needs  definitions  and  interpretations  of  such  statements,  which 
probably  are  correct  from  the  speaker's  point  of  view,  if  we  grant  him 
his  informations,  his  undefined  terms ,  the  structure  of  his  language  and 
premises  which  build  up  his  s.r.  But  our  Smith,  innocent  of  the  ‘struc¬ 
ture  of  human  knowledge’,  has  mostly  a  semantic  belief  in  the  one-value, 
absoluteness . ,  of  things,  and  thinghood  of  words,  and  does  not  know, 
or  does  not  remember ,  that  words  are  not  the  events  themselves.  Words 
represent  higher  order  abstractions  manufactured  by  higher  nerve  cen¬ 
tres,  and  objects  represent  lower  order  abstractions  manufactured  by 
lower  nerve  centres.  Under  such  identity-delusions ,  he  becomes  an  abso¬ 
lutist,  a  dogmatist,  a  finalist , .  He  seeks  to  establish  ‘ultimate  truths', 
‘eternal  verities'.,  and  is  willing  to  fight  for  them,  never  knowing  or 
remembering,  otherwise  forgetting,  the  ‘characteristics  left  out';  never 
recognizing  that  the  noises  he  makes  are  not  the  objective  actualities  we 
deal  with.  If  somebody  contradicts  him,  he  is  much  disturbed.  Forgetting 
characteristics  left  out,  he  is  always  ‘right’.  For  him  his  statement  is  not 

CONSCIOUSNESS  OF  ABSTRACTING 

only  the  only  statement  possible,  but  he  actually  attributes  some  cosmic 
objective  evaluation  to  it. 

The  above  description  is  unsatisfactory,  but  cannot  be  much  im¬ 
proved  upon,  since  the  situation  involves  un-speakable  affective  com¬ 
ponents  which  are  not  words.  We  must  simply  try  to  put  ourselves  in 
his  place,  and  to  live  through  his  experiences  when  he  identifies  and 
iK'lieves  without  question  that  his  words  ‘are’  the  things  they  only  stand 
for.  To  give  the  full  consequences  of  such  identification  resulting  in 
wrong  evaluation,  I  might  add  most  tedious  descriptions  of  the  interplay 
of  situations,  evaluations.,  in  quarrels,  unhappinesses,  disagreements., 
leading  to  dramas  and  tragedies,  as  well  as  to  many  forms  of  ‘mental’ 
illness  effectively  described  only  in  the  belles-lettres.  Thus,  Smithi,  who 
is  not  conscious  of  abstracting,  makes  the  statement,  ‘A  circle  is  not 
square*.  Let  us  suppose  that  Brown!  contradicts  him.  Smith!  is  angered; 
for  his  s.ry  his  statement  ‘is’  the  ‘plain  truth’,  and  Browni  must  be  a  fool. 

I  le  objectifies  it,  ascribes  to  it  undue  value.  For  him,  it  ‘is*  ‘experience’, 
a  ‘fact*. ,  and  he  bursts  into  speech,  denouncing  Browm  and  showing 
how  wrong  he  ‘is’.  From  this  semantic  attitude,  many  difficulties  and 
tragedies  arise. 

But  if  Smith2  (conscious  of  abstracting)  makes  the  statement,  ‘A 
circle  is  not  square’,  and  Brown2  contradicts  him,  what  would  Smith2  do? 
He  would  smile,  would  not  burst  into  speech  to  defend  his  statement, 
but  would  ask  Brown2,  ‘What  do  you  mean?  I  do  not  quite  understand 
you*.  After  receiving  some  answer,  Smith2  would  explain  to  Brown2  that 
his  statement  is  not  anything  to  quarrel  about,  as  it  is  verbal  and  is  true 
only  by  definition.  He  would  also  grant  the  right  of  Brown2  not  to 
accept  his  definition ,  but  to  use  another  one  to  satisfy  himself.  The 
problem  would  then,  naturally,  arise  as  to  what  definition  both  could 
accept,  or  which  would  be  generally  acceptable.  And  the  problem  would 
then  be  solved  by  purely  pragmatic  considerations.  Words  appear  as 
creatures  of  definitions,  and  optional ;  but  this  attitude  involves  important 
and  new  s.r . 

This  fact  seems  of  tremendous  semantic  importance,  as  it  provides 
the  working  foundation  for  a  theory  of  ‘universal  agreement’.  In  the 
first  part  of  the  above  example,  Smithi,  according  to  the  accepted  stan¬ 
dards,  was  ‘right’  (‘a  circle  is  not  square’).  Is  he  ‘more  right’  than 
Browna,  for  whom  the  ‘circle  is  square’?  Not  at  all.  Both  statements 
belong  to  the  verbal  level,  and  represent  only  forms  of  representation 
for  s.r  inside  their  skin.  Either  may  be  ‘right’  by  some  explicit  or  im¬ 
plicit  ‘definitions’.  Are  the  two  statements  equally  valid  ?  This  we  do  not 
know  a  priori;  we  must  investigate  to  find  out  if  the  noises  uttered  have 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OK  TIME-BINDING 

meanings  outside  of  pathology,  or  which  statement  structurally  covers 
the  situation  better,  carries  us  structurally  further  in  describing  and 
analysing  this  world , .  Only  scientific  structural  analysis  can  give  the 
preference  to  one  form  over  another.  Smith  and  Brown  can  only  pro¬ 
duce  their  'definitions’  according  to  their  s,r,  but  they  are  not  judges  as  to 
which  'definitions’  will  ultimately  stand  the  test  of  structure. 

The  moment  we  eliminate  identification  we  become  conscious  of 
abstracting,  and  permanently  and  instinctively  remember  that  the  object 
is  not  the  event,  that  the  label  is  not  the  object,  and  that  a  statement 
about  a  statement  is  not  the  first  statement ;  thus,  we  reach  a  semantic 
state,  where  we  recognize  that  everybody  'is  right’  by  his  own  'defini¬ 
tions’.  But  any  individual  or  unenlightened  public  opinion  is  not  the 
sole  judge  as  to  what  'definitions’  and  what  language  should  prevail. 
Only  structural  investigation  (science)  can  decide  which  appears  as  the 
structurally  more  similar  form  of  representation  on  the  verbal  levels 
for  what  is  going  on  on  the  un-speakable,  objective  levels. 

When  it  comes  to  'description  of  facts’,  the  situation  is  not  funda¬ 
mentally  altered.  Mistakes  seem  always  possible  and  often  occur.  Be¬ 
sides,  the  semantic  impressions  which  'facts*  make  on  us  are  also  indi¬ 
vidual,  and  often  in  conflict,  as  comparison  of  the  testimonies  of 
eye-witnesses  shows.  But  there  is  no  need  for  permanent  disagreement ; 
more  structural  investigation  of  the  objective  and  verbal  levels  will  pro¬ 
vide  a  solution.  Once  such  an  investigation  is  carried  far  enough,  we 
can  always  reach  a  semantic  basis  where  all  may  agree,  provided  we  do 
not  identify,  do  not  objectify,  and  do  not  confuse  description  and  infer¬ 
ence,  descriptive  and  inferential  words , . 

As  our  analysis  is  carried  out  from  the  structural  and  non-el  point 
of  view,  we  should  not  miss  the  fact  that  semantic  components  asso¬ 
ciated  with  words  and  statements  are,  outside  of  very  pathological  cases, 
never  entirely  absent,  and  become  of  paramount  importance.  In  the  older 
days,  we  had  no  simple  and  effective  means  by  which  we  could  affect 
painful,  misplaced,  or  disproportionate  evaluations,  meanings . ,  through 
a  semantic  re-education,  which  are  supplied  by  the  present  analysis  and 
the  use  of  the  Structural  Differential.  The  means  to  eliminate  identifica¬ 
tion  consist  of :  first,  an  objective  relief  diagram  to  which  we  can  point 
our  Unger;  and  second,  a  convincing  explanation  (pointing  the  finger  to 
the  labels)  that  the  verbal  levels,  with  their  distressing  and  disastrous 
older  s.rt  are  not ,  and  differ  entirely  from,  the  levels  of  objects  and 
events.  Whatever  we  may  say  or  feel,  the  objects  and  events  remain  on 
the  un-speakable  levels  and  cannot  be  reached  by  words.  Under  such 
natural  structural  conditions,  we  can  only  reach  the  objective  level  by 

CONSCIOUSNESS  OK  ABSTRACTING 

seeing,  handling,  actually  feeling . ,  and,  therefore,  by  pointing  our  finger 
to  the  object  on  the  Structural  Differential  and  being  silent — all  of  which 
cannot  be  conveyed  by  words  alone . 

In  experiments  with  the  ‘mentally'  ill  in  whom  the  semantic  disturb¬ 
ances  were  very  strong,  it  took  several  months  to  train  the  patients  in 
non-identity  and  in  silence  on  the  objective  levels.  But,  as  soon  as  this 
was  achieved,  either  complete  or  partial  relief  followed. 

The  main  disturbances  in  daily  life,  as  well  as  in  ‘mental'  illness, 
are  found  in  the  affective  field.  We  find  an  internal  pressure  of  identi¬ 
fications,  expressed  by  bursting  into  speech,  and  unjustified  semantic 
over-evaluation  of  words,  the  ascribing  of  objectivity  to  words,.  In 
such  cases,  suppression  or  repression  of  words  does  not  accomplish  much, 
but  often  does  considerable  harm  and  must  be  avoided  by  all  means. 
Under  such  conditions,  the  use  of  the  relief  diagram  becomes  a  neces¬ 
sity  in  pointing  to  the  difference  between  different  orders  of  abstractions 
and  inducing  the  semantically  beneficial  silence  on  the  ‘objective  level' 
without  repression  or  suppression. 

With  the  use  of  the  Structural  Differential,  we  can  eliminate  iden¬ 
tification,  and  so  attain  the  benefits,  avoiding  the  dangers.  If  any  one 
identifies,  and  his  s.r  drive  him  into  an  outburst  of  speech,  we  do  not 
repress  or  suppress  him ;  we  say,  instead :  ‘At  your  pleasure  [since  it 
makes  him  feel  better],  but  remember  that  your  words  occur  on  the 
verbal  levels  [showing  with  a  gesture  of  the  hands  the  hanging  labels], 
and  that  they  are  not  the  objective  level,  which  remains  untouched  and 
unchanged*.  Such  a  procedure,  when  repeated  again  and  again,  gives 
him  the  proper  semantic  evaluation  of  orders  of  abstractions,  frees  him 
from  identification ,  yet  without  repression  or  suppression .  It  teaches 
him,  also,  to  enquire  into  alleged  ‘facts’,  and  then  to  try  to  find  struc¬ 
turally  better  forms  of  representation.  If  such  results  are  not  forth¬ 
coming,  we  may  use  the  older  forms,  but  by  proper  evaluation  we  do 
not  semantically  put  ‘belief'  in  these  forms  of  representation.  Such 
beliefs  always  appear  as  the  result  of  identification  somewhere. 

The  technique  of  training  is  simple.  We  live  on  the  ‘objective'  or 
lower  order  of  abstraction  levels,  where  we  must  see,  feel,  touch,  per¬ 
form  . ,  but  never  speak.  In  training,  we  must  use  our  hands , .  It  is  very 
useful,  after  the  Structural  Differential  has  been  repeatedly  explained, 
stressing,  in  particular,  the  rejection  of  the  ‘is*  of  identity,  not  to  inter¬ 
rupt  the  other  fellow.  Let  him  speak,  but  wave  the  hand,  indicating  the 
verbal  levels;  then  point  the  finger  to  the  objective  level,  and,  with  the 
other  hand,  close  your  own  lips,  to  show  that  on  the  objective  level  one 
can  only  be  silent.  When  performed  repeatedly,  this  pantomime  has  a 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

most  beneficial,  semantic,  pacifying  effect  upon  the  ‘over-emotionalized’ 
identification-conditions.  The  neurological  mechanism  of  this  action  is 
not  fully  known,  but  some  aspects  are  quite  clear. 

The  more  elaborate  a  nervous  system  becomes,  the  further  some 
parts  of  the  brain  are  removed  from  immediate  experience.  Nerve  cur¬ 
rents,  having  finite  velocity,  eventually  have  longer  and  more  numerous 
paths  to  travel ;  different  possibilities  and  complications  arise,  resulting  in 
‘delayed  action’.  It  is  known  that  the  thalamus  (roughly)  appears  con¬ 
nected  with  affective  and  ‘emotional’  life,  and  that  the  cortex,  farther 
removed  and  isolated  from  the  external  world,  has  the  effect  of  inducing 
this  ‘delay  in  action’.  In  unbalanced  and  ‘emotional’  ‘thinking’,  which  is 
so  prevalent,  the  thalamus  seems  overworked,  the  cortex  seems  not 
worked  enough.  The  results  take  on  the  form  of  a  low  kind  of  animal¬ 
istic,  primitive,  or  infantile  behaviour,  often  of  a  pathological  character 
in  a  supposedly  civilized  adult.  It  appears  that  the  ‘silence  on  objective 
levels’  introduces  this  ‘delayed  action’,  unloading  the  thalamic  material 
on  the  cortex.  This  psychophysiological  method  is  very  simple,  scientific, 
and  entirely  general.  The  standard  ‘mental’  therapy  of  today  applies 
also  a  method  of  re-education  of  s.r,  as  if  relieving  the  thalamus,  and 
putting  more  of  the  nerve  currents  through  the  cortex,  or  eventually 
furnishing  the  cortex  with  different  material,  so  that  the  thalamic  ma¬ 
terial  returning  from  the  cortex  could  be  properly  influenced. 

If  we  succeed  in  such  a  semantic  re-education,  the  difficulties  vanish. 
The  older  experimental  data  show  that  in  many  instances  we  have  suc¬ 
ceeded,  and  that  in  many  we  have  failed.  The  successful  cases  show  that 
we  actually  know  the  essential  semantic  points  involved;  the  failures 
show  that  we  do  not  know  enough,  and  that  our  older  theories  are  not 
sufficiently  general.  At  present,  only  the  more  pronounced  and  morbid 
semantic  disturbances  come  to  the  attention  of  physicians,  and  very  little 
is  done  by  way  of  preventive  measures.  Besides  the  pronounced  disturb¬ 
ances  in  daily  life,  we  see  an  enormous  number  of  semantic  disturbances 
which  we  disregard,  and  call  ‘peculiarities’.  In  the  majority  of  cases, 
these  ‘peculiarities’  are  undesirable,  and,  under  unfavorable  conditions, 
may  lead  to  more  serious  consequences  of  a  morbid  character.  They 
usually  involve  a  great  deal  of  unhappiness  for  all  concerned,  and  un¬ 
happiness  appears  as  a  sign  of  some  semantic  maladjustment  somewhere, 
and  so  may  be  destructive  to  ‘mental’  and  nervous  health. 

In  advanced  ‘mental’  illnesses,  such  as  usually  come  to  the  attention 
of  psychiatrists,  there  are  certain  psycho-logical  symptoms  which  are 
generally  present.  The  symptoms  of  interest  to  us  in  this  work  are  called 
‘delusions’,  ‘illusions’,  and  ‘hallucinations’.  All  of  them  involve  the 

CONSCIOUSNESS  OF  ABSTRACTING 

semantic  identification  or  confusions  of  the  orders  of  abstractions ,  the 
evaluation  of  lower  orders  of  abstraction  as  higher,  or  higher  as  lower. 
It  was  explained  already  that  some  components  of  identification  are  in¬ 
variably  present  there,  and  so  identification  may  be  considered  as  an 
elementary  type  of  semantic  disturbances  from  which  all  the  other  states 
differ  only  in  intensity. 

The  main  point  is  to  find  psychophysiological  preventive  means 
whereby  this  identification  can  be  forestalled  or  eliminated.  To  date, 
experience  and  analysis  show  that  all  forms  of  identification  may  be  suc¬ 
cessfully  eliminated  by  training  in  visualization,  if  this  semantic  state 
can  be  produced.  For  this  purpose  the  Structural  Differential  is  uniquely 
useful  and  necessary.  With  its  help  we  train  all  centres.  The  lower 
centres  are  involved,  as  we  see,  feel,  hear. ;  the  higher  centres  are  equally 
involved,  as  we  ‘remember’,  ‘understand’. ;  with  the  result  that  all  centres 
work  together  without  conflict.  The  ‘consciousness  of  abstracting  is 
inculcated,  replacing  vicious  s.r  of  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions 
and  identification. 

This  harmonious  working  of  all  centres  on  their  proper  levels  has 
extremely  far-reaching,  practical  consequences  in  ‘mental  and  physical 
hygiene.  We  become  co-ordinated,  adjusted,  and  difficulties  which  might 
otherwise  occur  in  the  future  are  eliminated  in  a  preventive  way.  It 
must  be  remembered  that,  at  present,  it  is  impossible  to  foresee  to  how 
great  an  extent  the  elimination  of  identification  on  all  levels  will  have  a 
beneficial  effect.  At  this  stage  we  know  even  experimentally  that  the 
benefits  are  very  large,  but  we  may  expect  that  they  will  become  still 
more  numerous  when  more  experimenting  has  been  done.  Delusions, 
illusions,  and  hallucinations  represent  manifestations  which  occur  in  prac¬ 
tically  all  ‘mental’  difficulties,  and  they  only  represent  a  semantic  identi¬ 
fication  of  orders  of  abstractions  of  different  degrees  of  intensity.  When 
this  confusion  is  eliminated,  we  may  expect  general  changes  in  the  symp¬ 
toms.  But  as  the  correspondence  is  probably  not  one-to-onet  it  is  im¬ 
possible  to  foretell  theoretically  what  improvements  may  be  expected  in 
pronounced  illness.  In  the  slighter  disturbances,  which  affect  us  in  daily 
life,  the  results  are  much  easier  to  foresee,  and  are  always  beneficial. 

To  how  great  an  extent  the  consciousness  of  abstracting  benefits 
semantically  the  whole  organism ,  I  may  illustrate  by  one  of  my  own 
experiences.  Once  I  was  travelling  on  a  ship.  A  gentleman  visited  my 
cabin,  and,  seeing  the  Structural  Differential,  asked  questions  about  it. 
After  a  short  explanation,  he  asked  about  practical  applications. 

My  guest  was  sitting  on  my  berth ;  I  was  sitting  on  a  small  folding 
chair.  I  got  up,  went  to  the  door,  then  pretended  that  I  was  coming  in, 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

and,  at  my  suggestion,  he  said,  ‘Please  have  a  seat*.  I  remained  standing 
while  explaining  how,  if  I  were  not  ‘conscious  of  abstracting’,  to  me  his 
word  ‘seat’  would  be  identified  with  the  chair  (objectification)  and  my 
s.r  would  be  such  that  I  would  sit  down  with  great  confidence.  If  the 
chair  were  to  collapse  I  would  have,  besides  the  bump,  an  affective 
shock,  ‘fright’. ,  which  might  do  harm  to  my  nervous  system.  But  if  I 
were  conscious  of  abstracting,  my  s.r  would  be  different.  I  would  re¬ 
member  that  the  word ,  the  label  ‘seat’  is  not  the  thing  on  which  I  am 
supposed  to  sit.  I  would  remember  that  I  am  to  sit  on  this  individual, 
unique,  un-speakable  object,  which  might  be  strong  or  weak,.  Accord¬ 
ingly*  ¥  would  sit  carefully.  In  case  the  chair  should  collapse,  and  I 
should  hurt  myself  physically,  I  would  still  have  been  saved  an  affective 
nervous  shock. 

During  all  these  explanations  I  was  handling  the  little  chair  and 
shaking  it.  I  did  not  notice  that  the  legs  were  falling  out,  and  that  the 
chair  was  becoming  unfit  for  use.  Then,  when  I  actually  sat  on  the  relic, 
it  gave  way  under  me.  However,  I  did  not  fall  on  the  floor.  I  caught 
myself  in  the  air,  so  to  say,  and  saved  myself  from  a  painful  experience. 
It  is  important  to  notice  that  such  physical  readiness  requires  a  very 
elaborate,  nervous,  unconscious  co-ordination,  which  was  accomplished 
by  the  semantic  state  of  non-identification  or  consciousness  of  abstract¬ 
ing.  When  such  a  consciousness  of  abstracting  is  acquired,  it  works 
instinctively  and  automatically  and  does  not  require  continual  effort.  Its 
operation  involves  a  fraction  of  a  second’s  delay  in  action ,  but  this  small 
delay  is  not  harmful  in  practice ;  on  the  contrary,  it  has  very  important 
psycho-logical  and  neurological  ‘delayed  action’  effects. 

It  seems  that  ‘silence’  on  the  objective  levels  involves  this  psycho- 
physiological  delay.  No  matter  how  small,  it  serves  to  unload  the  thal¬ 
amic  material  on  the  cortex.  In  a  number  of  clinical  cases,  Dr.  Philip  S. 
Graven  has  demonstrated  that  the  moment  such  a  delay  can  actually  be 
produced  in  the  patient,  he  either  improves  or  is  entirely  relieved.  The 
precise  neurological  mechanism  of  this  process  is  not  known,  but  there  is 
no  doubt  that  this  ‘delayed  action’  has  many  very  beneficial  effects  upon 
the  whole  working  of  the  nervous  system.  It  somehow  balances  harmful 
s.r,  and  also  somehow  stimulates  the  higher  nervous  centres  to  more 
physiological  control  over  the  lower  centres. 

A  very  vital  point  in  this  connection  should  be  noticed.  That  this 
‘delayed  action’  is  beneficial  is  acknowledged  by  the  majority  of  nor¬ 
mally  developed  adults  in  the  form  of  delay  in  action  and  finds  its 
expression  in  such  statements  as  ‘think  twice’,  ‘keep  your  head’,  ‘hold 
your  horses’,  ‘keep  cool’,  ‘steady’,  ‘wait  a  minute’. ,  and  such  functional 

CONSCIOUSNESS  OF  ABSTRACTING 

recipes  as  ‘when  angry,  count  ten’, .  In  daily  life,  such  wisdom  is  ac¬ 
quired  either  by  painful  experience,  or  is  taught  to  children  in  an  A 
language,  which,  as  practice  shows,  is  rarely  effective  because  of  its 
inadequacy.  It  is  seldom  realized  that  the  mechanism  of  these  functional 
observations  and  familiar  advices  have  very  powerful  and  workable 
underlying  neurological  processes,  which  can  be  reached  and  directly 
affected  by  psychophysiological,  ordinal,  non-el  methods  in  connection 
with  the  structure  of  the  language  we  use .  Thus,  under  an  infantile, 
A ,  and  prevailing  system  we  use  and  teach  our  children  a  language 
involving  the  ‘is'  of  identity,  and  so  we  must  confuse  orders  of  abstrac¬ 
tions,  preparing  for  ourselves  and  the  children  the  harmful  semantic 
predispositions  for  ‘bursting  into  speech’,  instead  of  ‘wait  a  minute', 
which,  neurologically,  means  abusing  our  thalamus  and  keeping  our  cor¬ 
tex  ‘unemployed'.  In  a  A  oo-valued  system  we  reject  the  ‘is’  of  identity ; 
we  cannot  confuse  orders  of  abstractions ;  we  cannot  identify  words  with 
the  un-speakable  objective  levels  or  inferences  with  descriptions,  and  we 
cannot  identify  the  different  abstractions  of  different  individuals , .  This 
semantic  state  of  proper  evaluation  results  in  discrimination  between  the 
different  orders  of  abstractions;  an  automatic  delay  is  introduced — the 
cortex  is  switched  completely  into  the  nervous  circuit.  The  semantic 
foundation  is  laid  for  ‘higher  mentality'  and  ‘emotional  balance’. 

We  have  already  had  occasion  to  mention  the  mechanism  of  pro¬ 
jection  in  connection  with  identification,  as  a  semantic  state  of  affective 
ascribing  of  lower  centre  characteristics  to  higher  order  abstractions  and 
vice  versa,  and  in  connection  with  the  introverted  or  extroverted  attitudes. 
Likewise,  we  have  already  reached  the  conclusion  that  a  well-adjusted 
and,  therefore,  well-balanced  individual  should  be  neither  of  the  extremes, 
but  a  balanced  extroverted  introvert.  By  training  with  the  Differential 
this  important  semantic  result  may  be  brought  about.  By  training  with 
the  ‘object’  on  its  level,  we  become  extroverted,  and  we  learn  to  observe ; 
this  results  in  semantic  freedom  from  ‘preconceived  ideas',  such  as  we 
have  when  we  start  with  the  evaluation,  label  first  and  object  next,  in¬ 
stead  of  the  natural  order,  object  first  and  label  next.  By  passing  to 
higher  order  abstractions  and  evaluating  the  successive  ranks  of  labels, 
we  train  in  introversion.  The  result,  as  a  whole,  is  that  we  may  achieve 
the  desirable  and  balanced  semantic  state  of  the  extroverted  introvert. 

That  in  the  training  with  the  Differential  we  use  all  available  nerve 
centres  is  beneficial,  because  the  lower  centres  are  in  closer  connection 
with  the  vegetative  nervous  system  than  are  the  others. 

CHAPTER  XXVII 

HIGHER  ORDER  ABSTRACTIONS 

The  characters  which  science  discerns  in  nature  are  subtle  characters, 
not  obvious  at  first  sight.  They  are  relations  of  relations  and  characters 
of  characters.  (573)  A.  N.  whitehead 

In  this  connection  one  should  particularly  remember  that  the  human 
language  permits  the  construction  of  sentences  which  do  not  involve  any 
consequences  and  which  therefore  have  no  content  at  all — in  spite  of  the 
fact  that  these  sentences  produce  some  kind  of  picture  in  our  imagination; 
e.  g.,  the  statement  that  besides  our  world  there  exists  another  world,  with 
which  any  connection  is  impossible  in  principle,  does  not  lead  to  any  ex¬ 
perimental  consequence,  but  does  produce  a  kind  of  picture  in  the  mind. 
Obviously  such  a  statement  can  neither  be  proved  nor  disproved.  One 
should  be  especially  careful  in  using  the  words  “reality,”  “actually,”  etc., 
since  these  words  very  often  lead  to  statements  of  the  type  just  mentioned. 

(215)  W.  HEISENBERG 

Section  A.  General . 

In  the  previous  chapters  I  demonstrated  that  there  is  a  short  cut 
which  enables  us  to  grasp,  acquire,  and  apply  what  has  been  advanced 
in  the  present  work.  This  semantic  short  cut  is  ‘consciousness  of  ab¬ 
stracting'.  It  is  a  psycho-logical  attitude  toward  all  our  abstracting  on 
all  levels,  and  so  involves  the  co-ordinated  working  of  the  organism- 
as-a-whole. 

The  use  of  the  Structural  Differential  is  necessary,  because  some 
levels  are  un-speakable;  We  can  see  them,  handle  them,  feel  them . ,  but 
under  no  circumstances  can  we  reach  those  levels  by  speech  alone.  We 
must,  therefore,  have  a  diagram,  by  preference  in  relief  form,  which 
represents  the  empirical  structural  conditions,  and  which  indicates  the 
un-speakable  level  by  some  other  means  than  speech.  We  must,  in  the 
simplest  case,  either  point  our  finger  to  the  object,  insisting  upon  silence, 
or  must  perform  bodily  some  activity  and  similarly  insist  upon  silence, 
as  the  performing  and  feelings  are  also  not  words. 

In  such  semantic  training  it  is  enough  to  insist  upon  the  non¬ 
identity  or  the  difference  between  the  objective,  un-speakable  levels  of 
lower  order  abstractions,  (0*),  and  the  verbal  or  higher  order  abstrac¬ 
tions,  (Ln).  When  this  habit  and  feeling  are  acquired,  no  one  should 
have  difficulties  in  extending  the  non-identity  method  to  daily-life  occur¬ 
rences.  To  achieve  these  semantic  aims,  we  must  first  emphasize  the 
common-sense  fact  that  an  object  is  not  the  event.  To  do  this,  we  start 
with  the  1933  scientific  structural  ‘metaphysics'  about  the  event  and 

HKillKK  <>R1)KR  ABSTRACTIONS 

stress  the  fact  that  the  ob¬ 
ject,  being  a  nervous  ab¬ 
straction  of  lower  order, 
has  fewer  and  different 
m.o  characteristics  than 
the  event  has.  This  is  best 
accomplished  by  stressing 
the  fact  that  in  abstract¬ 
ing  from  the  event  to  the 
object  we  left  out  some 
characteristics.  We  did  not 
abstract  * all *  characteris¬ 
tics;  this  would  be  a  self- 
contradiction  in  terms,  an 
impossibility. 

We  do  not  even  need 
to  stress  a  full  understand¬ 
ing  of  the  event.  Common- 
sense  examples,  showing 
that  what  we  recognize  as 
a  'pencil'  is  not  'all',  often 
suffice.  No  one  will  have 
difficulties,  provided  he 
trains  himself  in  this  di¬ 
rection,  ,in  remembering 
continually  and  instinc¬ 
tively  the  free  hanging 
strings  (B'),  (B"),  which 
indicate  the  non-abstracted 
or  left-out  characteristics 
and  which  help  to  train  in  non-identity.  With  the  relief  diagram,  the  s.r 
of  the  student  are  trained  through  all  nervous  centres .  He  sees,  he 
handles . ,  the  hanging  strings,  and  he  also  hears  about  them.  This  gives 
the  maximum  probability  that  the  organism-as-a-whole  will  be  affected. 
In  this  way  an  ‘intellectual'  theory  engages  the  ‘senses',  feelings,  and 
reflex  mechanisms.  To  affect  the  organism-as-a-whole,  organism-as-a- 
whole  methods  must  be  employed. 

A  similar  structural  situation  is  found  when  we  deal  with  higher 
order  abstractions.  A  word,  or  a  name,  or  a  statement  is  conveyed  in 
spoken  form  or  by  writing,  and  affects  first  the  lower  centres  and  then 
is  abstracted,  and  again  transformed,  by  the  higher  centres.  The  order 

Fig.  1 

The  Structural  Differential 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

is  generally  not  changed  when  the  verbal  issues  are  neither  seen  nor 
heard  but  originate  in  ourselves.  Most  ‘impulses’,  ‘interests’,  ‘meanings’, 
‘evaluations’. ,  originate  in  lower  centres  and  follow  the  usual  course, 
from  lower  centres  to  higher.  When  ‘experience’  (reaction  of  lower 
centres)  is  transformed  into  ‘memories’  (higher  centres) . ,  the  order  is 
similar.  Difficulties  begin  when  the  order  is  pathologically  reversed  and 
‘ideas’  are  evaluated  as  experience,  words  as  objects , .  In  the  building  of 
language  a  similar  process  can  be  observed.  We  observe  the  absolute 
individuals  with  which  we  actually  deal,  we  label  them  with  individual 
names,  say,  Alf  A2,  . .  .  ,  An,  A12,  .  .  .  ,  A21,  A22, . . . ,  A3i,  A32, .  . . , .  By 
a  process  of  abstracting  and  disregarding ,  for  instance,  the  characteristic 
subscripts  ‘1*,  we  would  have  only  the  ones  which  have  the  character¬ 
istic  subscripts  2,  3,  .  .  .  ,  9,  22,  23,  .  .  .  ,  29 , .  Disregarding  the  charac¬ 
teristic  subscripts  ‘2’,  we  would  have  the  ones  with  the  characteristics 
3,  4,  .  .  .  ,  9,  33,  34,  .  .  .  ,  39 , .  Finally,  if  we  should  eliminate  all  indi¬ 
vidual  characteristic  subscripts,  we  would  have  a  ‘general’  name  A  for 
the  whole  group  without  singling  out  individual  characteristics. 

All  words  of  the  type  of  ‘man’,  ‘animal’,  ‘house’,  ‘chair’,  ‘pencil’. , 
have  been  built  by  a  similar  process  of  abstraction,  or  disregard  for 
individual  differences.  In  each  case  of  disregard  of  individual  charac¬ 
teristics  a  new  neurological  process  was  involved. 

Similarly,  with  ‘statements  about  a  statement’.  When  we  hear  a 
statement,  or  see  it  in  a  written  form,  such  a  statement  becomes  a  stimu¬ 
lus  entering  through  the  lower  centres,  and  a  statement  about  it  repre¬ 
sents,  in  general,  a  new  process  of  abstraction,  or  an  abstraction  of 
higher  order. 

It  becomes  obvious  that  the  introduction  of  a  language  of  ‘different 
order  of  abstractions’,  although  it  is  not  familiar,  yet  structurally  it 
represents  very  closely,  in  terms  of  order ,  most  fundamental  neuro¬ 
logical  processes  going  on  in  us.  As  we  already  know,  a  natural  order 
has  been  established  by  evolution ;  namely,  lower  order  abstractions  first, 
higher  next;  the  identifications  of  orders  or  the  reversal  of  orders  ap¬ 
pears  pathological  for  man  and  appears  as  a  confusion  of  orders  of 
abstractions,  resulting  in  false  evaluation:  identification,  illusions,  delu¬ 
sions,  and  hallucinations. 

Historically,  the  first  to  pay  serious  attention  to  the  above  problems 
in  a  consistent,  yet  very  limited,  way  were  mathematicians.  In  the 
investigation  of  the  problems  of  the  foundation  of  mathematics,  mathe¬ 
matical  ‘logic*,  and  the  theory  of  aggregates,  we  came  across  self-con¬ 
tradictions  which  would  make  mathematics  impossible.  To  avoid  such 
a  disaster,  Russell  invented  what  is  called  the  ‘theory  of  mathematical 

HIGHER  ORDER  ABSTRACTIONS 

types’.  The  status  of  this  theory  is  a  very  interesting  and  instructive 
one.  The  theory  solves  the  mathematical  difficulties,  thus  saving  mathe¬ 
matics,  but  has  no  application  to  life.  Practically  all  mathematicians,  if  I 
am  not  mistaken,  the  author  of  the  theory  included,  somehow  ‘dislike* 
the  theory  and  make  efforts  to  solve  the  problems  in  a  different  way  and 
possibly  to  abandon  the  theory  altogether. 

We  have  already  shown  that  the  introduction  of  a  language  of 
‘different  orders  of  abstractions’  is  structurally  entirely  justified  and 
physiologically  natural,  as  it  describes,  in  terms  of  order,  the  activities 
of  the  nervous  system.  Such  facts  are  important ;  but  if,  in  addition,  the 
introduction  of  a  language  of  a  new  A  structure  would  give  us  further 
demonstrable  advantages,  then  the  introduction  of  such  a  language  would 
become  increasingly  desirable. 

Although  the  majority  of  mathematicians  ‘dislike’  the  theory  of 
types,  yet,  at  present,  this  theory  is  unconditionally  necessary  for  non- 
self -contradictory  mathematics.  The  author  was  pleasantly  surprised  to 
find  that  after  his  ^-system  was  formulated,  this  simple  and  natural, 
actional,  functional,  operational,  non-el  theory  covers  the  theory  of 
mathematical  types  and  generalizes  it,  making  the  theory  applicable  not 
only  to  the  solution  of  mathematical  paradoxes  but  to  the  solution  of  the 
majority  of  purely  human  and  scientific  difficulties.  One  general  rule  of 
‘non-confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions’,  and  the  acquiring  of  the  simple 
and  workable  ‘consciousness  of  abstracting’  based  on  the  denial  of  the 
‘is’  of  identity,  offers  a  full  structural  and  semantic  solution.  The  dis¬ 
regard  of  the  issues  involved  leads  fatalistically  to  the  manufacture  of 
endless  and  unnecessary  human  sufferings  and  unhappiness,  the  elimina¬ 
tion  of  which  is  one  of  the  main  points  in  a  theory  of  sanity.  There  is 
no  mystery  in  1933  that  continuous  small  painful  shocks  may  lead  to 
serious  semantic  and  physical  disturbances.  Psycho-logicians  and  psychi¬ 
atrists  will  find  it  increasingly  difficult  to  work  at  their  problems  if  they 
disregard  these  semantic  issues.  Parents  arid  teachers  will  find  simple 
yet  effective  structural  means  for  training  the  reactions  of  children  in 
sanity ,  with  all  the  ensuing  semantic  benefits  to  the  individuals  and  to 
society. 

When  Whitehead  and  Russell  were  working  at  the  foundations  of 
mathematics,  they  came  across  endless  paradoxes  and  self-contradictions, 
which,  of  course,  would  make  mathematics  impossible.  After  many 
efforts  they  found  that  all  these  paradoxes  had  one  general  source,  in 
the  rough,  in  the  expressions  which  involve  the  word  ‘all’,  and  the  Solu¬ 
tion  was  found  by  introducing  ‘non-allness’,  a  semantic  forerunner  of 
non-identity.  Consider,  for  example,  ‘a  proposition  about  all  proposi- 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

tions’.  They  found  that  such  totalities,  or  such  ‘air  statements,  were  not 
legitimate,  as  they  involved  a  self-contradiction  to  start  with.  A  propo¬ 
sition  cannot  be  made  legitimately  about  ‘air  propositions  without  some 
restriction,  since  it  would  have  to  include  the  new  proposition  which  is 
being  made.  If  we  consider  a  m.o  term  like  ‘propositions’,  which  we  can 
manufacture  without  known  limits,  and  remember  that  any  statement 
about  propositions  takes  the  form  of  a  proposition,  then  obviously  we 
cannot  make  statements  about  all  propositions.  In  such  a  case  the  state¬ 
ment  must  be  limited ;  such  a  set  has  no  total,  and  a  statement  about  ‘all 
its  members’  cannot  be  made  legitimately.  Similarly,  we  cannot  speak 
about  all  numbers. 

Statements  such  as  ‘a  proposition  about  dll  propositions’  have  been 
called  by  Russell  ‘illegitimate  totalities’.  In  such  cases,  it  is  necessary 
to  break  up  the  set  into  smaller  sets,  each  of  which  is  capable  of  having 
a  totality.  This  represents,  in  the  main,  what  the  theory  of  types  aims 
to  accomplish.  In  the  language  of  the  Princtpia  Mathematica,  the  prin¬ 
ciple  which  enables  us  to  avoid  the  illegitimate  totalities  may  be  expressed 
as  follows :  ‘Whatever  involves  all  of  a  collection  must  not  be  one  of  the 
collection’,  or,  ‘If,  provided  a  certain  collection  had  a  total,  it  would  have 
members  only  definable  in  terms  of  that  total,  then  the  said  collection 
has  no  total’.1  The  above  principle  is  called  the  ‘vicious-circle  principle’, 
because  it  allows  us  to  evade  the  vicious  circles  which  the  introduction 
of  illegitimate  totalities  involve.  Russell  calls  the  arguments  which  in¬ 
volve  the  vicious-circle  principle,  ‘vicious-circle  fallacies’. 

As  an  example,  Russell  gives  the  two-valued  law  of  ‘excluded 
third’,  formulated  in  the  form  that  ‘all  propositions  are  true  or  false’. 
We  involve  a  vicious-circle  fallacy  if  we  argue  that  the  law  of  excluded 
third  takes  the  form  of  a  proposition,  and,  therefore,  may  be  evaluated 
as  true  or  false.  Before  we  can  make  any  statement  about  ‘all  proposi¬ 
tions’  legitimate,  we  must  limit  it  in  some  way  so  that  a  statement  about 
this  totality  must  fall  outside  this  totality. 

Another  example  of  a  vicious-circle  fallacy  may  be  given  as  that  of 
the  imaginary  sceptic  who  asserts  that  he  knows  nothing,  but  is  refuted 
by  the  question — does  he  know  that  he  knows  nothing?  Before  the  state¬ 
ment  of  the  sceptic  becomes  significant,  he  must  limit,  somehow,  the 
number  of  facts  concerning  which  he  asserts  his  ignorance,  which  repre¬ 
sent  an  illegitimate  totality.  When  such  a  limitation  is  imposed,  and  he 
asserts  that  he  is  ignorant  of  an  extensional  series  of  propositions,  of 
which  the  proposition  about  his  ignorance  is  not  a  member,  then  such 
scepticism  cannot  be  refuted  in  the  above  way. 

HIGHER  ORDER  ABSTRACTIONS 

We  do  not  need  to  enter  into  further  details  concerning  the  elabo¬ 
rate  and  difficult  theory  of  types.  In  my  A  psychophysiologicai  formula¬ 
tion,  the  theory  becomes  structurally  extremely  simple  and  natural,  and 
applies  to  mathematics  as  well  as  to  a  very  large  number  of  daily  experi¬ 
ences,  eliminating  an  unbelievably  large  number  of  misunderstandings, 
vicious  circles,  and  other  semantic  sources  of  human  disagreements  and 
unhappiness. 

It  should  be  noticed  that,  in  the  given  examples,  we  always  made  a 
■tutement  about  another  statement,  and  that  the  vicious  circle  arose 
from  identifying  or  from  the  confusion  of  the  orders  of  statements. 
1  he  way  out  is  found  in  the  consciousness  of  abstracting,  which  leads  to 
the  semantic  discrimination  between  orders  of  abstractions.  If  we  have 
certain  propositions,  pu  p2t  p3t  .  .  .  pn ,  and  make  a  new  proposition  about 
these  propositions,  say  P,  then,  according  to  the  present  theory,  the 
statement  P  about  the  statements  pu  p2 . ,  must  be  considered  as  an 
abstraction  of  higher  order,  and  so  different,  and  must  not  be  identified 
an  to  order  with  the  propositions  pu  p2,  .  .  .  />». 

The  above  psychophysiologicai  formulation  is  entirely  general,  yet 
simple  and  natural  in  a  ^-system.  To  make  this  clearer,  I  shall  take  sev¬ 
eral  statements  concerning  the  theory  of  types  from  the  Principia 
Mathematica ,  shall  designate  them  by  (Pr.),  shall  reformulate  them  in 
my  language  of  orders  of  abstractions ,  and  shall  designate  them  as  gen¬ 
eral  semantics  (G.  S.). 

Thus,  ‘The  vicious  circles  in  question  arise  from  supposing  that  a 
collection  of  objects  may  contain  members  which  can  only  be  defined 
by  means  of  the  collection  as  a  whole*  (Pr.).  Objects  as  individuals 
and  ‘collections  of  objects*  obviously  belong  to  different  orders  of  ab¬ 
ut  ractions  and  should  not  be  confused  (G.S.).  A  ‘Proposition  about  all 
propositions’  (Pr.).  This  involves  a  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions, 
for  if  we  posit  propositions  pu  p2y  .  .  .  pn,  then  a  proposition  P  about 
these  propositions  represents  a  higher  order  abstraction  and  should  not 
be  identified  with  them  (G.S.).  ‘More  generally,  given  any  set  of  objects 
such  that,  if  we  suppose  the  set  to  have  a  total,  it  will  contain  members 
which  presuppose  this  total,  then  such  a  set  cannot  have  a  total.  By 
saying  that  a  set  has  “no  total”,  we  mean,  primarily,  that  no  significant 
statement  can  be  made  about  “all  its  members”  ’  (Pr.).  A  set  of  state¬ 
ments  or  objects  or  elements,  or  the  like,  and  a  statement  about  them 
Iwlong  to  different  orders  of  abstractions  and  should  not  be  confused 
(G.S.).  In  the  language  of  Wittgenstein:  ‘No  proposition  can  say  any¬ 
thing  about  itself,  because  the  propositional  sign  cannot  be  contained  in 
Itself  (that  is  the  “whole  theory  of  types”).’2 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

In  the  language  of  the  present  general  semantics  a  statement  about 
a  statement  is  not  the  ‘same’  statement,  but  represents,  by  structural  and 
neurological  necessity,  a  higher  order  of  abstraction,  and  should  not  be 
confused  with  the  original  statement. 

Similar  reformulations  apply  to  all  cases  given  in  the  Principia 
Mathematica,  and  so  it  becomes  evident  that  the  present  theory  covers 
a  similar  ground  as  the  theory  of  types,  and  also  covers  an  endless  list 
of  daily-life  applications  which  are  of  crucial  semantic  importance  in  a 
theory  of  sanity.  We  must  stress  here  a  simple,  natural,  and  single 
semantic  law  of  non-identity  which  covers  all  confusions  of  orders  of 
abstraction .  This  one  rule  and  training  teach  us  not  to  confuse  the  higher 
orders  with  the  lower,  not  to  identify  words  with  objects  (not  to  ob¬ 
jectify),  as  well  as  not  to  confuse  higher  abstractions  of  different  orders. 
This  generality  and  structural  simplicity  constitute  an  argument  in  favor 
of  the  present  A- system.  It  is  easier  to  teach  a  single,  simple,  and  natural 
rule  which  covers  a  vast  field  of  semantic  sources  of  human  difficulties. 
For  when  the  rule  is  explained,  and  the  learner  is  trained  with  the 
Structural  Differential,  the  semantic  problem  resolves  itself  simply  into 
the  showing  with  one’s  finger  different  orders  of  abstractions,  and  insist¬ 
ing  that  ‘this  is  not  this'. 

If  we  consider  the  natural,  structural,  and  empirical  fact  that  our 
lives  are  lived  in  a  world  of  non-identical  abstractions  of  different 
orders,  the  discrimination  between  different  orders  becomes  of  para¬ 
mount  semantic  importance  for  evaluation.  Under  such  conditions  we 
should  become  thoroughly  acquainted  with  the  mechanism  of  these  dif¬ 
ferent  orders  of  abstractions.  We  should  notice,  first,  that  the  language 
of  the  Principia  Mathematica  is  Ay  and  involves  the  ‘is’  of  identity,. 
Such  a  language  leads  to  identifications  and  to  confusions,  and  makes 
simple  issues  difficult  and  perplexing.  The  term  ‘class’  is  very  confusing. 
What  do  we  mean  by  this  term  ?  In  life  we  have,  and  deal  with,  indi¬ 
viduals  on  objective,  un-speakable  levels.  If  we  take  a  number  of  indi¬ 
viduals,  we  have  a  number  of  them,  yet  they  all  remain  individual.  If 
we  produce  an  abstraction  of  higher  order,  so  that  the  individuality  of 
each  member  is  lost,  then  we  have  an  abstraction  of  a  higher  order 
(‘idea’  in  the  old  language),  but  no  more  the  absolute  individuals  of  our 
collection.  The  term  ‘class’  in  this  respect  is  seriously  confusing,  as  it 
tends  to  conceal  a  simple  experimental  fact,  and  leads  to  confusion  of 
the  orders  of  abstractions  if  the  multiordinality  of  the  term  ‘class’  is  not 
formulated. 

Many  critics  and  reviewers  of  the  Principia  Mathematica  somehow 
feel  this  to  be  so,  but  their  criticisms  are  not  bold  enough,  and  do  not 

HIGHER  ORDER  ABSTRACTIONS 

go  to  the  roots  of  the  A  semantic  difficulty.  They  do  not  pay  attention 
to  the  Af  ‘logical’,  ‘philosophical’,  and  ‘psychological’  elementalistic 
method  and  language  involving  the  ‘is’  of  identity,  in  which  the  Intro¬ 
duction  of  the  Principia  is  written.  Doctor  Alonzo  Church  is  the  first, 
as  far  as  my  knowledge  goes,  to  suggest  that,  following  Peano,  numbers 
should  be  defined  in  the  language  of  abstractions.  He  does  not  carry  his 
analysis  further,  however,  and  does  not  state  that  it  involves  a  language 
of  entirely  different  A  structure.3  If  we  abandon  the  term  ‘class’  and 
accept  the  language  of  ‘abstractions  of  different  orders’,  then  we  are  led 
to  the  rejection  of  the  ‘is’  of  identity  and  to  the  present  system,  of  which 
the  theory  of  mathematical  types  becomes  a  necessary  part.  The  prob¬ 
lems  of  ‘class’  cease  to  be  an  ‘assumption’,  as  the  different  orders  of 
abstractions  are  descriptions  of  experimental  facts ;  and  so  the  ‘axiom 
of  reducibility’  becomes  unnecessary.  In  my  language,  this  axiom  is 
also  an  aristotelian  description  of  the  experimental  fact  that  we  can 
abstract  in  different  orders. 

Section  B .  Multiordinal  terms . 

In  the  examples  given  in  Section  A,  we  used  words  such  as  ‘propo¬ 
sition’,  which  were  applied  to  all  higher  order  abstractions.  We  have  al¬ 
ready  seen  that  such  terms  may  have  different  uses  or  meanings  if 
applied  to  different  orders  of  abstractions.  Thus  originates  what  I  call 
the  multiordinality  of  terms.  The  words  ‘yes’,  ‘no’,  ‘true’,  ‘false’,  ‘func¬ 
tion’,  ‘property’,  ‘relation’,  ‘number’,  ‘difference’,  ‘name’,  ‘definition’, 
‘abstraction*,  ‘proposition’,  ‘fact’,  ‘reality’,  ‘structure’,  ‘characteristic’, 
‘problem’,  ‘to  know’,  ‘to  think’,  ‘to  speak’,  ‘to  hate’,  ‘to  love*,  ‘to  doubt’, 
‘cause’,  ‘effect’,  ‘meaning’,  ‘evaluation’,  and  an  endless  array  of  the  most 
important  terms  we  have,  must  be  considered  as  multiordinal  terms . 
There  is  a  most  important  semantic  characteristic  of  these  m,o  terms; 
namely,  that  they  are  ambiguous,  or  oo-valued,  in  general,  and  that  each 
has  a  definite  meaning,  or  one  value,  only  and  exclusively  in  a  given 
context,  when  the  order  of  abstraction  can  be  definitely  indicated. 

These  issues  appear  extremely  simple  and  general,  a  part  and  parcel 
of  the  structure  of  ‘human  knowledge’  and  of  our  language.  We  cannot 
avoid  these  semantic  issues,  and,  therefore,  the  only  way  left  is  to  face 
them  explicitly.  The  test  for  the  multiordinality  of  a  term  is  simple.  Let 
us  make  any  statement  and  see  if  a  given  term  applies  to  it  (‘true’, 
‘false*,  ‘yes’,  ‘no’,  ‘fact’,  ‘reality’,  ‘to  think’,  ‘to  love’,.).  If  it  does,  let 
us  deliberately  make  another  statement  about  the  former  statement  and 
test  if  the  given  term  may  be  used  again.  If  so,  it  is  a  safe  assertion 
that  this  term  should  be  considered  as  m.o.  Any  one  can  test  such  a  m.o 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

term  by  himself  without  any  difficulty.  The  main  point  about  all  such 
m.o  terms  is  that,  in  general >  they  are  ambiguous ,  and  that  all  arguments 
about  them,  ‘in  general’,  lead  only  to  identification  of  orders  of  abstrac¬ 
tions  and  semantic  disturbances,  and  nowhere  else.  Multiordinal  terms 
have  only  definite  meanings  on  a  given  level  and  in  a  given  context. 
Before  we  can  argue  about  them,  we  must  fix  their  orders,  whereupon 
the  issues  become  simple  and  lead  to  agreement.  As  to  ‘orders  of  ab¬ 
straction',  we  have  no  possibility  of  ascertaining  the  ‘absolute'  order  of 
an  abstraction ;  besides,  we  never  need  it.  In  human  semantic  difficulties, 
in  science,  as  well  as  in  private  life,  usually  no  more  than  three,  perhaps 
even  two,  neighbouring  levels  require  consideration.  When  it  comes  to 
a  serious  discussion  of  some  problem,  errors,  ambiguity,  confusion,  and 
disagreement  follow  from  confusing  or  identifying  the  neighbouring 
levels.  In  practice,  it  becomes  extremely  simple  to  settle  these  three  (or 
two)  levels  and  to  keep  them  separated,  provided  we  are  conscious  of 
abstracting,  but  not  otherwise . 

For  a  theory  of  sanity,  these  issues  seem  important  and  structurally 
essential.  In  identifications,  delusions,  illusions,  and  hallucinations,  we 
have  found  a  confusion  between  the  orders  of  abstractions  or  a  false 
evaluation  expressed  as  a  reversal  of  the  natural  order. 

One  of  the  symptoms  of  this  confusion  manifests  itself  as  ‘false 
beliefs',  which  again  imply  comparison  of  statements  about  ‘facts'  and 
‘reality',  and  involve  such  terms  as  ‘yes',  ‘no',  ‘true',  ‘false', .  As  all  these 
terms  are  multiordinal,  and,  therefore,  ambiguous,  ‘general'  ‘philosophi¬ 
cal'  rigmaroles  should  be  avoided.  With  the  consciousness  of  abstracting, 
and,  therefore,  with  a  feel  for  this  peculiar  stratification  of  ‘human 
knowledge',  all  semantic  problems  involved  can  be  settled  simply. 

The  avoidance  of  m.o  terms  is  impossible  and  undesirable.  Sys¬ 
tematic  ambiguity  of  the  most  important  terms  follows  systematic 
analogy.  They  appear  as  a  direct  result  and  condition  of  our  powers 
of  abstracting  in  different  orders,  and  allow  us  to  apply  one  chain  of 
oo-valued  reasoning  to  an  endless  array  of  different  one-valued  facts,  all 
of  which  are  different  and  become  manageable  only  through  our  ab¬ 
stracting  powers. 

For  further  details  about  the  theory  of  types,  the  reader  is  referred 
to  the  literature  on  the  subject  and  Supplement  II4  ;  here  I  shall  give 
only  a  few  examples  of  the  complexities  and  difficulties  inherent  in  lan¬ 
guage,  and  show  how  simply  they  become  solved  by  the  aid  of  A  gen¬ 
eral  semantics  and  the  resulting  ‘consciousness  of  abstracting'. 

As  an  example,  I  quote  Russell's  analysis  of  the  ‘simple'  statement 
‘I  am  lying',  as  given  in  the  Principia .  ‘The  oldest  contradiction  of  the 

HIGHER  ORDER  ABSTRACTIONS 

kind  in  question  is  the  Epimenides .  Epimenides  the  Cretan  said  that  all 
Cretans  were  liars,  and  all  other  statements  made  by  Cretans  were  cer¬ 
tainly  lies.  Was  this  a  lie?  The  simplest  form  of  this  contradiction  is 
afforded  by  the  man  who  says  “I  am  lying” ;  if  he  is  lying,  he  is  speaking 
the  truth,  and  vice  versa. . . . 

'When  a  man  says  “I  am  lying”,  we  may  interpret  his  statement 
as :  “There  is  a  proposition  which  I  am  affirming  and  which  is  false.” 
That  is  to  say,  he  is  asserting  the  truth  of  some  value  of  the  function 
“I  assert  p ,  and  p  is  false.”  But  we  saw  that  the  word  “false”  is  ambigu¬ 
ous,  and  that,  in  order  to  make  it  unambiguous,  we  must  specify  the 
order  of  falsehood,  or,  what  comes  to  the  same  thing,  the  order  of  the 
proposition  to  which  falsehood  is  ascribed.  We  saw  also  that,  if  p  is  a 
proposition  of  the  «th  order,  a  proposition  in  which  p  occurs  as  an 
apparent  variable  is  not  of  the  «th  order,  but  of  a  higher  order.  Hence 
the  kind  of  truth  or  falsehood  which  can  belong  to  the  statement  “there 
is  a  proposition  p  which  I  am  affirming  and  which  has  falsehood  of  the 
nth  order”  is  truth  or  falsehood  of  a  higher  order  than  the  nth.  Hence 
the  statement  of  Epimenides  does  not  fall  within  its  own  scope,  and 
therefore  no  contradiction  emerges. 

Tf  we  regard  the  statement  “I  am  lying”  as  a  compact  way  of 
simultaneously  making  all  the  following  statements :  “I  am  asserting  a 
false  proposition  of  the  first  order,”  “I  am  asserting  a  false  proposition 
of  the  second  order,”  and  so  on,  we  find  the  f  ollowing  curious  state  of 
things :  As  no  proposition  of  the  first  order  is  being  asserted,  the  state¬ 
ment  “I  am  asserting  a  false  proposition  of  the  first  order”  is  false. 
This  statement  is  of  the  second  order,  hence  the  statement  "I  am  mak¬ 
ing  a  false  statement  of  the  second  order”  is  true.  This  is  a  statement 
of  the  third  order,  and  is  the  only  statement  of  the  third  order  which  is 
being  made.  Hence  the  statement  “I  am  making  a  false  statement  of  the 
third  order”  is  false.  Thus  we  see  that  the  statement  “I  am  making  a 
false  statement  of  order  2n+  1”  is  false,  while  the  statement  “I  am 
making  a  false  statement  of  order  2n”  is  true.  But  in  this  state  of  things 
there  is  no  contradiction/5 

Clearly,  if  we  should  apply  the  language  of  orders  of  abstractions 
to  the  above  case,  a  similar  outcome  is  reached  more  generally  and  more 
simply.  If  we  should  confuse  the  orders  of  abstractions,  we  might 
naturally  have  an  endless  argument  at  hand  This  example  shows  how 
a  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions  might  lead  to  insoluble  verbal 
problems,  and  how  semantically  important  it  is  that  we  should  not  iden¬ 
tify,  and  that  we  should  be  conscious  of  abstracting,  with  the  resulting 
instinctive  feeling  for  this  peculiar  structural  stratification  of  'human 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

knowledge*.  We  should  notice  that  with  the  confusion  of  orders  of 
abstractions,  and  by  the  use  of  m.o  terms,  without  realizing  their 
go -valued  character,  we  may  always  construct  an  endless  array  of  such 
verbal  arguments  to  befog  the  issues,  but  that  as  soon  as  we  assign  a 
definite  order  to  the  m.o  terms,  and  so  settle  a  specific  single  meaning  in 
a  given  context  for  the  many  meanings  any  m.o  term  may  have,  the  dif¬ 
ficulties  vanish. 

As  the  above  analysis  applies  to  all  m.o  terms,  and  these  terms  hap¬ 
pen  to  be  most  important  in  our  lives,  there  is  no  use  in  trying  to  avoid 
these  terms  and  the  consequences  of  using  them.  Quite  the  contrary; 
often  it  is  structurally  necessary  to  build  a  m.o  term — for  instance, 
‘abstracting* — we  must  take  for  granted  that  it  has  many  meanings,  and 
indicate  these  meanings  by  assigning  to  the  term  the  definite  order  of 
abstraction.  Thus,  such  a  term  as  ‘abstracting*  or  ‘characteristic*., 
might  be  confusing  and  troublesome;  but  ‘abstracting  in  different 
orders*. ,  is  not,  as  in  a  given  context  we  may  always  assign  the  definite 
order  and  single  meaning  to  the  term. 

It  has  been  repeatedly  said  that  a  m.o  term  has,  by  structural  neces¬ 
sity,  many  meanings.  No  matter  how  we  define  it,  its  definition  is  again 
based  on  other  m.o  terms.  If  we  try  to  give  a  general  'meaning*  to  a 
m.o  term,  which  it  cannot  have,  further  and  deeper  analysis  would  dis¬ 
close  the  multiordinality  of  the  terms  by  which  it  is  defined,  restoring 
once  more  its  multiordinality.  As  there  is  no  possibility  of  avoiding  the 
above  structural  issue,  it  is  more  correct  and  also  more  expedient  to 
recognize  at  once  the  fundamental  multiordinality  of  a  term.  If  we  do 
so,  we  shall  not  get  confused  as  to  the  meaning  of  such  a  term  in  a  given 
context,  because,  in  principle,  in  a  context  its  meaning  is  single  and  fixed 
by  that  context. 

The  semantic  benefits  of  such  a  recognition  of  multiordinality  are, 
in  the  main,  sevenfold:  (1)  we  gain  an  enormous  economy  of  'time*  and 
effort,  as  we  stop  ‘the  hunting  of  the  snark*,  usually  called  ‘philosophy*, 
or  for  a  one-valued  general  definition  of  a  m.o  term,  which  would  not 
be  formulated  in  other  m.o  terms;  (2)  we  acquire  great  versatility  in 
expression,  as  our  most  important  vocabulary  consists  of  m.o  terms, 
which  can  be  extended  indefinitely  by  assigning  many  different  orders 
and,  therefore,  meanings;  (3)  we  recognize  that  a  definition  of  a  m.o 
term  must,  by  necessity,  represent  not  a  proposition  but  a  propositional 
function  involving  variables;  (4)  we  do  not  need  to  bother  much  about 
formal  definitions  of  a  m.o  term  outside  of  mathematics,  but  may  use 
the  term  freely,  realizing  that  its  unique,  in  principle,  meaning  in  a  given 
context  is  structurally  indicated  by  the  context;  (5)  under  such  struc- 

HIGHER  ORDER  ABSTRACTIONS 

tural  conditions,  the  freedom  of  the  writer  or  speaker  becomes  very 
much  accentuated ;  his  vocabulary  consists  potentially  of  infinite  numbers 
of  words,  and  psycho-logical,  semantic  blockages  are  eliminated;  (6) 
he  knows  that  a  reader  who  understands  that  oo -valued  mechanism  will 
never  be  confused  as  to  the  meaning  intended;  and  (7)  the  whole 
linguistic  process  becomes  extremely  flexible,  yet  it  preserves  its  essen¬ 
tial  extensional  one- valued  character,  in  a  given  case. 

In  a  certain  sense,  such  a  use  of  m.o  terms  is  to  be  found  in  poetry, 
and  it  is  well  known  that  many  scientists,  particularly  the  creative  ones, 
like  poetry.  Moreover,  poetry  often  conveys  in  a  few  sentences  more  of 
lasting  values  than  a  whole  volume  of  scientific  analysis.  The  free  use 
of  m.o  terms  without  the  bother  of  a  structurally  impossible  formalism 
outside  of  mathematics  accomplishes  this,  provided  we  are  conscious  of 
abstracting;  otherwise  only  confusion  results. 

It  should  be  understood  that  I  have  no  intention  of  condemning 
formalism.  Formalism  of  the  most  rigorous  character  is  an  extremely 
important  and  valuable  discipline  (mathematics  at  present)  ;  but  for¬ 
malism,  as  such,  in  experimental  science  and  life  appears  often  as  a 
handicap  and  not  as  a  benefit,  because,  in  empirical  science  and  life,  we 
are  engaged  in  exploring  and  discovering  the  unknown  structure  of  the 
world  as  a  means  for  structural  adjustment.  The  formal  elaboration  of 
some  language  is  only  the  consistent  elaboration  of  its  structure,  which 
must  be  accomplished  independently  if  we  are  to  have  means  to  compare 
verbal  with  empirical  structures.  From  a  A  point  of  view,  both  issues 
are  equally  important  in  the  search  for  structure. 

Under  such  structural  empirical  conditions  the  m.o  terms  acquire 
great  semantic  importance,  and  perhaps,  without  them,  language,  mathe¬ 
matics,  and  science  would  be  impossible.  As  soon  as  we  understand  this, 
we  are  forced  to  realize  the  profound  structural  and  semantic  difference 
between  the  A  and  A  systems.  What  in  the  old  days  were  considered 
propositions,  become  propositional  functions,  and  most  of  our  doctrines 
become  the  doctrinal  functions  of  Keyser,  or  system-functions,  allowing 
multiple  interpretations. 

Terms  belong  to  verbal  levels  and  their  meanings  must  be  given  by 
definitions,  these  definitions  depending  on  undefined  terms,  which  consist 
always,  as  far  as  my  knowledge  goes,  of  m.o  terms.  Perhaps  it  is  neces¬ 
sary  for  them  to  have  this  character,  to  be  useful  at  all.  When  these 
structural  empirical  conditions  are  taken  into  account,  we  must  conclude 
that  the  postulational  method  which  gives  the  structure  of  a  given  doc¬ 
trine  lies  at  the  foundation  of  all  human  linguistic  performances,  in 
daily  life  as  well  as  in  mathematics  and  science.  The  study  of  these  prob- 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

lems  throws  a  most  important  light  on  all  mysteries  of  language,  and  on 
the  proper  use  of  this  most  important  human  neurological  and  semantic 
function,  without  which  sanity  is  impossible. 

From  a  structural  point  of  view,  postulates  or  definitions  or  assump¬ 
tions  must  be  considered  as  those  relational  or  multi-dimensional  order 
structural  assumptions  which  establish,  conjointly  with  the  undefined 
terms,  the  structure  of  a  given  language.  Obviously,  to  find  the  struc¬ 
ture  of  a  language  we  must  work  out  the  given  language  to  a  system  of 
postulates  and  find  the  minimum  of  its  (never  unique)  undefined  terms. 
This  done,  we  should  have  the  structure  of  such  a  system  fully  dis¬ 
closed  ;  and,  with  the  structure  of  the  language  thoroughly  known,  we 
should  have  a  most  valuable  tool  for  investigating  empirical  structure  by 
predicting  verbally,  and  then  verifying  empirically. 

To  pacify  the  non-specialist,  let  me  say  at  once  that  this  work  is 
very  tedious  and  difficult,  although  a  crying  need ;  nevertheless,  it  may 
be  accomplished  by  a  single  individual.  Because  of  the  character  of  the 
problem,  however,  when  this  work  is  done,  the  semantic  results  have 
always  proved  thus  far — and  probably  will  continue  so — quite  simple 
and  comprehensible  to  the  common  sense,  even  of  a  child. 

One  very  important  point  should  be  noted.  Since  language  was  first 
used  by  the  human  race,  the  structural  and  related  semantic  conditions 
disclosed  by  the  present  analysis  have  not  been  changed,  as  they  are 
inherent  in  the  structure  of  ‘human  knowledge*  and  language.  Histori¬ 
cally,  we  were  always  most  interested  in  the  immediacy  of  our  daily 
lives.  We  began  with  grunts  symbolizing  this  immediacy,  and  we  never 
realize,  even  now,  that  these  historically  first  grunts  were  the  most  com¬ 
plex  and  difficult  of  them  all.  Besides  these  grunts,  we  have  also  devel¬ 
oped  others,  which  we  call  mathematics,  dealing  with,  and  elaborating, 
a  language  of  numbers,  or  (as  I  define  it  semantically)  a  language  of 
two  symmetrical  and  infinitely  many  asymmetrical  unique,  specific  rela¬ 
tions  for  exploring  the  structure  of  the  world,  which  is,  at  present,  the 
most  effective  and  the  simplest  language  yet  formed.  Only  in  1933,  after 
many  hundreds  of  thousands  of  years,  have  the  last  mentioned  grunts 
become  sufficiently  elaborate  to  give  us  a  sidelight  on  structure.  We 
must  revise  the  whole  linguistic  procedure  and  structure,  and  gain  the 
means  by  which  to  disclose  the  structure  of  ‘human  knowledge*.  Such 
semantic  means  will  provide  for  the  proper  handling  of  our  neurological 
structure,  which,  in  turn,  is  the  foundation  for  the  structurally  proper 
use  of  the  human  nervous  system,  and  will  lead  to  human  nervous  adjust¬ 
ment,  appropriate  s.r,  and,  therefore,  to  sanity. 

HIGHER  ORDER  ABSTRACTIONS 

Human  beings  are  quite  accustomed  to  the  fact  that  words  have 
different  meanings,  and  by  making  use  of  this  fact  have  produced  some 
rather  detrimental  speculations,  but,  to  the  best  of  my  knowledge,  the 
structural  discovery  of  the  multiordinality  of  terms  and  of  the  psycho- 
physiological  importance  of  the  treatment  of  orders  of  abstractions 
resulting  from  the  rejection  of  the  ‘is*  of  identity — as  formulated  in  the 
present  system — is  novel.  In  this  mechanism  of  multiordinality,  we 
shall  find  an  unusually  important  structural  problem  of  human  psycho¬ 
logies,  responsible  for  a  great  many  fundamental,  desirable,  undesirable, 
and  even  morbid,  human  characteristics.  The  full  mastery  of  this 
mechanism  is  only  possible  when  it  is  formulated,  and  leads  automati¬ 
cally  to  a  possibility  of  a  complete  psychophysiological  adjustment.  This 
adjustment  often  reverses  the  psycho-logical  process  prevailing  at  a 
given  date ;  and  this  is  the  foundation,  among  others,  of  what  we  call 
‘culture*  and  ‘sublimation*  in  psychiatry. 

Let  me  recall  that  one  of  the  most  fundamental  functional  differ¬ 
ences  between  animal  and  man  consists  in  the  fact  that  no  matter  in  how 
many  orders  the  animal  may  abstract,  its  abstractions  stop  on  some  level 
beyond  which  the  animal  cannot  proceed.  Not  so  with  man.  Structurally 
and  potentially,  man  can  abstract  in  indefinitely  many  orders,  and  no 
one  can  say  legitimately  that  he  has  reached  the  ‘final*  order  of  abstrac¬ 
tions  beyond  which  no  one  can  go.  In  the  older  days,  when  this  semantic 
mechanism  was  not  made  structurally  obvious,  the  majority  of  us  copied 
animals,  and  stopped  abstracting  on  some  level,  as  if  this  were  the 
‘final*  level.  In  our  semantic  training  in  language  and  the  ‘is*  of  identity 
given  to  us  by  our  parents  or  teachers  or  in  school,  the  multiordinality 
of  terms  was  never  suspected,  and,  although  the  human  physiological 
mechanism  was  operating  all  the  while,  we  used  it  on  the  conscious  level 
in  the  animalistic  way,  which  means  ceasing  to  abstract  at  some  level. 
Instead  of  being  told  of  the  mechanism,  and  of  being  trained  consciously 
in  the  fluid  and  dynamic  s.r  of  passing  to  higher  and  higher  abstractions 
as  normal,  for  Smith,  we  preserved  a  sub-normal,  animalistic  semantic 
blockage,  and  ‘emotionally*  stopped  abstracting  on  some  level. 

Thus,  for  instance,  if,  as  a  result  of  life,  we  come  to  a  psycho¬ 
logical  state  of  hate  or  doubt,  and  stop  at  that  level,  then,  as  we  know 
from  experience,  the  lives  of  the  given  individual  and  of  those  close  to 
him  are  not  so  happy.  But  a  hate  or  doubt  of  a  higher  order  reverses 
or  annuls  the  first  order  semantic  effect.  Thus,  hate  of  hate,  or  doubt 
of  doubt — a  second  order  effect— has  reversed  or  annulled  the  first  order 
effect,  which  was  detrimental  to  all  concerned  because  it  remained  a 
structurally-stopped  or  an  animalistic  first  order  effect. 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

The  whole  subject  of  our  human  capacity  for  higher  abstracting 
without  discernible  limits  appears  extremely  broad,  novel,  and  unana¬ 
lysed.  It  will  take  many  years  and  volumes  to  work  it  out ;  so,  of  neces¬ 
sity,  the  examples  given  below  will  be  only  suggestive  and  will  serve  to 
illustrate  roughly  the  enormous  power  of  the  A  methods  and  structure, 
aiming  to  make  them  workable  as  an  educational,  powerful,  semantic 
device. 

Let  us  take  some  terms  which  may  be  considered  as  of  a  positive 
character  and  represent  the  structure  of  ‘culture’,  science,  and  what  is 
known  in  psychiatry  as  ‘sublimation’;  such  as  curiosity,  attention, 
analysis,  reasoning,  choice,  consideration,  knowing,  evaluation , .  The 
first  order  effects  are  well  known,  and  we  do  not  need  to  analyse  them. 
But  if  we  transform  them  into  second  order  effects,  we  then  have 
curiosity  of  curiosity,  attention  of  attention,  analysis  of  analysis,  reasoning 
about  reasoning  (which  represents  science, psycho-logics,  epistemology. ,)  ; 
choice  of  choice  (which  represents  freedom,  lack  of  psycho-logical 
blockages,  and  shows,  also,  the  semantic  mechanism  of  eliminat¬ 
ing  those  blocks)  ;  consideration  of  consideration,  gives  an  important 
cultural  achievement;  knowing  of  knowing  involves  abstracting  and 
structure,  becomes  ‘consciousness*,  at  least  in  its  limited  aspect,  taken  as 
consciousness  of  abstracting ;  evaluation  of  evaluation  becomes  a  theory 
of  sanity,. 

Another  group  represents  morbid  semantic  reactions.  Thus  the 
first  order  worry,  nervousness,  fear,  pity.,  may  be  quite  legitimate  and 
comparatively  harmless.  But  when  these  are  of  a  higher  order  and  iden¬ 
tified  with  the  first  order  as  in  worry  about  worry,  fear  of  fear.,  they 
become  morbid.  Pity  of  pity  is  dangerously  near  to  self-pity.  Second 
order  effects,  such  as  belief  in  belief,  makes  fanaticism.  To  know  that 
we  know,  to  have  conviction  of  conviction,  ignorance  of  ignorance., 
shows  the  mechanism  of  dogmatism ;  while  such  effects  as  free  will  of 
free  will,  or  cause  of  cause . ,  often  become  delusions  and  illusions. 

A  third  group  is  represented  by  such  first  order  effects  as  inhibi¬ 
tion,  hate,  doubt,  contempt,  disgust,  anger,  and  similar  semantic  states ; 
the  second  order  reverses  and  annuls  the  first  order  effects.  Thus  an 
inhibition  of  an  inhibition  becomes  a  positive  excitation  or  release  (see 
Part  VI)  ;  hate  of  hate  is  close  to  ‘love’ ;  doubt  of  doubt  becomes  scien¬ 
tific  criticism  and  imparts  the  scientific  tendency ;  the  others  obviously 
reverse  or  annul  the  first  order  undesirable  s.r . 

In  this  connection  the  pernicious  effect  of  identification  becomes 
quite  obvious.  In  the  first  and  third  cases  beneficial  effects  were  pre¬ 
vented ,  because  identification  of  orders  of  abstractions,  as  a  semantic 

HIGHER  order  abstractions. 

state,  produced  a  semantic  blockage  which  did  not  allow  us  to  pass  to 
higher  order  abstractions ;  in  the  second  case,  it  actually  produced  mor¬ 
bid  manifestations. 

The  consciousness  of  abstracting,  which  involves,  among  others, 
the  full  instinctive  semantic  realization  of  non-identity  and  the  stratifica¬ 
tion  of  human  knowledge,  and  so  the  multiordinality  of  the  most  im¬ 
portant  terms  we  use,  solves  these  weighty  and  complex  problems 
because  it  gives  us  structural  methods  for  semantic  evaluation,  for 
orientation,  and  for  handling  them.  By  passing  to  higher  orders  these 
states  which  involve  inhibition  or  negative  excitation  become  reversed. 
Some  of  them  on  higher  levels  become  culturally  important ;  and  some 
of  them  become  morbid.  Now  consciousness  of  abstracting  in  all  cases 
gives  us  the  semantic  freedom  of  all  levels  and  so  helps  evaluation  and 
selection,  thus  removing  the  possibility  of  remaining  animalistically  fixed 
or  blocked  on  any  one  level.  Here  we  find  the  mechanism  of  the  ‘change 
of  human  nature’  and  an  assistance  for  persons  in  morbid  states  to 
revise  by  themselves  their  own  afflictions  by  the  simple  realization  that 
the  symptoms  are  due  to  identifying  levels  which  are  essentially  different, 
an  unconscious  jumping  of  a  level  or  of  otherwise  confusing  the  orders 
of  abstractions.  Even  at  present  all  psychotherapy  is  unconsciously 
using  this  mechanism,  although,  as  far  as  I  know,  it  has  never  before 
been  structurally  formulated  in  a  general  way. 

It  should  be  added  that  the  moment  we  eliminate  identification  and 
acquire  the  consciousness  of  abstracting,  as  explained  in  the  present 
system,  we  have  already  acquired  the  permanent  semantic  feeling  of  this 
peculiar  structural  stratification  of  human  knowledge  which  is  found  in 
the  psycho-logics  of  the  differential  and  integral  calculus  and  mathe¬ 
matics,  similar  in  structure  to  the  world  around  us,  without  any  difficult 
mathematical  technique.  Psycho-logically,  both  mathematics  and  the 
present  system  appear  structurally  similar,  not  only  to  themselves,  but 
also  to  the  world  and  our  nervous  system;  and  at  this  point  it  departs 
very  widely  from  the  older  systems. 

Let  me  give  another  example  of  how  the  recognition  of  order  of 
abstractions  clears  up  semantic  difficulties. 

I  recall  vividly  an  argument  I  had  with  a  young  and  very  gifted 
mathematician.  Our  conversation  was  about  the  geometries  of  Euclid 
and  Lobatchevski,  and  we  were  discussing  the  dropping  and  introduction 
of  assumptions.  I  maintained  that  Lobatchevski  introduced  an  assump¬ 
tion  ;  he  maintained  that  Lobatchevski  dropped  an  assumption.  On  the 
surface,  it  might  have  appeared  that  this  is  a  problem  of  ‘fact’  and  not 
of  preference.  Tfie  famous  fifth  postulate  of  Euclid  reads,  ‘If  a  straight 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

line  falling  on  two  straight  lines  makes  the  interior  angles  on  the  same 
side  less  than  two  right  angles,  the  two  straight  lines,  if  produced 
indefinitely,  meet  on  that  side  on  which  are  the  angles  less  than  two 
right  angles'.  We  should,  note,  in  passing,  that  a  straight  line  is  assumed 
to  be  of  ‘infinite'  length,  which  involves  a  definite  type  of  structural 
metaphysics  of  ‘space',  common  to  the  A  and  older  systems.  This  pos¬ 
tulate  of  Euclid  can  be  expressed  in  one  of  its  equivalent  forms,  as,  for 
instance,  ‘Through  a  point  outside  a  straight  line  one,  and  only  one, 
parallel  to  it  can  be  drawn'.  Lobatchevski  and  others  decided  to  build  up 
a  geometry  without  this  postulate,  and  in  this  they  were  successful. 
Let  us  consider  what  Lobatchevski  did.  For  this,  we  go  to  a  deeper 
level — otherwise,  to  a  higher  order  abstraction — where  we  discover  that 
what  on  his  level  had  been  the  dropping  of  an  assumption  becomes  on 
our  deeper  level  or  higher  order  abstraction  the  introduction  of  an 
assumption;  namely,  the  assumption  that  through  a  point  outside  a 
straight  line  there  passes  more  than  one  parallel  line. 

Now  such  a  process  is  structurally  inherent  in  all  human  knowledge . 
More  than  this,  it  is  a  unique  characteristic  of  the  structure  of  human 
knowledge.  We  can  always  do  this.  If  we  pass  to  higher  orders  of 
abstractions,  situations  seemingly  ‘insoluble',  ‘matters  of  fact',  quite 
often  become  problems  of  preference .  This  problem  is  of  extreme 
semantic  importance,  and  of  indefinitely  extended  consequences  for  all 
science,  psychiatry,  and  education  in  particular. 

The  examples  I  have  given  show  a  most  astonishing  semantic 
situation ;  namely,  that  one  question  can  sometimes  be  answered  ‘yes'  or 
‘no*,  ‘true'  or  ‘false',  depending  on  the  order  of  abstractions  the  answerer 
is  considering.  The  above  facts  alter  considerably  the  former  sup¬ 
posedly  sharply  defined  fields  of  ‘yes'  and  ‘no',  ‘true’  and  ‘false’,  and,, 
in  general,  of  all  multiordinal  terms.  Many  problems  of  ‘fact’  on  one 
level  of  abstraction  become  problems  of  ‘preference'  on  another,  thereby 
helping  to  diminish  the  semantic  field  of  disagreement. 

It  is  interesting  to  throw  some  light  on  the  problem  of  ‘preference'. 
Which  statement  or  attitude  is  preferable?  The  one  claiming  that 
Lobatchevski  dropped  a  postulate,  or  the  one  claiming  that  Lobatchevski 
introduced  a  new  postulate  ?  Both  are  ‘facts’,  but  on  different  levels,  or  of 
different  orders.  The  dropping  appears  as  an  historical  fact ;  the  intro¬ 
ducing  as  a  psycho-logical  fact  inherent  in  the  structure  of  human 
knowledge.  The  preference  is  fairly  indicated;  the  psycho-logical  fact 
is  of  the  utmost  generality  (as  all  psycho-logical  facts  are)  and,  there¬ 
fore,  more  useful,  since  it  applies  to  all  human  endeavours  and  not  merely 
to  what  a  certain  mathematician  did  under  certain  circumstances. 

HIGHER  ORDER  ABSTRACTIONS 

Section  C.  Confusion  of  higher  orders  of  abstractions . 

We  have  already  seen  that  Fido’s  power  of  abstracting  stops  some¬ 
where.  If  we  are  finalists  of  any  kind,  we  also  assume  that  our  power 
of  abstracting  stops  somewhere.  In  some  such  way  the  finalistic,  dog¬ 
matic  and  absolutistic  semantic  attitudes  are  built. 

If,  however,  by  the  aid  of  the  Structural  Differential  we  train  the 
s.r  of  our  children  in  A  non-identity  and  the  inherent  stratification  of 
human  knowledge  and  power  of  abstracting,  we  facilitate  the  passing  to 
higher  order  abstractions  and  establish  flexible  s.r  of  full  conditionality 
which  are  unique  for  Smith  and  of  great  preventive  and  therapeutic 
value.  We  thus  build  up  ‘human  mind*  for  efficiency  and  sanity,  by 
eliminating  the  factors  of  semantic  blockages,  while,  by  engaging  the 
activity  of  the  higher  nerve  centres,  we  diminish  the  vicious  overflow 
of  nervous  energy  upon  the  lower  nerve  centres,  which,  if  allowed,  must, 
of  necessity,  make  itself  manifest  in  arrested  or  regressive  symptoms. 

The  above  issues  are  of  serious  semantic  importance  in  our  daily 
lives  and  in  sanity.  All  semantic  disturbances  involve  evaluation,  doc¬ 
trines,  creeds,  speculations  . ,  and  vice  versa.  Under  circumstances  such 
as  described  above,  which  appear  inherent  with  us,  it  is  dangerous  not 
to  have  means  to  see  one’s  way  clear  in  the  maze  of  verbal  difficulties 
with  all  their  dangerous  and  ever-present  semantic  components. 

By  disregarding  the  orders  of  abstractions,  we  can  manufacture  any 
kind  of  verbal  difficulties ;  and,  without  the  consciousness  of  abstracting, 
we  all  become  nearly  helpless  and  hopeless  semantic  victims  of  a  primi¬ 
tive-made  language  and  its  underlying  structural  metaphysics.  Yet  the 
way  out  is  simple;  non-identity  leads  to  ‘consciousness  of  abstracting* 
and  gives  us  a  new  working  sense  for  values,  new  s.r,  to  guide  us  in  the 
verbal  labyrinth. 

Outside  of  ‘objectification’,  which  is  defined  as  the  evaluation  of 
higher  order  abstractions  as  lower ;  namely,  words,  memories . ,  as  objects, 
experiences,  feelings.,  the  most  usual  identification  of  different  higher 
order  abstractions  appears  as  the  confusion  of  inferences  and  inferential 
terms  with  descriptions  and  descriptive  terms. 

Obviously,  if  we  consider  a  description  as  of  the  nth  order,  then 
an  inference  from  such  a  description  (or  others)  should  be  considered 
as  an  abstraction  of  a  higher  order  (n+  1).  Before  we  make  a  deci¬ 
sion,  we  usually  make  a  more  or  less  hasty  survey  of  happenings,  this 
survey  establishing  a  foundation  for  our  judgements,  which  become  the 
basis  of  our  action.  This  statement  is  fairly  general,  as  the  components 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

of  it  can  be  found  by  analysis  practically  everywhere.  Our  problem  is  to 
analyse  the  general  case.  Let  us  follow  up  roughly  the  process. 

We  assume,  for  instance,  an  hypothetical  case  of  an  ideal  observer 
who  observes  correctly  and  gives  an  impersonal,  unbiased  account  of 
what  he  has  observed.  Let  us  assume  that  the  happenings  he  has  observed 
appeared  as:  £,  ♦,  |,  £,  .  .  .  ,  and  then  a  new  happening  £  occurred. 
At  this  level  of  observation ,  no  speaking  can  be  done,  and,  therefore, 
I  use  various  fanciful  symbols,  and  not  words.  The  observer  then 
gives  a  description  of  the  above  happenings,  let  us  say  a,  b,  c,  d,  .  .  .  ,  x; 
then  he  makes  an  inference  from  these  descriptions  and  reaches  a  con¬ 
clusion  or  forms  a  judgement  A  about  these  facts.  We  assume  that  facts 
unknown  to  him,  which  always  exist,  are  not  important  in  this  case. 
Let  us  assume,  also,  that  his  conclusion  seems  correct  and  that  the  action 
A”  which  this  conclusion  motivates  is  appropriate.  Obviously,  we  deal 
with  at  least  three  different  levels  of  abstractions :  the  seen,  experienced . , 
lower  order  abstractions  (un-speakable)  ;  then  the  descriptive  level,  and, 
finally,  the  inferential  levels. 

Let  us  assume  now  another  individual,  Smithi,  ignorant  of  struc¬ 
ture  or  the  orders  of  abstractions,  of  consciousness  of  abstracting,  of 
s.r. ;  a  politician  or  a  preacher,  let  us  say,  a  person  who  habitually  iden¬ 
tifies,  confuses  his  orders,  uses  inferential  language  for  descriptions,  and 
rather  makes  a  business  out  of  it.  Let  us  assume  that  Smithx  observes  the 
‘same  happenings1.  He  would  witness  the  happenings  £,  , 

and  the  happening  £  would  appear  new  to  him.  The  happenings 
0,  ♦,  |,  fc, . .  . ,  he  would  describe  in  the  form  a,  bt  c,  d,  ,  .  .  ,  from 
which  fewer  descriptions  he  would  form  a  judgement ,  reach  a  conclu¬ 
sion ,  B ;  which  means  that  he  would  pass  to  another  order  of  abstrac¬ 
tions.  When  the  new  happening  £  occurs,  he  handles  it  with  an  already 
formed  opinion  Bt  and  so  his  description  of  the  happening  £  is  coloured 
by  his  older  s.r  and  no  longer  the  x  of  the  ideal  observer,  but  B(x)  —  y. 
His  description  of  ‘facts*  would  not  appear  as  the  a,  bt  c,  d,  .  .  .  ,  xt  of 
the  ideal  observer  but  a,  b,  c,  d>  .  .  .  ,  B(x)  —  y.  Next  he  would  abstract 
on  a  higher  level,  form  a  new  judgement,  about  ‘facts*  a,  b,  c,  d,  .  ,  .  , 
B(x)  =  y,  let  us  say,  C.  We  see  how  the  semantic  error  was  produced. 
The  happenings  appeared  the  ‘same*,  yet  the  unconscious  identification 
of  levels  brought  finally  an  entirely  different  conclusion  to  motivate  a 
quite  different  action,  C". 

A  diagram  will  make  this  structurally  clearer,  as  it  is  very  difficult 
to  explain  this  by  words  alone.  On  the  Structural  Differential  it  is  shown 
without  difficulty. 

HIGHER  ORDER  ABSTRACTIONS 

Seen  happenings  (un¬ 
speakable) 

(First  order  abstrac¬ 
tions)  . 

IDEAL  OBSERVER 

,1, 

Description 
(  Second  order  abstrac¬ 
tions)  . . 

a,  b, 

Inferences,  conclusions, 
and  what  not. 

(Third  order  abstrac-  , 

tions) .  A 

Creeds  and  other  se¬ 
mantic  reactions .... 

Action . 

A 

A 

t 

V 

SMITH! 

S 

a,  b,  c,  . . 

■B(x) 

if 

r 

I 

C 

i 

c 

I 

cu 

Let  us  illustrate  the  foregoing  with  two  clinical  examples.  In  one 
case,  a  young  boy  persistently  did  not  get  up  in  the  morning.  In  another 
case,  a  boy  persistently  took  money  from  his  mother’s  pocketbook.  In 
both  cases,  the  actions  were  undesirable.  In  both  cases,  the  parents 
unconsciously  identified  the  levels,  x  was  identified  with  B(x)f  and  con¬ 
fused  their  orders  of  abstractions.  In  the  first  case,  they  concluded  that 
the  boy  was  lazy;  in  the  second,  that  the  boy  was  a  thief .  The  parents, 
through  semantic  identification,  read  these  inferences  into  every  new 
‘description’  of  forthcoming  facts,  so  that  the  parents’  new  ‘facts’  became 
more  and  more  semantically  distorted  and  coloured  in  evaluation,  and 
their  actions  more  and  more  detrimental  to  all  concerned.  The  general 
conditions  in  both  families  became  continually  worse,  until  the  reading 
of  inferences  into  descriptions  by  the  ignorant  parents  produced  a 
semantic  background  in  the  boys  of  driving  them  to  murderous  intents. 

A  psychiatrist  dealt  with  the  problem  as  shown  in  the  diagram  of 
the  ideal  observer.  The  net  result  was  that  the  one  boy  was  not  ‘lazy’, 
nor  the  other  a  ‘thief’,  but  that  both  were  ill.  After  medical  attention, 
of  which  the  first  step  was  to  clarify  the  symbolic  semantic  situation, 
though  not  in  such  a  general  way  as  given  here,  all  went  smoothly.  Two 
families  were  saved  from  crime  and  wreck. 

I  may  give  another  example  out  of  a  long  list  which  it  is  unnecessary 
for  our  purpose  to  analyse,  because  as  soon  as  the  ‘consciousness  of 
abstracting’  is  acquired,  the  avoidance  of  these  inherent  semantic  dif¬ 
ficulties  becomes  automatic.  In  a  common  fallacy  of  (Petitio  Principii \ 

VI l.  TI1E  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

or  ‘Begging  the  Question*  fallacy,  we,  by  self-deceptive  semantic  evalu¬ 
ation,  assume  the  conclusion  to  be  proved.  In  other  words,  we  confuse 
the  orders  of  abstractions.  Beside  the  wilful  use  of  this  fallacy  by  law¬ 
yers  in  courts  to  influence  juries  of  low  intelligence . ,  a  similar  fallacy  is 
widely  committed  in  the  reasonings  of  daily  life  and  leads  to  many 
unnecessary  semantic  difficulties.  Particularly  vicious  is  the  use  of  the 
so-called  ‘question-begging  epithets*.  We  postulate  the  fact  which  we 
wish  to  prove,  label  it  by  another  name,  and  then  use  the  new  higher 
order  name  in  our  premise.  It  represents  clearly  a  confusion  of  orders 
of  abstractions. 

All  such  terms  as  ‘un-patriotic’,  *un-christian*,  ‘un-american*,  ‘pro- 
german*  (during  the  World  War),  ‘wet*,  ‘dry*.,  fall  into  this  group.  It 
is  probably  no  secret  that  a  large  part  of  the  population  of  this  world 
was  swayed  by  such  methods  during  the  war.  In  times  of  peace,  large 
countries  are  continually  swayed  by  such  use  of  terms  which  play  upon 
the  pathological  s.r  of  the  population,  thereby  facilitating  the  ‘putting 
over*  of  different  propagandas.  Similar  procedures  lead  to  many  seman¬ 
tic  difficulties  in  daily  life.  It  is  easy  to  see  that  the  difficulty  is  general ; 
namely,  ‘the  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions'.  The  antidote  is 
equally  general,  and  is  found  in  the  elimination  of  the  ‘is*  of  identity, 
resulting  in  the  ‘consciousness  of  abstracting*.  It  should  be  noticed  that 
these  pathological  reactions  have  long  been  known,  and  that  they  are 
extremely  general.  We  are  told  about  them  in  schools  under  the  name 
of  ‘logical  fallacies*,  disregarding  their  semantic  character,  and  so  it  is 
practically  impossible  to  eliminate  them  or  to  apply  the  wisdom  we  are 
taught.  It  is  not  difficult  to  see  why  this  should  occur.  In  the  older  days, 
all  the  ‘wisdom*  was  taught  to  us  by  purely  ‘intellectual*,  ‘verbal*,  classi¬ 
cal  A  and  el  methods.  We  had  no  simple  psycho  physiological  method  of 
complete  generality,  which  could  be  taught  in  a  non-el  way  affecting  all 
nerve  centres.  It  is  known  how  difficult  it  is  to  ‘change  human  nature*, 
which  simply  means  that  the  older  verbal  educational  methods  could  not 
properly  affect  the  lower  centres.  It  seems  that  the  first  step  in  develop¬ 
ing  a  method  to  accomplish  these  ends  is  to  use  the  Structural  Differen¬ 
tial,  without  which  it  is  practically  impossible  to  teach  ‘silence  on  the 
objective  level*  and  ‘delayed  action*  and  to  train  through  all  centres  in 
non-identity,  ‘stratification*,  natural  order,  and  so  in  appropriate  s,r .  It 
appears  that  now,  to  begin  with,  we  have  acquired  a  workable  and 
simple  psychophysiological  method  for  changing  identification  into  vis¬ 
ualization,  and,  in  general,  for  the  prevention  or  elimination  of  identi¬ 
fication  or  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions.  We  have  now  discovered 
a  mechanism  which  involves  and  deals  directly  with  the  reactions  of  the 

HIGHER  ORDER  ABSTRACTIONS 

lower  centres,  ‘senses',  affects,  ’emotions' , .  The  older,  difficult  ‘change 
in  human  nature'  becomes  an  easily  accomplished  fact  in  a  structural,  A 
semantic  education.  ‘Human  nature'  can  best  be  described,  perhaps,  as  a 
complex  of  s.r,  which  can  be  educated  and  ‘changed’  to  a  large  extent. 

It  seems  unnecessary  to  enlarge  further  upon  this  subject.  Every 
attentive  reader  can  supply  endless  examples  of  this  kind  of  semantic 
disturbances  from  his  own  observation  or  experience.  Naturally,  the 
generality,  simplicity,  and  physiological  character  of  the  method  proposed 
in  this  work  become  powerful  assets,  and  instruction  in  the  A  methods 
can  easily  be  given  to,  or  acquired  by,  everybody.  It  can  be  taught  in 
homes  and  schools.  It  gives  a  preventive  psychophysiological  method  of 
training  the  s.r  in  the  millions  and  millions  of  cases  in  which  human  life 
becomes  wrecked  through  the  lack  of  a  working  structural  educational 
theory  concerned  with  these  reactions.  But  it  is  not  enough  to  preach 
these  ‘platitudes';  they  must  be  practised  as  well.  If  the  parents  and 
the  boys  mentioned  above  had  been  trained  as  children  with  the  Struc¬ 
tural  Differential,  it  would  have  been  an  impossibility  for  the  situation  to 
have  become  so  acute. 

Let  us  follow  our  daily  experiences  by  the  aid  of  the  Structural 
Differential.  We  find  ourselves  on  at  least  five  levels.  The  first  repre¬ 
sents  the  un-speakable  event,  or  the  scientific  object,  or  the  unseen 
physico-chemical  processes  on  the  sub-microscopic  levels  which  constitute 
stimuli  registered  by  our  nervous  system  as  objects.  The  second  con¬ 
sists  of  the  external,  objective,  also  un-speakable,  levels  on  which  we 
see  with  our  eyes,.  On  this  level,  we  could  make  a  moving  picture, 
including  actions.,  (writing  a  book  is  also  behaviour).  The  third  level 
represents  the  equally  un-speakable  psycho-logical  ‘pictures'  and  s.r.  On 
the  fourth  level  of  abstractions  we  describe  verbally  our  facts,  that 
humans  (a)  eat,  sleep.;  ( b )  cheat,  murder.;  (c)  moralize,  philosophize, 
legislate . ;  (d )  scientize,  mathematize , .  Finally,  in  the  present  context, 
our  inferences  belong  to  the  fifth  level. 

Unfortunately,  we  usually  abstract  facts  (a),  identify  the  levels, 
and  form  a  conclusion  ‘man  is  an  animal', .  From  this  conclusion  we  con¬ 
fuse  the  levels  again  and  colour  the  description  of  the  facts  (6),  (c), 
(d) . ;  jump  again  to  higher  levels  and  build  conclusions  from  descrip¬ 
tions  (a)  and  from  distorted,  coloured  descriptions  ( b ),  (c),  (J),  and 
so  obtain  the  prevailing  doctrines  in  all  fields.  These  again  lead  us,  in 
the  field  of  action,  to  the  mess  we  all  find  ourselves  in.  In  this  dervish 
dance  between  the  levels  we  entirely  disregarded  uncoloured  facts  ( d ). 

The  ideal  observer  would  observe  all  forms  of  human  behaviour  at 
a  given  date,  not  leaving  out  facts  (d)  ;  then,  without  confusing  his 

VIJ.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIM E-R1N DING 

levels,  and  also  without  confusing  descriptions  with  inferences,  he  would 
reach  his  higher  order  of  abstractions  properly,  with  very  different 
resultant  doctrines,  which  would  produce  entirely  different  semantic 
evaluation,  and  motivate  equally  different  action. 

We  may  understand  now  why  we  must  constantly  revise  our  doc¬ 
trines,  for  the  above  analysis  throws  a  considerable  light  on  the  fact  that 
scientists  need  training  with  the  Differential  as  much  as  other  mortals 
(the  author  included).  History  shows  that  they  have  not  officially 
checked  themselves  up  sufficiently  to  become  aware  of  this  fatal  habit 
of  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions  through  identification. 

It  might  appear,  at  first  glance,  that  all  that  has  been  said  here  is 
simple  and  easy.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  not  for  the  grown-ups ;  it  is  easy 
only  for  children  and  the  young.  In  all  my  studies  and  experimenting  I 
have  found  that,  for  the  reasons  already  given,  the  use  of  the  Differen¬ 
tial  appears  essential,  and  that  it  requires  a  long  while  and  training  to 
accomplish  new  semantic  results.  As  a  rule,  unless  they  are  very  un¬ 
happy,  people  try  to  trust  their  ‘understanding*,  and  dislike  to  train 
repeatedly  with  the  Differential.  For  some  reason  or  other,  they  usually 
forget  that  they  cannot  acquire  structural  familiarity  with,  or  reflex- 
reactions  in,  spelling,  or  typewriting,  or  driving  a  car.,  by  verbal  means 
alone.  Similar  considerations  apply  in  this  case.  Without  the  actual 
training  with  the  Differential,  certainly  the  best  results  cannot  be 
expected. 

To  gain  the  full  benefit  involves  the  uprooting  of  old  habits,  taboos, 
‘philosophies’,  and  private  doctrines,  the  worst  being  the  structure  of 
our  primitive  A  language  with  the  ‘is’  of  identity,  all  of  which  are  deeply 
rooted  and  work  unconsciously.  Only  the  semantic  training  with  the 
Differential  in  non-identity  can  affect  the  ‘habitual’  and  the  ‘uncon¬ 
scious’.  Rationalization,  lip-service  to  the  ‘understanding’  of  it,  will  be 
of  no  use  whatsoever.  Persistent  training  seems  the  only  way  to  acquire 
this  special  structural  sense  for  proper  evaluation ,  and  the  habit  of 
feeling  when  identification,  or  the  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions 
becomes  particularly  dangerous.  This  feeling,  as  it  involves  most  im¬ 
portant  factors  of  evaluation,  is  difficult  to  acquire,  as  difficult,  perhaps, 
as  reflex-learning  to  spell  or  to  typewrite.  But,  when  acquired,  it  makes 
us  aware  of  the  continuous,  necessary  utilization  of  many  levels  of 
abstractions,  which  becomes  dangerous  only  when  we  identify  them  or 
are  not  conscious  of  this  fact.  We  can  then  utilize  the  different  orders 
of  abstractions  consciously,  without  identification,  and  thus  keep  out  of 
danger.  Most  of  the  important  terms  appear  as  multiordinal,  and,  al¬ 
though  they  belong  to  verbal  levels,  they  apply  often  to  all  levels,  an 

HIGHER  ORDER  ABSTRACTIONS 

important  structural  fact  impossible  to  avoid,  and  one  which  makes  this 
special  semantic  sense  uniquely  necessary  to  acquire. 

It  seems  unnecessary  to  repeat  that  everything  that  has  been  said 
above  applies  in  the  fullest  extent  to  our  ethical,  social,  political,  eco¬ 
nomic,  and  international  relations.  Before  any  sanity  can  be  brought  into 
the  analysis  of  these  relations,  before  they  can  be  rationally  analysed, 
the  investigators  would  have  to  be  trained  to  observe  correctly  and  to 
avoid  verbal  structural  pitfalls.  For  the  lack  of  such  semantic  training 
and  re-education,  the  ‘time-honoured1  ‘Fido’  debates  involving  the  ‘is'  of 
identity,  continue  on  all  sides,  and  lead  to  naught  else  but  a  waste  of 
‘time’  and  effort. 

I  say  waste  of  ‘time’,  simply  because  there  seems  no  end  to  the 
paradoxes  which,  with  a  little  ingenuity,  we  can  build  up  when  we  begin 
to  gamble  with  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions  and  disregard  multi- 
ordinality.  Any  doctrine,  no  matter  how  structurally  true  or  beneficial, 
can  be  defeated,  confused,  or  delayed,  by  the  use  of  such  methods.  These 
problems  appear  of  crucial  semantic  importance,  because  our  lives  are 
lived  in  a  permanent  structural  interplay  between  different  orders  of 
abstractions.  All  our  achievements  depend  upon  this  interplay,  yet  the 
most  acute  and  painful  dangers  also  have  their  sources  in  the  non¬ 
realization  of  this  dervish  dance  between  different  orders  of  abstractions. 

Since  we  cannot  evade  the  passing  from  level  to  level,  or  the  use  of 
multiordinal  terms,  our  wisdom  should  consist  only  in  not  abusing  these 
semantic  conditions  of  human  life.  As  we  must  do  that,  let  us  do  it, 
but  let  us  not  identify  the  orders,  and  thus  let  us  evade  the  dangers. 
Consciousness  of  abstracting  gives  us  the  complete  psychophysiological 
solution  of  this  complex  situation,  as  it  allows  us  to  have  the  psycho¬ 
logical  benefits  and  to  avoid  the  dangers  by  the  use  of  physiological 
means. 

In  conclusion,  I  must  stress  once  more  the  importance  of  the  struc¬ 
ture  of  the  language  in  which  we  analyse  any  given  problem.  In  the 
.7-system  I  am  proposing,  the  term  order  is  accepted  as  one  of  its  very 
foundations.  In  1933,  we  know  that  as  words  are  not  the  things  spoken 
about . ,  structure,  and  structure  alone,  becomes  the  only  possible  content 
of  knowledge,  and  the  search  for  structure,  the  only  possible  aim  of 
science.  If  we  try  to  define  structure,  we  can  do  so  in  terms  of  relations 
and  multi-dimensional  order.  The  recent  advances  of  science  show, 
beyond  doubt,  that  the  day  will  come  when  all  science  will  be  formu¬ 
lated  in  terms  of  structure  and,  therefore,  of  physics,  and  physics 
formulated  as  a  form  of  multi-dimensional  geometry,  based  on  multi¬ 
dimensional  order,  giving  us,  ultimately,  multiordinal  structure. 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

The  application  of  the  term  order,  which  involves  physiological,  as 
well  as  semantic,  mechanisms  of  evaluation,  to  the  analysis  of  human 
behaviour,  has  led  me  to  the  present  A~ system  and  the  investigation  of 
the  structure  of  language.  The  discovery  that  some  of  the  most  im¬ 
portant  terms  we  use  appear  multiordinal,  a  character  concealed  by  the 
‘is’  of  identity,  has  disclosed  to  us  a  most  vital  and  inherent  psycho¬ 
logical  mechanism,  responsible  in  humans  for  many  most  desirable,  many 
undesirable,  and  many  morbid  human  characteristics.  It  disclosed,  also, 
the  psycho-logical  structure  of  these  characteristics,  and  so  we  have 
obtained  physiological  means  by  which  to  enhance  the  development  of 
desirable  characteristics,  and  to  prevent  or  transform  the  others. 

Further  analysis  has  disclosed  a  natural  survival  order  in  evaluation : 
the  event  first,  the  object  next;  the  object  first,  the  label  next;  descrip¬ 
tion  first,  inferences  next . ,  in  inherent  importance.  We  have  also  found 
that  the  majority  of  human  difficulties,  'mental'  ills  included,  involve 
semantic  disturbances  and  exhibit,  not  the  natural  survival  order,  but 
the  identification  of  different  orders,  resulting  in  a  reversed  (patho¬ 
logical)  order. 

It  is  impossible  in  this  book  to  review  the  data  of  psychiatry  from 
the  A  point  of  view,  as  this  would  require  a  separate  large  volume, 
which,  I  hope,  will  be  written  some  day;  but  any  one  can  verify  the 
statements  made  above  by  himself  from  clinical  literature,  and  also  by 
analysing  his  own  or  other  persons*  life-difficulties,  quarrels,  disagree¬ 
ments  . ,  which  generally  involve  quite  unnecessary  sufferings.  Psycho¬ 
therapeutic  literature  shows  abundantly  that  the  success  of  the  physicians 
depends  mostly  on  reversing  the  pathological  reversed  order  in  a  given 
field,  and  so  restoring  the  natural  order  in  the  s.r .  It  is  easily  verified 
that,  in  most  cases,  when  ‘mental*  illness  originated  through  different  life 
experiences,  these  would  have  affected  very  little,  if  at  all,  a  child  or 
an  adult  who  was  conscious  of  abstracting,  and  whose  nervous  processes 
and  corresponding  semantic  states  followed  the  natural  order. 

With  the  aid  of  the  Structural  Differential  and  a  A  language  of 
new  structure,  it  is  easy  to  train  the  s.r  of  an  infant,  a  child,  or  a  young 
person,  and  possible,  although  much  more  difficult,  to  train  a  grown-up 
in  the  natural  order.  Such  a  training  becomes  a  potent  preventive  struc¬ 
tural  physiological  method,  as  it  eliminates  the  psycho-logical  states  of 
identification  or  reversed  order,  both  of  which  represent  the  raw  seman¬ 
tic  material  out  of  which  future  nervous  disorders  are  produced. 

The  non~el  term  ‘order’  is  equally  applicable  in  life  and  science; 
gives  us,  in  1933,  the  simplest  .structural  common  base,  and  allows  us  to 

1  IK iilEU  ORDER  AKSTKAC  TIONS 

4S1 

ill  tempt  the  formulation  of  a  science  of  man,  which  ultimately  becomes 
a  theory  of  sanity,  a  consequence  of  a  non-aristotelian  system . 

It  should  be  recalled  that  order  is  accepted  in  the  present  system  as 
undefined  and  fundamental ;  yet  its  use  is  easily  explained  by  the  aid  of 
the  term  'between',  and  can  be  shown  and  applied  in  reference  to  em¬ 
pirical  structures. 

If  we  can  formulate  a  method  which,  through  the  application  of  a 
pHychophysiological  term  such  as  order,  and  a  simple  device  such  as  the 
training  of  s,r  in  the  natural  survival  order,  or  reversing  the  pathologi¬ 
cal  reversed  order,  includes  the  mechanism  of  non-identity  and  one  of 
the  most  important  human  nervous  functionings,  such  a  method,  because 
of  its  structural  simplicity  and  physiological  character,  may  be  expected 
to  prove  very  workable.  I  desire  to  stress  most  emphatically  the  very 
important  general ,  impersonal ,  preventive ,  semantic ,  reflex-character  of 
»uch  a  method. 

In  actual  life,  we  deal,  for  the  most  part,  with  persons  who  are 
'mentally'  or  nervously  disturbed  in  different  degrees.  We  could,  even¬ 
tually,  divide  them  for  our  purpose  into  two  groups:  (1)  those  who 
do  not  want  to  improve  or  get  well,  but  who  somehow  like  their  ficti¬ 
tious  worlds  and  the  maladjustments  connected  with  them;  (2)  those 
who  genuinely  want  to  get  over  their  difficulties. 

In  general,  it  is  extremely  difficult  or  impossible  to  achieve  any¬ 
thing  at  all  with  the  first  group.  The  second  group  is  greatly  helped 
if  we  give  them  means  to  work  by  themselves  at  their  problems.  Very 
often  it  is  most  effective  to  explain  to  them  this  simple  'natural  order’, 
'identification',  and  'reversed  order'  mechanism,  the  multiordinality  of 
terms . ,  and  so  give  them  a  definite  psychophysiological  symptom  to 
struggle  against.  These  symptoms  of  identification  or  reversed  order,  in 
their  generality  and  structural  neurological  fundamentally,  underlie  the 
process  of  formation  of  practically  all  known  semantic  difficulties  of 
evaluation. 

The  reader  should  not  assume  that  it  is  always  possible  to  eliminate 
identification  and  so  achieve  this  coveted  natural  order,  or  the  reversal 
of  the  reversed  pathological  order;  but,  whenever  this  is  possible,  the 
person  is  relieved  in  a  great  many  psycho-logical  fields.  The  simplicity 
and  generality,  the  physiological  and  structural  character  of  this  method 
seems  its  main  recommendation,  particularly  as  a  preventive  measure  or 
semantic  training  for  sanity.  The  training  is  a  laborious  process,  requir- 
Ing  great  persistence ;  but,  to  my  knowledge,  very  few  trainings  are  easy, 
and,  perhaps,  none  leads  to  more  important  results  than  does  this  one. 

CHAPTER  XXVIII 

ON  THE  MECHANISM  OF  IDENTIFICATION  AND  VISUALIZATION 

“Did  you  say  'pig,'  or  ‘fig’?”  said  the  Cat. 

“I  said  ‘pig’,”  replied  Alice;  “and  I  wish  you  wouldn't  keep  appearing 
and  vanishing  so  suddenly:  you  make  one  quite  giddy!” 

“All  right,”  said  the  Cat;  and  this  time  it  vanished  quite  slowly,  be¬ 
ginning  with  the  end  of  the  tail,  and  ending  with  the  grin,  which  remained 
some  time  after  the  rest  of  it  had  gone. 

“Well!  I’ve  often  seen  a  cat  without  a  grin,”  thought  Alice;  “but  a  grin 
without  a  cat!  It's  the  most  curious  thing  I  ever  saw  in  all  my  life!”* 

LEWIS  CARROLL 

The  significance  of  the  paradoxical  phase  is  not  limited  to  pathological 
states  such  as  those  previously  observed,  and  it  is  highly  probable  that  it 
plays  an  important  part  in  normal  men  too,  who  often  are  apt  to  be  much 
more  influenced  by  words  than  by  the  actual  facts  of  the  surrounding 
reality.  (394)  I.  p.  pavlov 

In  the  case  of  an  imbecile,  repetition  without  comprehension,  psittacism, 
may  prevail;  the  r6le  of  visual  impressions  is  null  or  nearly  so  among  the 
illiterate;  the  deaf  from  birth  who  have  learned  to  speak  have  no  auditory 
impressions  to  intervene.  But,  normally,  it  is  feelings  and  ideas  that  ap¬ 
pear  in  action,  in  the  form  of  language.  <4ip  henri  pi£ron 

The  specific  neurones  necessary  for  sensation  are  also  necessary  for  the 
associative  reawakening  of  that  sensation,  which  is  called  the  image — a 
dynamic  process  and  not  a  photographic  negative  resting  miraculously  in 
the  nervous  substance,  where  some  subtle  spirit  might  go  to  consult  it. 
<411)  HENRI  FI^RON 

It  is  none  the  less  true  that  certain  cultivated  persons  can  use  visual 
images,  and  can  even  use  these  images  in  preference  to  others.  <4ii) 

HENRI  PI&RON 

Objectification  and  visualization  are  usually  not  differentiated.  The 
first  represents  a  very  undesirable  semantic  process,  whereas  the  second, 
visualization,  represents  one  of  the  most  beneficial  and  efficient  forms  of 
human  'thought'.  From  a  A  point  of  view,  such  a  lack  of  differentiation 
between  the  two  reactions  appears  as  a  very  serious  problem,  requiring 
an  analysis  of  the  respective  mechanisms. 

To  visualize,  we  must  have  such  forms  of  representation  as  lend 
themselves  to  visualization;  otherwise,  we  must  fail.  The  ^-system, 
which  could  not  adequately  handle  asymmetrical  relations,  and  could  not 
be  built  explicitly  on  structure,  necessarily  involves  identification.  In  the 
/I  period,  we  were  able  to  visualize  objects  and  a  few  objective  situa¬ 
tions,  but  all  the  higher  abstractions  were,  in  principle,  inaccessible  to 
visualization,  making  scientific  theories  needlessly  difficult.  A  ^-system, 
free  from  identification,  must  be  based  explicitly  on  structure  on  all  levels 
(structure  defined  in  terms  of  relations  and  ultimately  multi-dimensional 

*  Alice  in  Wonderland . 

IDENTIFICATION  AND  VISUALIZATION 

order),  which  can  be  easily  visualized.  It  should  be  recalled  that  struc- 
litrr,  relations,  and  multi-dimensional  order  supply  us  with  a  language 
which  completely  bridges  daily-life  experiences  with  all  science,  leading 
toward  a  general  theory  of  values.  Mathematics  and  mathematical 
physics  then  become  the  representatives  and  the  foundation  of  all 
sc  ience ;  and  in  the  human  field  a  general  theory  of  values  will  lead  to 
adjustment  or  sanity  and  will  some  day  include  ethics,  economics , . 

For  these  reasons,  the  Structural  Differential  is  uniquely  useful,  as, 
at  a  glance,  it  conveys  to  the  eye  structural  differences  between  the  world 
of  the  animal,  the  primitive  man,  and  the  infant,  which,  no  matter  how 
complex,  is  extremely  simple  in  comparison  with  the  world  of  the 
'civilized*  adult.  The  first  involves  a  one-valued  orientation  which,  if  ap¬ 
plied  to  the  oo-valued  facts  of  life,  gives  extremely  inadequate,  wasteful, 
and  ultimately  painful  adjustment,  where  only  the  few  strongest  sur¬ 
vive.  The  second  involves  oo-valued  orientation,  similar  in  structure  to  the 
actual,  empirical,  oo-valued  facts  of  life,  allowing  a  one-to-one  adjust¬ 
ment  in  evaluation  with  the  facts  in  each  individual  case,  and  producing 
a  semantic  flexibility . ,  necessary  for  adjustment.  This  flexibility  is  known 
to  be  the  foundation  for  balanced  semantic  states,  ‘higher  intelligence*,. 

Visualization  requires  a  definite  elimination,  through  differentiation, 
of  harmful  identification,  which,  as  usual,  is  based  on  incorrect  evalua¬ 
tion  of  structural  issues.  Thus,  we  have  had  endless,  bitter,  and  futile 
urguments  as  to  whether  or  not  the  ‘mechanistic*  point  of  view  of  the 
world  and  ourselves  is  legitimate,  adequate , .  The  average  person,  as 
well  as  the  majority  of  ‘philosophers*,  identifies  ‘mechanistic*  with  ‘ma- 
chinistic*.  Roughly,  mechanics  is  a  name  for  a  science  which  deals  with 
dynamic  manifestations  on  all  levels ;  thus,  we  have  macroscopic  classical 
mechanics,  colloidal  mechanics  now  being  formulated,  and  the  sub- 
microscopic  quantum  mechanics  already  being  well-developed  disciplines. 
In  the  rough,  ‘machine*  is  a  label  applied  to  a  man-made  apparatus  for 
the  application  or  transformation  of  power.  But  even  machines  differ 
greatly ;  thus,  a  dynamo  is  entirely  different  in  principle,  in  theory,  and 
in  applications  from  a  lathe  or  an  automobile. 

If  we  ask :  ‘Is  the  machinists  point  of  view  of  the  world  justified?*, 
the  answer  is  simple  and  undeniable;  namely,  that  this  point  of  view  is 
grossly  inadequate  and  should  be  entirely  abandoned.  But  it  is  not  so  with 
the  mechanistic  point  of  view,  understood  in  its  modern  sense  and  in¬ 
cluding  the  quantum  mechanics  point  of  view,  which  is  entirely  struc¬ 
tural.  In  1933,  we  know  positively  that  even  the  gross  macroscopic 
physico-chemical  characteristics  of  everything  we  are  dealing  with 
depend  on  the  sub-microscopic  structure  (see  Part  X).  The  details  are 

454  VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

not  yet  fully  known,  but  the  principles  are  firmly  established.  With  a 
A  understanding  and  evaluation  of  the  unique  importance  of  structure 
as  the  only  possible  content  of  ‘knowledge’,  these  ‘firmly  established’ 
principles  become  irr ever sibly  established* .  W e  may  go  further  and  say 
that  the  quantum  mechanics  point  of  view  becomes  the  first  structurally 
correct  point  of  view  and,  as  such,  should  be  accepted  fully  in  any  sane 
orientation.  If  we  stop  identification,  then  we  will  differentiate  between 
some  simple  facts.  For  instance,  we  will  understand  that  any  semantic 
state,  reaction,  or  process  has  its  corresponding  sub-microscopic,  struc¬ 
tural,  colloidal,  and  ultimately  quantum  mechanical  processes  going  on 
in  the  nervous  system ;  however,  the  j.r,  or  feelings  of  pain  or  pleasure . , 
are  not  the  sub-microscopic  processes.  These  belong  to  different  levels, 
but  with  oo-valued  semantics  we  can  establish  in  principle  a  one-to-one 
correspondence  between  them.  Thus,  when  we  differentiate  adequately, 
the  older  mac/nnistic  objections  disappear  entirely;  and,  in  its  proper 
field,  for  structural  reasons,  we  must  preserve  the  mechanistic ,  and  en¬ 
tirely  abandon  the  too  crude  machmistic  attitudes.  The  mechanistic 
(1933)  attitude  is  based  on  structure  and  so  is  indispensable  for  visual¬ 
ization  ;  and  training  in  visualisation  automatically  abolishes  objectifica¬ 
tion,  which  represents  an  important  special  case  of  all  identification. 
From  the  point  of  view  of  a  A- system,  adjustment  and  sanity  in  humans 
depend,  to  a  large  extent,  on  their  ‘understanding’,  which  is  entirely 
structural  in  character;  therefore,  we  must  accept  a  mechanistic  (1933) 
attitude ,  which,  in  the  meantime,  can  be  visualized. 

The  finding  of  structural  means  of  representation  facilitates  visual¬ 
isation,  imagining,  picturing,.  In  the  adjustment  trend  we  start  with 
lower  nerve-impressions,  ‘senses’,  ‘feelings’.,  lower  abstractions,  and 
these  are  abstracted  again  by  the  higher  centres.  The  higher  centres 
produce  the  ‘very  abstract’  theories,  which  cannot  be  visualized  for  a 
while.  The  lower  centres,  which  are  involved  in  visualization,  can  deal 
only  with  structures  which  can  be  ‘concretely  pictured’.  So  we  always 
try  to  invent  mechanistic  or  geometrical  theories,  such  as  can  be  handled 
by  the  lower  centres. 

Individual  ‘experiences’,  supplied  by  the  lower  centres  of  different 
individuals,  do  not  blend  directly.  They  are  blended  in  the  higher  cen¬ 
tres.  In  them  manifold  experiences,  whether  individual  or  accumulated 
by  the  race  (time-binding),  are  abstracted  further,  integrated,  and  sum¬ 
marized.  Once  this  has  been  accomplished,  structural  means  are  sought 
and  discovered  to  translate  these  higher  abstractions  into  lower,  the  only 
ones  with  which  the  lower  centres  can  deal.  Then  we  can  ‘visualize’  our 
theories,  and  the  higher  centres  not  only  influence  the  lower  centres,  but 

IDENTIFICATION  AND  VISUALIZATION 

the  lower  centres  have  appropriate  means  by  which  to  co-operate  with 
the  higher  centres  in  their  new  non-el  quests. 

The  lack  of  explicitly  structural  forms  of  representations  is  respon¬ 
sible,  also,  for  the  difficulties  which  arise  when  the  higher  order  abstrac¬ 
tions  are  translated  into  the  reflex-reactions  of  the  lower  centres,  which 
can  deal  with  ‘intuitions’,  ‘orientations’,  ‘visualization’,  .  The  so-called 
‘geniuses’  have  a  very  subtle  nervous  system  in  which  the  translation  of 
higher  order  abstractions  into  lower  and  vice  versa  is  easily  accomplished. 
From  the  point  of  view  of  forms  or  representations,  we  can  have  two 
issues:  (1)  we  may  have  el  forms  of  representations  which  are  not 
based  on  structure,  visualization . ,  and  cannot  efficiently  affect  the  activi¬ 
ties  of  the  lower  centres;  (2)  we  may  have  a  non-el  system  based  on 
structure,  visualization . ,  which  can  be  translated  simply,  easily,  and 
efficiently  into  the  terms  of  the  lower  centres.  These  problems  are  of 
educational  importance  and  should  be  worked  out  more  fully. 

In  my  experience  with  grown-ups  who  have  had  only  a  short  con¬ 
tact  with  my  work,  I  find,  in  many  cases,  that,  although  they  may  have 
even  given  their  complete  verbal  approval  of  the  main  point  of  the  sys¬ 
tem,  yet,  invariably,  in  practice,  the  full  application  is  lacking.  Obvi¬ 
ously,  the  semantic  importance  of  the  present  findings  is  not  in  the  verbal 
approval  alone,  when  that  approval  is  not  applied,  but  in  the  consistent 
and  permanent  instinctive  acquisition  of  the  new  semantic  attitude  which 
involves  a  complete  elimination  of  identification,  allness,  elementalism , . 

We  can  teach  any  one  to  repeat  verbally,  by  heart,  instructions  for 
operating  an  automobile,  a  piano,  or  a  typewriter;  but  no  one  could 
operate  them  satisfactorily  by  reflex-action  after  such  verbal  training 
alone.  To  operate  effectively  and  skilfully  any  structural  complex,  we 
must  become  intimately  familiar  with  its  structural  working  through  actual 
reflex-training,  and  only  then  can  we  expect  the  best  results.  In  my  ex¬ 
perience,  this  is  true  with  language,  and,  without  the  visual  Structural 
Differential  on  which  we  can  point  our  finger  to  the  objective  level  and  urge 
silence . ,  such  basic  semantic  reflex-training  cannot  properly  be  given. 

If  we  ask  a  man:  ‘Do  you  know  how  to  drive  a  car?’,  and  he  an¬ 
swers  ‘Yes’,  we  assume  that  he  has  acquired  the  proper  reflexes.  If  he 
answers  ‘No,  but  I  know  about  it’,  he  means  that  he  has  not  acquired 
the  proper  reflexes,  but  that  his  ‘knowledge’  is  on  purely  verbal  levels, 
non-effective  in  application  on  non-verbal  reflex-levels.  This  applies  fully 
to  s.r;  we  may  ‘know’  about  them,  but  we  may  never  apply  successfully 
what  we  supposedly  ‘know’.  To  ‘know’  represents  a  multiordinal  process 
which  involves  equally  the  activities  of  the  lower  nerve  centres  and  of 
the  higher.  In  our  el  systems  we  had  no  such  distinction,  and  so  we 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

confused  them.  The  older  ‘knowledge’,  when  presented  in  el  language, 
could  fiot  have  been  absorbed  easily  by  the  non-el  organisms-as-a-whole. 
As  the  main  task,  at  present,  is  to  unlearn  the  older  s.r,  the  new  reactions 
need  a  persistent  training,  particularly  by  the  grown-ups.  The  non-el, 
A  language  and  method  prove  to  have  psychophysiological  importance. 

Although  the  neurological  mechanism  underlying  identification,  ob¬ 
jectification,  visualization.,  is  not  well  known  (1933),  neurology  gives 
us  evidence  that  in  these  states,  as  well  as  in  delusions  and  hallucina¬ 
tions,  the  actual  lower  nerve  centres  are  somehow  engaged.  We  may 
assume  that  different  ‘resistances’,  ‘blockages’.,  in  some  parts  of  the 
nervous  system  make  the  passage  of  nervous  impulses  more  difficult, 
and  it  seems  reasonable  to  suppose  that,  in  such  cases,  the  paths  travelled 
by  the  nervous  currents  are  different. 

In  Fig.  1,  an  hypothetical  and  over-simplified  scheme  of  the  different 
types  of  distribution  of  nervous  currents,  as  is  known  functionally,  is 
suggested.  The  ordering  is  not  anatomical  but  functional  in  terms  of 
degrees  of  intensity.  In  this  scheme,  we  may  consider  that  the  nervous 
impulse  (A)  reaches  the  lower  nerve  centres,  the 
brain-stem  and  the  thalamus,  passes  through  the 
sub-cortical  layers  and  the  cortex,  continuously 
being  transformed.  Finally,  in  returning,  it  may 
take  either  the  beneficial  and  adaptive  semantic 
form  of  visualization  (V),  free  from  identifica¬ 
tion  and  semantic  disturbances,  or  may  involve 
identification,  with  semantic  disturbances,  such 
as  objectifications  of  different  orders  (O),  delu¬ 
sions  (D),  illusions  (I),  or,  finally  hallucinations 
(H). 

Identification,  or  confusion  of  orders  of  ab¬ 
stractions,  consists  of  erroneous  evaluation :  that 
which  is  going  on  inside  of  our  skin  has  objective  existence  outside  of 
our  skins;  the  ascribing  of  external  objectivity  to  words;  the  identifica¬ 
tion  in  value  of  ‘memories  of  experiences’  with  experience ;  the  identi¬ 
fication  of  our  s.r  and  states  with  words;  the  identification  of  infer¬ 
ences  with  descriptions,.  Identification  is  greatly  facilitated,  if  not 
actually  induced,  by  the  A  structure  of  language  in  which  we  have  one 
.name  for  at  least  four  entirely  different  entities.  Thus,  the  A  ‘apple’ 
(without  subscripts  and  date)  is  used  as  a  label  for  the  physico-chemical 
process ;  for  an  object,  say,  ‘apple1>Feb.23fi93s’ ;  for  a  ‘mental’  picture  on  the 
un-speakable  semantic  level,  and  for  the  verbal  definition.  Under  such 
linguistic  conditions,  it  is  practically  impossible,  without  special  training , 

IDKNTIHCATION  AND  VISUALIZATION 

nut  to  identify  the  four  entirely  different  abstractions  into  one . ,  with  all 
the  following  sinister  consequences. 

Delusions  represent  incorrect  notions  and  inappropriate  sr  formed, 
not  by  insufficient  knowledge  or  ‘logic’,  but  by  affective  pressure  in  a 
definite  evaluational  direction;  as,  for  instance,  delusions  of  grandeur; 
delusions  of  persecution;  delusions  of  ‘sin’;  delusions  of  reference,. 

Illusions  appear  more  like  real  perceptions,  but  pathologically 
changed.  For  instance,  anything  may  be  semantically  coloured  or  inter¬ 
preted,  or  evaluated  as  an  offense,  or  a  threat,  or  a  promise , . 

Hallucinations  consist  of  ‘perceptions’,  with  all  their  vividness,  but 
without  any  external  stimuli.  Patients  hear  voices ;  see  visions ;  feel 
pricks  or  burnings . ,  when  there  is  nothing  to  hear,  or  see,  or  to  be 
pricked  by. 

In  visualisation ,  identification  does  not  occur;  orders  of  abstractions 
arc  not  confused;  semantic  disturbances  do  not  appear;  the  evaluation 
is  correct;  a  ‘picture’  is  evaluated  as  a  picture  and  not  as  the  events  , .  In 
oilier  words,  because  of  the  consciousness  of  abstracting,  the  natural 
order  of  evaluation  is  preserved.  But  once,  through  identification,  this 
natural  order  is  reversed,  it  marks  a  pathological  condition  more  or  less 
morbid,  and  often  of  a  non-adaptive  character. 

Identification  represents,  in  affective  tension,  the  mildest  semantic 
disturbance,  consisting  of  an  error  in  meanings  and  evaluation.  Objects 
arc  evaluated  as  events;  ‘ideas’,  or  higher  order  abstractions,  are  evalu¬ 
ated  as  objects;  as  experience;  as  the  un-speakable  semantic  states  or 
reactions ;  otherwise,  as  lower  order  abstractions.  The  confusion  in  the 
held  of  higher  order  abstractions  follows  a  similar  rule.  Inferences 
obviously  represent  higher  order  abstractions  than  descriptions ;  so,  when 
I  hey  are  not  differentiated,  higher  order  abstractions  are  again  identified 
with  the  lower.  We  all  know  from  daily-life  experience  the  fantastic 
amount  of  suffering  we  can,  and  do,  actually  produce  for  ourselves  and 
others  with  such  identifications. 

In  delusions,  a  similar  but  more  intense  identification  occurs,  result¬ 
ing  in  erroneous  semantic  evaluation;  wishes,  feelings,  and  other 
semantic  states  inside  of  our  skins  are  projected  into  the  external  world, 
giving  delusionally  strong  objective  evaluation. 

In  illusions,  we  also  ascribe  to,  or  identify  our  complex  semantic 
states  with,  different  perceptions  and  evaluate  our  higher  order  abstrac¬ 
tions  as  lower. 

In  hallucinations,  this  process  of  reversing  the  natural  order  comes 
to  a  culminating  point :  higher  order  abstractions  are  translated  into,  and 
have  the  full  vividness  and  ‘reality’  of,  lower  order  abstractions. 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

We  see  that  the  pathological  processes  of  ‘mental’  illnesses  involve 
identification  as  a  generalised  symptom;  which  means  the  reversal ,  in 
different  degrees ,  of  the  natural  order  of  evaluation  based  on  the  inten¬ 
sified  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions.  The  more  intense  this  process 
of  reversal  becomes,  the  more  non-adaptive  and  morbid  the  manifesta¬ 
tions.  It  should  be  noticed  that  this  analysis  becomes  a  necessity  once 
we  decide  to  accept  a  non-el  language.  This  analysis  is  far  from  exhaus¬ 
tive,  but  an  analysis  in  new  non-el ,  structurally  correct  terms,  throws  a 
new  light  on  old  problems. 

Hallucinations  which  result  from  ‘physical’  illness  do  not  represent 
a  permanent  danger,  but  when  a  patient  seems  ‘physically’  well,  and  his 
confusions  of  orders  of  abstractions,  delusions,  illusions,  and  hallucina¬ 
tions  become  completely  ‘rationalized’,  then  these  are  unmistakable  signs 
of  serious  ‘mental’  illness,  suggesting  sub-microscopic  colloidal  lesions. 
Now  this  ‘rationalization’  represents  nothing  else  but  a  nervous  disturb¬ 
ance  and  involves  identification  somewhere.  In  ‘physical’  ills  the  nervous 
system  may  be  disturbed,  but  the  illness  does  not  usually  originate  in 
nervous  disturbances,  and  so,  as  such,  is  not  dangerous. 

The  distinction  between  visualization  and  objectification  based  on  a 
/^-system  seems  new ;  the  difference  is  subtle,  but  when  it  is  formulated 
we  can  discover  a  simple  means  whereby  to  control  the  situation.  If  we 
were  to  take  a  ‘bone’  made  of  papier-mache  and  smear  it  with  fat  or 
meat,  Fido  would,  perhaps,  objectify  (identify)  such  a  ‘bone’  from  the 
smell  and  the  form  of  the  papier-mache  with  an  edible  one,  and  would 
fight  for  it.  We  do  a  similar  sort  of  thing  when  we  objectify.  Religious 
wars,  the  ‘holy  inquisition’,  the  persecution  of  science,  which  we  are 
witnessing  even  at  the  present  day  in  some  countries  and  communities, 
are  excellent  examples. 

We  should  notice  that  Fido  was  able  to  trust  his  natural,  even 
‘objectified’,  instinct,  for  nature  does  not  play  such  tricks  on  him,  such 
as  producing  ‘bones’  of  papier-mache.  If  nature  did,  dogs  that  objectify 
and  persist  in  their  liking  for  such  ‘food’  would  soon  be  eliminated. 
These  particular  objectifications  would  be  dangerous  and  painful  to 
those  particular  kinds  of  dogs  with  that  particular  nervous  system,  and 
would  ultimately  prove  of  no  survival  value.  Thus  identification,  which 
represents  an  inappropriate  evaluation,  is  harmful  to  all  life,  but  is  little 
noticed  at  present,  because  the  main  periods  of  the  animal  racial  adjust¬ 
ment  have  been  accomplished  long  ago.  Experiments  on  flies  show  that 
the  number  of  mutants  which  may  be  produced  in  a  laboratory  is  large, 
but  very  few  would  survive  outside  of  a  laboratory.  In  unaided  nature, 
these  mutants  probably  occur,  but  seldom  leave  observable  traces.3 

IDENTIFICATION  AND  VISUALIZATION 

I  lowevcr,  even  today,  as  Pavlov  has  shown  in  his  laboratories,  we  can 
impose,  by  an  interplay  of  a  four-dimensional  order  of  stimuli,  such  con¬ 
ditions  upon  animals  for  which  their  nervous  survival  structure  was  not 
naturally  adapted,  and  so  induce  nervous  pathological  states.  Wrong 
evaluation  is,  indeed,  harmful  to  all  life  and  accounts  for  such  rigid 
survival  laws  in  nature,  which  science  teaches  humans  how  to  make  more 
flexible.  Practically  word  for  word,  this  applies  to  ourselves.  We  are 
constantly  producing  more  and  more  complex  conditions  of  life,  man¬ 
made,  man-invented,  and  deceptive  for  the  non-prepared.  These  new 
conditions  are  usually  due  to  the  application  of  the  work  of  some  genius, 
and  the  nervous  system  and  s.r  of  most  of  us  are  not  prepared  for  such 
eventualities.  In  spite  of  inventions  and  discoveries  of  science,  which 
are  human  achievements,  we  still  preserve  animalistic  systems  and  doc¬ 
trines  which  shape  our  s.r.  Hence,  life  becomes  more  strained  and  in¬ 
creasingly  more  unhappy,  thereby  multiplying  the  number  of  nervous 
break-downs. 

It  is  known  that  not  all  people  are  able  to  visualize  equally  well.  In 
the  older  days  this  fact  was  taken  for  granted,  and  did  not  suggest 
further  analysis.  Under  present  conditions  in  many  human  beings  and 
hIho  in  animals,  as  shown  in  the  experiments  of  Pavlov,  the  visual 
stimuli  are  physiologically  weaker  than  the  auditory  ones;  in  man,  how- 
rver,  the  visual  stimuli  should  be  physiologically  stronger  than  the  audi- 
lory.  This  difference  does  not  affect  the  general  mechanism  of  the  cyclic 
nerve  currents  and  orders  of  abstractions.  In  the  auditory  type  the  main 
returning  currents  are  deviated  into  different  paths.  The  division  be¬ 
tween  ‘visual’  and  ‘auditory’  types  is  not  sharp.  In  life  we  deal  mainly 
with  individuals  who  have  no  more  than  a  special  inclination  for  one 
or  the  other  types  of  reaction. 

In  the  case  of  ‘mental’  processes,  human  adjustment  has  to  be 
managed  on  higher,  more  numerous,  and  more  complex  levels.  Obvi- 
ounly,  then,  the  auditory  types  are  more  enmeshed  by  words,  further 
removed  from  life  than  the  visual  ones,  and  so  cannot  be  equally  well 
adjusted.  This  fact  should  not  be  neglected,  and  on  the  human  levels 
we'  should  have  educational  methods  to  train  in  visualization,  which  au¬ 
tomatically  eliminates  identification. 

The  auditory  channels  which  connect  us  with  the  external  world 
are  much  less  subtle  and  effective  than  the  visual  ones.  The  eye  is  not 
merely  a  ‘sense-organ’.  Embryology  shows  that  the  eye  is  a  part  of  the 
brain  itself,  and  what  is  called  the  ‘optic  nerve’  must  be  considered  not 
a  nerve  but  as  a  genuine  nervous  tract.  This  fact,  of  course,  would 
iHMign  to  the  eye  a  special  semantic  importance,  not  shared  with  other 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

‘sense-organs’  or  receptors.  We  ought  not  to  be  surprised  to  find  that 
the  visual  types  are  better  adjusted  to  this  world  than  the  auditory  types. 
In  pathological  states,  such  as  identifications,  delusions,  illusions,  and 
hallucinations,  there  seems  to  be  involved  a  translation  of  auditory 
semantic  stimuli  into  visual  images.  In  these  pathological  cases  the  order 
of  evaluation  appears  as  label  first  and  object  next,  while  the  adaptive 
order  seems  to  require  object  first  and  label  next , .  There  seems  little 
doubt  that  visualization  is  very  useful,  and  that  identification  is  espe¬ 
cially  harmful.  The  most  effective  means  to  transform  the  s.r  of  iden¬ 
tification  is  found  in  visualization ,  which  indicates  its  special  semantic 
importance . 

The  semantic  disturbance  of  identification  may  have  many  sources, 
auditory  included,  but  the  only  adaptive  trend  is  in  visualization,  which 
involves  in  some  way  the  optical  neural  structure.  Some  structural  light 
is  thrown  on  this  subject  when  we  realize  that,  physiologically,  the  eye 
is  more  closely  related  to  the  vegetative  nervous  system,  which  regu¬ 
lates  our  vital  organs,  than  the  ear  is.  In  man  the  optic  thalamus  is 
greatly  enlarged,  so  that  the  whole  thalamus  is  often  called  the  ‘optic 
thalamus  .  Actually,  the  thalamus  has  many  functions,  other  than  visual, 
and  is  connected  with  affective  manifestations. 

As  most  of  our  observations  are  accomplished  by  the  aid  of  the  eye, 
we  should  expect  auditory  types  to  be  poor  observers ,  and  so  racially, 
in  the  long  run,  not  so  well  adjusted  semantically.  Observation  shows 
that  the  auditory  types  often  have  infantile  reactions— a  serious  handi¬ 
cap.  From  an  adaptive  point  of  view  the  ‘normal’,  non-inf antile,  best- 
adjusted  individual  ought  to  be  a  visual  type.  Auditory  types  must 
also  be  further  detached  from  actualities  than  the  visual  types,  as  audi¬ 
tory  stimuli  involve  more  inferences  than  descriptions,  which  is  the 
opposite  of  the  functioning  of  the  visual  types.  If  inferences,  rather 
than  descriptions,  are  involved,  we  naturally  deal  with  higher  abstrac¬ 
tions  first,  and  with  the  lower  next,  and  so  there  is  always  a  danger  of 
the  semantic  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions,  which  necessarily  in¬ 
volves  inappropriate  evaluation,-  of  which  objectification  is  only  a  par¬ 
ticular  case. 

Even  to  common  sense  it  seems  clear  that  there  is  a  significant  dif¬ 
ference  between  ‘knowing’  this  world  by  hearing  and  ‘knowing’  it  by 
seeing.  There  is,  likewise,  a  difference  between  the  translation  of  higher 
abstractions  into  lower  terms  by  the  visual  path,  and  the  corresponding 
translation  by  the  auditory  path.  In  daily  life  we  never  say  ‘I  hear’ 
when  we  wish  to  convey  that  we  understand ;  but  we  say  ‘I  see'.  When 
we  say  ‘I  hear’,  we  usually  wish  to  convey  that  we  have  heard  some- 

IDENTIFICATION  AND  VISUALIZATION 

tiling  which  we  did  not  fully  grasp  or  approve.  The  above  relation  is 
rather  important,  but  has  not  been  sufficiently  analysed.  The  problems  of 
introversion  and  extroversion  are  connected  with  it. 

The  relation  between  the  problems  of  identification  and  the  number 
of  values  found  in  the  empirical  world  in  connection  with  the  number 
of  values  ascribed,  or  assumed . ,  by  our  semantic  processes,  is  most 
important. 

The  following  analysis  is,  by  necessity,  one-sided,  over-simplified . , 
as  a  fuller  analysis  would  require  a  separate  volume.  I  consider  many 
problems  ‘in  principle*  only ;  this  allows  me  a  briefer  treatment  necessary 
for  my  purpose,  but  it  must  be  realized  that  our  language  and  general 
semantics,  which,  in  practice,  we  use  unconsciously,  are  extremely  com¬ 
plex  and  involve  one-,  two-,  three-,  and  oo-valued  components,  never,  as 
yet,  sharply  differentiated  nor  formulated.  Investigation  shows  that  the 
oo-valued  semantics  is  the  most  general  and  includes  the  one-,  two- . ,  and 
few-valued  semantics  as  particular  cases.  The  one-valued  semantics  of 
literal  identifications  are  found  only  among  animals,  primitive  people, 
infants,  and  the  ‘mentally*  ill,  although  more  or  less  serious  traces  of 
some  identification  are  found  in  practically  all  of  us,  because  these  are 
embodied  in  the  structure  of  our  language  and  prevent  the  acquisition 
of  the  oo-valued  systems  necessary  for  sanity.  For  my  purpose,  it  is 
enough  to  formulate  the  problems  for  the  complete  elimination  of  primi¬ 
tive  identification,  and  then  modern,  oo-valued,  A  semantics  follow 
automatically.  Under  such  conditions,  I  must  concentrate  on  the  vital 
problem  of  one-valued  identification  and  treat  the  two- . ,  and  few-valued 
systems  sketchily,  ‘in  principle’,  although  we  must  realize  that  the  last 
systems  have  been  made  more  flexible  by  the  use  of  many  ingenious 
verbal  devices  which  I  do  not  even  mention  in  the  present  work. 

Let  me  repeat  that  the  attitudes,  flexibility,  or  fixity . ,  of  our  s.r  de¬ 
pend  to  a  large  extent  on  the  structure  of  language  used,  which  involves 
also  its  appropriate  general  semantics.  The  ‘logic’  of  our  schooldays 
represents  a  composite  affair,  in  the  main  A ,  and  we  call  it  by  this  last 
name.  This  ‘logic’  can  be  considered  as  a  two-valued  ‘logic’  because  of 
the  fundamental  ‘law  of  the  excluded  third*,  expressed  as  ‘A  is  B  or  not 
B*,  by  which  a  third  possibility  is  excluded.  But  even  the  traditional 
‘logic*  had  to  admit  in  its  scheme  what  was  called  ‘modality’;  namely, 
some  degrees  of  certainty  or  uncertainty  with  which  a  given  statement 
is  made.  Lately,  Lukasiewicz  has  shown  that  a  three-valued  ‘logic’  can 
be  so  formulated  as  to  include  modality.  Later,  he  and  Tarski  general¬ 
ized  it  to  an  w-valued  ‘logic’.  When  n  tends  toward  infinity,  this  ‘logic’ 
becomes  the  ‘logic’  of  probability.  If  these  disciplines  are  made  non-el , 

Vli.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

we  have  what  I  call  one-,  two-,  three- . ,  and  oo-valued  general  semantics 
Theoretically,  and  in  practice,  we  are  interested  mostly  in  the  one-,  two-, 
three-,  few-valued,  and  oo-valued  general  semantics.  For  my  purpose, 
and  for  simplicity,  I  shall  deal  only  with  identification;  that  is,  the 
primitive  one-valued  semantics,  the  influence  of  which  is  found  in  both 
the  two-  and  three- valued  semantics,  and  may  only  be  completely  elimi¬ 
nated  in  an  oo-valued  semantics . 

We  live  in  a  four-dimensional  space-time  manifold  which,  on  all 
levels,  consists  of  absolutely  individual  events,  objects,  situations,  ab¬ 
stractions  . ,  and  we  must  conclude  that  structurally  we  live  in  an  indefi¬ 
nitely  many-valued  or  oo-valued  world,  the  possibilities  of  which  follow 
in  principle  the  laws  of  combinations  of  higher  orders.  The  above 
statement  represents  a  description  of  a  structural  observation  about  the 
empirical  world,  independent  of  our  pleasure,  and  can  be  contradicted 
only  by  exhibiting  empirically,  actual  ‘identity'  or  ‘absolute  sameness'. , 
of  different  events,  objects,  or  situations . ,  which  exhibiting  becomes  an 
impossibility  if  we  decide  to  investigate  facts  more  fully. 

Under  such  empirical  conditions,  for  adjustment  and  so  for  sanity, 
we  must  have  on  semantic  levels  such  theories,  systems,  methods . , 
which  would  allow  us  in  a  given  case,  under  given  conditions,  at  a  given 
date , ,  to  evaluate  the  individual  happenings  uniquely;  or  which  would 
allow  us  to  establish  a  one-to-one  correspondence  between  the  essen¬ 
tially  oo-valued  facts  of  experience  and  our  semantic  states.  It  becomes 
obvious  that  this  can  be  accomplished  only  if  we  have  oo-valued  and 
non-el  general  semantics.  We  see  that  the  two-,  or  three-valued,  el  A 
‘logic',  ‘psychology'. ,  and,  in  general,  the  ^-system,  being  structurally 
different  from  the  empirical  world,  will  prevent,  in  principle,  such  an 
adjustment  and,  therefore,  sanity. 

Identification  may  be  considered  as  the  remains  of  pre-human,  or 
primitive,  or  infantile,  one- valued  semantics,  which  establishes,  or  results 
from,  semantic  states,  by  which  the  essentially  oo-valued  facts  of  experi¬ 
ence  are  not  differentiated  or  evaluated  properly,  and  so  the  indefinitely 
many  values  of  these  facts  are  identified  into  a  single  value.  Such 
identification  is  always  structurally  unjustified  and  dangerous,  and  may 
be  the  result  of  a  great  many  factors,  such  as  low  development,  ignor¬ 
ance,  insufficient  observation,  ‘wishful  thinking',  fears,  pathological 
states  of  our  nervous  system,  different  semantic  disturbances,  ‘mental' 
ills,  infantilism  in  the  grown-ups , .  But  among  humans  we  cannot  avoid 
training,  through  the  mechanism  of  language  and  its  structure,  in  some, 
most  often  unconscious,  general  semantics,  and  so  a  great  deal  depends 

IDENTIFICATION  AND  VISUALIZATION 

on  what  kind  of  semantics  or  methods  of  evaluation  we  impose  on  our 
children. 

We  should  notice  an  important  fact  which  is  usually  disregarded; 
namely,  that  a  language,  and  often  one  word,  involves  a  definite  type  of 
semantics.  Thus,  in  primitive  ‘polysynthetic*  languages,  it  is  not  a  ques¬ 
tion  of  associations  or  superstitions;  the  mystic  characteristics  and  the 
thing  simply  are  not  differentiated,  but  literally  identified  into  one  whole. 
Thus,  we  have  one-valued  semantics  where  the  ‘good’  and  ‘evil  spirits' 
actually  participate  in  everything  considered  as  a  synthetic  whole.2 

A  language  of  ‘true'  and  ‘false'  involves  two-valued  semantics ;  the 
introduction  of  adverbs  or  their  equivalents  introduces  modality  and  so 
three- valued  semantics.  The  introduction  of  indefinitely  many  degrees 
between  the  ‘true'  and  ‘false’  leads  finally  to  oo-valued  semantics. 

A  diagram  may  help  to  make  this  clearer. 

A,  B,  C.,  oo-valued  and  different  facts 
of  experience,  which,  in  a  given  case, 
have,  by  necessity,  indefinitely  many , 
single ,  individual  values, 
a,  b,  c . ,  oo-valued  non-aristotelian  orien¬ 
tation  structurally  similar  to  the  empirical 
world  which  allows  us,  in  a  given  case,  to 
assign  indefinitely  many  single,  one-to-one 

corresponding  values  to  the  individual  Fig.  2 

facts. 

A,  B,  C.,  oo-valued  and  different  facts 
of  experience,  which,  in  a  given  case, 
have,  by  necessity,  indefinitely  many, 
single,  individual  values. 

2Slt  Sa.,  two-,  three-.,  and  few-valued 
aristotelian  orientation  structurally  non- 
similar  to  the  empirical  world,  which 
compels  us  to  ascribe  two . ,  or  few  values 
to  the  essentially  indefinitely  many- valued 

and  different  facts,  resulting  in  identifira-  Fig.  3 

tion  of  the  many  values  into  a  few,  which 
improper  evaluation  is  projected  on  the 
facts. 

A,  B,  C . ,  oo-valued  and  different  facts 
of  experience,  which,  ^  in  a  given  case, 
have,  by  necessity,  indefinitely  many,  * 
single,  individual  values.  ^ 

ft,  one-valued,  animal,  primitive . ,  orien¬ 
tation,  structurally  non-similar  to  the 
empirical  world,  which  compels  us  to 
ascribe  one  value  to  the  essentially  in¬ 
definitely  many-valued  and  different  facts, 
resulting  in  identification  of  the  many 
values  into  one,  which  improper  evalua¬ 
tion  is  projected  on  the  facts. 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

In  Fig.  2,  the  arrows  Aa,  Bb . ,  indicate  the  A  one-to-one  correspon¬ 
dence  between  the  oo-valued  individual  facts  of  life,  A,B,C . ,  and  the 
corresponding  s.rt  or  a,b,c  orientations . ,  which  ascribe  single  values  to 
the  different  facts,  establishing  a  foundation  for  structurally  correct 
proper  evaluation  which  helps  adjustment  and  so  sanity. 

In  Fig.  3,  the  A  two- . ,  few- valued  orientation  and  type  of  corre¬ 
spondence  is  shown. 

In  Fig.  4,  12  indicates  a  single,  say,  proper  evaluation  of  the  one 
fact  A.  The  arrows  OB,  ClC,  12D,  OE,  OF,  .  .  .  ,  12N  indicate  the  projec¬ 
tion  of  the  one-valued  semantic  state,  or  orientation  on  the  essentially 
unchanged  oo-valued  facts  A,  B,  C . ,  distorting  them.  In  other  words, 
the  oo-valued  facts,  through  the  identification  of  many  values  into  one, 
and  by  pathological  projection,  have  been  given  wrong  evaluation, 
thereby  preventing,  in  principle ,  adjustment  and  sanity,  particularly  for 
a  civilized  human  1933. 

If  we  train  our  children  in  one-,  two-,  three-,  and  more  generally 
few-valued  el,  A  reactions  based  on  corresponding  languages,  ‘logics'. , 
the  result  must  be  that  they  will  have  great  difficulty  in  adjusting  them¬ 
selves  to  a  world  of  non-el  oo-valued  facts,  and  that,  even  if  they  suc¬ 
ceed,  this  would  ultimately  happen  only  after  a  great  waste  of  efforts  and 
unnecessary  sufferings.  If  we  approach  the  oo-valued  facts  of  life  with 
one-,  two-,  or  even  few- valued  semantic  attitudes,  we  must  identify 
some  of  the  indefinitely  many  values  into  one,  or  a  few  values,  and  so 
approach  the  oo-valued  world  with  an  orientation  which  projects  ignor¬ 
antly  or  pathologically  our  restricted,  few- valued  semantic  evaluations 
on  the  oo-valued  individual  facts  of  experience. 

The  above  explanations  apply  in  the  fullest  extent  to  the  structure 
of  language.  The  daily  language,  as  well  as  our  attitudes  toward  it,  still 
reflects  primitive  structural  s.r  of  the  period  before  it  was  known  that 
on  the  objective  levels  we  deal  exclusively  with  oo -valued,  four-dimen¬ 
sional  processes .  The  language  in  the  ^-system  represents,  in  principle, 
what  may  be  called  a  three-dimensional  and  one-,  two- . ,  more  generally 
few-valued  linguistic  system  structurally  non-similar  to  the  oo-valued, 
four-dimensional  event-process  conditions.  Let  us  analyse,  for  instance, 
the  A  term  ‘apple'.  This  term  represents,  in  principle ,  a  name  for  a  ver¬ 
bal,  one-valued,  and  constant  intensional  definition,  in  which  space-time 
relations  do  not  enter.  What  are  the  structural  facts  of  experience  ?  The 
object  which  we  call  ‘apple’  represents  a  process  which  changes  con¬ 
tinually;  besides,  every  single  apple  that  ever  existed,  or  will  exist,  was 
an  absolute  individual,  and  different  from  any  other  objective  ‘apple'. 
In  applying  such  a  three-dimensional  and  one-valued  language  to  essen- 

IDENTIFICATION  AND  VISUALIZATION 

tially  oo-valued  processes,  we  only  make  proper  evaluation,  and  so  ad¬ 
justment  and  sanity,  very  difficult. 

Yet  the  structural  adjustment  is  simple  in  a  ^-system.  The  A 
‘apple’  was  a  name  for  a  verbal  intensional  definition ;  in  a  ^-system, 
we  manufacture  indefinitely  many  names  for  the  indefinitely  many  objec¬ 
tive  and  different  ‘apples’  by  subscripts,  ‘applet,  ‘apple2\  ‘apple 3’. ,  sup¬ 
plementing  the  subscript  with  the  date ;  thus,  in  ‘applei  ^.23.1933’,  we  gain 
the  possibility  of  considering  ‘apple*,*’  as  oo-valued,  and  so,  in  a  given 
case.,  we  are  enabled  to  have  a  single  name  which  we  could  relate  to 
single  values  of  the  objective,  absolute  individuals,  and  absolute  individ¬ 
ual  stages  of  the  process.  Similarly  with  multiordinal  terms.  Before  the 
multiordinality  of  terms  was  discovered  and  formulated  by  me  in  1925, 
these  terms  were  silently  assumed  in  principle,  to  be  one-valued,  and  we 
were  either  prevented  from  using  them  in  connection  with  oo-valued 
orders  of  abstractions,  or,  if  used  by  semantic  necessity,  we  identified  the 
indefinitely  many  values  into  one.  Both  results  were  undesirable;  the 
first  established  semantic  blockages  to  creative  scientific  work ;  the  other 
promulgated  semantic  disturbances.  But  once  the  multiordinality  of 
terms  is  established,  we  have  oo-valued  terms  to  which,  in  a  given  con¬ 
text  (by  differentiating  the  different  orders  of  abstractions  which  a  con¬ 
text  indicates),  we  can  ascribe  single  values. 

Such  a  pioneering  analysis  may  appear  difficult  at  first,  but  this  is 
only  due  to  the  lack  of  familiarity  and  established  pre-^4  and  A 
one-,  two-,  three-,  or  few- valued  s,rt  all  of  which  involve  ultimately 
identification  somewhere.  Once  identification  is  abolished,  however,  and 
this  is  childishly  simple,  although  not  easy  and  rather  laborious  for 
grown-ups,  oo-valued  semantics  become  natural  and  automatic ,  evading 
very  serious  theoretical  difficulties.  In  the  present  volume,  I  had  to 
elaborate  in  detail  upon  different  issues,  simply  because  my  readers  will 
be  mostly  grown-ups  with  established  pre-At  and  A  reactions,  who  must 
first  be  made  to  recognize  the  benefits  of  a  A  evaluation  before  they  will 
be  willing  to  undergo  a  laborious  re-education  of  their  older  s.r .  The 
procedure  in  the  training  of  infants  and  children  is  extremely  simple 
and  entirely  on  their  levels. 

There  is,  however,  one  point  that  I  wish  to  make  entirely  clear. 
From  the  older  point  of  view,  one  might  say  that  a  ^-system  may  lead 
to  ‘over-rationalization’  and,  consequently,  take  ‘all  the  joy  out  of  life’. 
Such  objections  are  entirely  unjustified.  First  of  all,  the  ^-system  leads 
to  shallow,  but  often  clever  verbal  interplay  of  definitions,  mostly  non¬ 
similar  in  structure  to  the  world  and  ourselves,  representing  a  species  of 
apologetics,  and  usually  called  ‘rationalization’.  The  ^-system  leads  to 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

structural  adjustment  of  language  and  s.r ,  and  a  structural  enquiry, 
resulting  in  understanding.  It  makes  shallow  infantile  ‘rationalization’, 
‘wishful  thinking’,  and  apologetics  of  different  brands  impossible,  but 
leads  to  a  higher  order  of  adult  intelligence,  based  on  proper  evaluation. 
In  mere  ‘rationalization’,  we  often  have  clever,  but  shallow,  infantile 
evaluation,  based  on  the  ignorance  or  disregard  of  structural  facts,  which 
alone  make  up  the  content  of  all  ‘knowledge’.  In  a  ^-system,  by  elimi¬ 
nating  the  sources  of  infantile  evaluation  and  reactions,  we  supply  the 
nervous  system  of  the  infant  with  uniquely  appropriate  material,  so  that 
it  may  develop  into  a  ‘normal’  adult.  In  the  older  system,  instead  of 
helping,  we  hindered  the  development  of  adult  standards  of  evaluation, 
with  well-known  results.  There  is  nothing  wrong  with  ‘human  nature’ 
or  the  majority  of  nervous  systems  as  such,  but  there  is  something 
definitely  wrong  with  our  educational  methods  inside  and  outside  our 
schools. 

There  is  another  point  which  is  still  more  convincing  and,  perhaps, 
even  more  decisive.  The  above-mentioned  older  objections  are  due  to  s.r 
based  on  the  play  upon  elementcdistic  terms  and  are  a  neurological  impos¬ 
sibility.  The  organism  works  as-a-whole,  and  in  the  cyclic  nerve  currents 
it  is  impossible,  by  any  known  educational  methods,  to  abolish  ‘emotions’. 
But  what  can  be  accomplished  is  this:  By  training  in  silence  on  the 
un-speakable  objective  levels  and  in  differentiation  between  different 
orders  of  abstractions,  we  automatically  abolish  the  infantile  identifica¬ 
tions  and  evaluations;  we  introduce  a  ‘delay  in  action’,  which  is  the 
physiological  means  for  getting  our  ‘emotions’  under  control  and  for 
engaging  the  fuller  co-operation  of  the  cortex.  Infantile  ‘over-emotion¬ 
alism’  is  abolished  in  the  adult.  Infants  would  behave  as  infants,  but 
this  infantile  behaviour  would  not  be  carried  into  the  period  when 
adulthood  should  begin.  The  ‘emotions’  are  not  abolished  but  ‘sub¬ 
limated’. 

It  is  true  that  many  standards  would  be  changed.  For  instance,  we 
might  roughly  say  that  an  infantile  type  is  often  bored  by  a  symphony 
and  that  jazz  satisfies  his  infantile  make-up.  If  we  were  to  take  such  an 
infantile  grown-up  and  compel  him  to  listen  only  to  symphonies,  this 
would  not  be  kind,  nor  would  it  transform  his  infantile  s.r  into  adult 
reactions.  But,  if  unhampered  by  inappropriate  semantic  and  so  neuro¬ 
logical  training,  he  would  be  free  to  develop  normally  into  an  adult,  and 
his  own  preference  would  be  toward  a  symphony  rather  than  toward 
primitive  throbbings,  his  enjoyment,  then,  would  not  be  diminished,  but, 
perhaps,  made  fuller. 

IDENTIFICATION  AND  VISUALIZATION 

Similar  analysis  could  be  made  of  all  human  interests,  with  the 
result  that  the  forcing  of  adult  standards  on  infantile  types  would 
remain  unkind;  but  the  sad  part  of  it  is  that,  in  spite  of  repressions, 
imiHJsitions . ,  these  imposed  standards  remain  largely  ineffective  and  are 
abandoned  as  soon  as  compulsion  ends.  Not  so,  if,  by  proper  semantic 
education,  we  allow  the  infant  to  develop  normally  into  adulthood.  The 
new  standards  are  not  imposed,  but  become  his  own.  We  do  not  then 
need  compulsion  from  without,  because  the  new  standards  act  from 
within  and  become  pleasurable  and  lasting. 

A  similar  process  is  very  obvious  in  the  practice  of  psychotherapy. 
The  standards  of  evaluation  of  the  patients  are  usually  inappropriate 
to  the  conditions  of  modern  life  and  often  clash  sharply  with  the 
accepted  standards.  Moralizing  without  changing  by  other  means  his 
ntundards  of  evaluation  never  accomplishes  any  satisfactory  therapeutic 
results ;  quite  the  contrary,  it  often  does  a  great  deal  of  harm.  A  physi¬ 
cian  would  be  very  unwise  to  censure  or  condemn  a  symptom,  as  this 
would  preclude  any  beneficial  results.  What  physicians  usually  do  is  to 
treat  any  symptom,  no  matter  how  repulsive,  with  great  sympathy  and 
understanding.  They  do  not  attempt  to  change  the  symptom  directly, 
but,  by  the  understanding  of  its  main  mechanism,  they  try  to  change  the 
patient's  standards  of  evaluation,  of  which  the  symptom  is  only  a  conse¬ 
quence.  If  at  all  successful  and  the  physician  succeeds  in  changing  the 
inappropriate  standards  of  evaluation,  the  symptom  then  automatically 
disappears.  In  daily  life,  we  usually  attack  only  the  symptoms,  disre¬ 
garding  mostly  the  underlying  structural  foundations;  this  method  ac¬ 
counts  for  the  doubtful  results. 

Under  infantile  standards  we  apply  similar  methods  to  society. 
M  any  may  want  to  abolish  wars,  revolutions,  ‘depressions’. ,  but  they  do 
not  investigate  structurally  deep  enough.  They  attack  the  symptoms, 
instead  of  analysing  the  structural  issues  which  produce  these  symptoms. 

In  conclusion,  let  us  notice  that  the  analysis  of  a  semantic  mechan¬ 
ism  on  a  printed  page  requires  new  terms  and  the  co-ordination  of 
many  details . ,  which,  at  first,  do  not  always  appear  so  simple,  although, 
once  the  theoretical  side  is  mastered,  the  educational  application  is  genu¬ 
inely  simple.  Thus,  the  analysis  of  the  one-,  two-,  three- . ,  and  oo-valued 
semantics  may  appear  difficult,  yet,  in  practice,  it  only  amounts  to  im¬ 
parting  through  our  educational  systems  a  semantic  flexibility,  instead 
of  fixity;  to  acquiring  the  inclination  of  starting  with  observations,  fol¬ 
lowed  by  descriptions,  from  which  we  pass  to  inferences,  in  connection 
with  awareness  of  these  ordered  processes , .  In  training,  it  is  enough  to 
abolish  identification,  and  this  is  easily  achieved  once  we  have  produced 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

the  proper  method,  based  on  a  language  of  new  A  structure.  This  last 
actually  consists  of  but  a  few,  new,  simple,  and  common-sense  terms,  the 
analysis  of  which  helps  us  to  discover  a  few  simple  and  invariant  psycho- 
physiological  relations.  Thus,  identification  is  eliminated  by  starting  with 
an  ordinal  language  and  method.  Once  we  get  the  feel  of  the  horizontal 
and  vertical  stratification,  and  learn  to  differentiate  between  orders  of 
abstractions,  identification  disappears.  Silence  on  the  objective  levels 
produces  a  ‘delay’,  involves  and  trains  the  cortex ;  our  reactions  become 
more  and  more  intelligent  in  the  human  sense . ,  . ;  and  the  most  impor¬ 
tant  results  are  reached  by  the  simplest  means. 

The  training  in  visualization  and  the  abolishing  of  objectification 
are  the  first  and  most  important  steps  for  a  complete  elimination  of 
identification.  When  this  first  step  is  achieved,  the  rest  is  comparatively 
a  very  simple  task. 

But  the  reader  may  ask  why  we  should  have  to  use  such  unfamiliar 
and,  therefore,  seemingly  difficult  methods  to  achieve  such  obvious 
results.  Do  we  really  need  a  ^-system  to  achieve  the  results  which,  even 
in  an  ^-system,  are  known  to  be  desirable?  The  answer  is  weighty 
with  consequences  and  should  be  taken  very  earnestly.  In  the  ^-system, 
these  desirable  results  could  not  be  attained  generally,  because  the  struc¬ 
ture  of  our  old  languages  and  the  method  hampered  rather  than  helped 
us.  New  theories,  new  systems . ,  are  built  precisely  with  the  aim  to 
facilitate  adjustment.  Those  questions  which  in  the  older  days  were  sup¬ 
posed  to  be  ‘philosophical’,  ‘metaphysical’ . ,  the  application  of  which  re¬ 
quired  a  high  grade  of  intelligence,  knowledge . ,  to  start  with,  become, 
in  the  new  way,  simply  a  problem  of  the  structure  of  the  language  we 
use.  All  the  issues  appear  closely  interrelated.  We  do  not  require  ‘high 
intelligence’  nor  ‘higher  education’  to  begin  with,  in  order  to  obtain  these 
desirable  results,  as  the  results  follow  automatically  from  the  structure 
of  the  language  we  accept  and  teach  our  children.  Thus,  the  older  im¬ 
possibilities  are  achieved  simply  and  automatically,  with  the  greatest 
possible  efficiency  and  the  most  lasting  results. 

CHAPTER  XXIX 

ON  NON-ARISTOTELIAN  TRAINING 

If  the  preliminary  experiments  described  above  should  be  fully  upheld, 
an  important  fact  in  the  physiology  of  the  cortex  will  be  disclosed — namely, 
that  new  connections  can  be  established  in  the  cortex,  not  only  in  the  areas 
of  optimal  excitability,  but  also  in  those  areas  which  are  in  one  or  another 
phase  of  inhibition.  (394)  p*  pavlov 

That  wretched  monosyllable  4*all"  has  caused  mathematicians  more 
trouble  than  all  the  rest  of  the  dictionary.  (23>  e,  t.  bell 

. . .  these  observations  .  .  .  point  to  the  view  ...  that  the  mechanism 
of  development  of  a  conditional  reflex  and  the  mechanism  of  external  in¬ 
hibition  are  somehow  similar,  and  that  the  process  of  external  inhibition 
bears  some  relation  to  the  development  of  new  connections  between  dif¬ 
ferent  cortical  elements.  (394)  t  p*  favlov 

In  particular  the  factor  of  duration  of  time  was  shown  to  act  as  a  real 
physiological  stimulus,  and  experiments  were  described  in  which  definite 
time  intervals  appeared  as  effective  stimuli.  (394)  I.  p.  pavlov 

The  procedure  for  training  in  the  present  system  by  the  aid  of  the 
Differential  follows  directly  from  the  theoretical  considerations  which 
have  been  explained  in  the  foregoing  chapters.  The  contentions  of  the 
system  have  been  verified  experimentally  in  all  cases  where  it  has  been 
consistently  applied. 

The  main  aim  is  to  acquire  the  coveted  'consciousness  of  abstract¬ 
ing’,  on  which  non-delusional  evaluation  is  based,  and  which  becomes  the 
foundation  for  non-pathological  s.r  and  sanity.  As  we  deal  with  different 
aspects  of  an  organic'  process  which  inherently  works  as-a-whole,  all 
these  aspects  appear  strictly  interrelated.  We  have  found  by  analysis 
two  main  aspects  which  underlie  the  others.  It  appears  that  the  A 
structure  leads  to  semantic  states  which  can  be  formulated  as  the  feeling 
of  ‘allness’,  and  that,  through  the  ‘is’  of  identity,  it  leads  to  the  con¬ 
fusion  of  orders  of  abstractions.  Thus,  for  training,  the  program  is 
readily  sketched :  we  must  first  eliminate  the  'allness’ ;  then  we  must 
impart  this  peculiar  stratification  of  'human  knowledge*  which  follows 
from  the  rejection  of  the  'is*  of  identity;  in  other  words,  eliminate 
identification.  It  becomes  also  obvious  that  a  theory  of  sanity  cannot  be 
separated  from  a  ^-system. 

Since  the  organism  works  as-a-whole,  all  nerve  centres  should  be 
trained  so  as  to  impart  a  permanent,  lasting,  and  ingrained  feeling  of 
abstracting.  Once  this  has  been  achieved,  the  recognition  of  the  vertical 
and  the  horizontal  stratification  of  human  knowledge  becomes,  also,  a 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

permanent  semantic  state.  This  gives  us  a  kind  of  semantic  co-ordinate 
system,  in  which  we  can  represent  any  life  situation  or  scientific  situa¬ 
tion,  or  any  difficulty,  with  great  clarity,  and  so  evaluate  them  properly. 
In  verbal  theoretical  explanations  this  procedure  appears  complex;  in 
practice,  it  is  not  so.  It  is  extremely  simple,  provided  we  persistently 
follow  the  instructions,  which  are  based  on  theory  and  practice.  Above 
all,  we  must  not  expect  results  too  quickly. 

For  reasons  already  explained,  students  should  not  only  hear  and  see 
the  explanations,  but  should  also  perform  for  themselves,  should  handle 
the  labels  and  indicate  with  their  hands  the  different  orders  of  abstrac¬ 
tions.  After  preliminary  explanations,  the  children  should  be  called  to 
the  Differential,  and,  using  their  hands,  they  should  explain  it.  This 
applies,  also,  to  grown-ups  and  to  patients.  The  Differential  is  not  only 
a  permanent  structural  and  semantic  reminder  which  affects  many  nerve 
centres;  it  is  more,  for,  in  training,  it  conveys  the  natural  order  through 
all  centres.  Any  reader  who  refuses  to  use  his  hands  in  this  connection 
handicaps  himself  seriously,  because  ordering  abolishes  identification. 

Fundamentally,  there  is  no  structural  difference  between  the  use  of 
language  and  the  use  of  any  other  mechanical  device;  they  all  involve 
reflex-action.  It  is  well  known  that  any  pianist,  telegraph  operator, 
typist,  or  chauffeur  would  not  be  a  successful  performer  if  he  had  to 
meditate  about  every  move  he  makes.  As  a  rule,  verbal  explanations  of 
the  working  of  the  respective  machines  are  necessary  at  first,  yet  the 
structural  reflex-skill  required  is  actually  acquired  by  prolonged  practice, 
where  again  all  nervous  centres  are  involved.  We  all  know  what  amaz¬ 
ing  unconscious  reflex-adjustments  a  good  driver  of  a  car  can  make  in 
case  of  unexpected  danger. 

A  similar  semantic  reflex-skill  is  required  in  handling  our  linguistic 
apparatus,  and,  in  case  of  danger,  of  sudden  turns  and  twists,  our 
orientation  should  also  work  unconsciously.  That  is  why  the  structural 
feeling  for  the  working  of  the  apparatus  es  required.  All  nerve  centres 
should  be  trained  to  employ  the  most  effective  means  to  affect  the  organ¬ 
ism  and  its  working  as-a- whole. 

The  semantic  training  of  grown-ups  and  that  of  children  do  not 
differ  in  essentials.  Children  have  fewer  established  habits,  have  more 
fluid  s.r  than  adults,  and,  therefore,  the  results  with  children  are 
achieved  more  quickly  and  last  better. 

I  shall  now  explain  how  to  train  children.  A  similar  method  applies 
to  adults,  also;  but  an  adult  should  not  trust  himself  too  much  that 
he  has  completely  acquired  ‘consciousness  of  abstracting’.  He  must  train 
very  thoroughly.  I  speak  from  personal  experience.  Although  I  have 

ON  NON-ARISTOTELIAN  TRAINING 

the  Differential  before  my  eyes  practically  always  and  am  the  author 
uf  the  present  system,  yet  every  once  in  a  while  I  catch  myself  with  one 
of  the  old  vicious  semantic  habits.  Habits,  and  particularly  linguistic 
habits,  may  be  very  pernicious  and  difficult  to  change. 

We  do  not  need  to 
Ktart  with  profound  theo¬ 
retical  considerations;  we 
may  start  with  any  famil¬ 
iar  daily-life  objects  and  a 
microscope  or  magnifying 
glass.  We  bring  the  Dif¬ 
ferential  into  the  class¬ 
room,  with  labels  (except 
one)  detached,  but  do  not 
proceed  to  explain  it.  We 
start  with  a  little  semantic 
experiment  upon  the  sub¬ 
ject  of  ‘allness’.  We  take 
any  actual  object,  an  apple, 
a  pencil,  or  anything  else 
which  is  familiar  to  the 
children.  The  principles  in¬ 
volved  are  entirely  general 
and  apply  to  all  objective 
levels  in  a  very  similar 
way.  We  tell  them  that  we 
will  have  some  fun.  Then 
we  ask  them  to  tell  us 
*  everything"  or  ‘all’  about 
the  object  in  question;  in 
this  case,  the  apple.  When 
the  children  begin  to  tell 
us  ‘all*  about  it,  we  write 
the  characteristics  down 
on  the  black-board.  This 

last  is  vital .  We  must  have  a  visual  and  extensional  record  of  the 

ascribed  characteristics.  When  the  children  have  exhausted  their  ingen¬ 

uity  in  telling  ‘all*  about  the  apple,  we  should  not  be  satisfied.  We 
should  make  them  doubt,  urging  them  that,  perhaps,  they  did  not  tell 
‘all"  about  it,  using  the  word  ‘all*  continually.  The  term  ‘all’  should  be 
stressed  and  repeated  to  the  point  of  the  children's  being  thoroughly 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

annoyed  with  the  term.  The  more  they  learn  to  dislike  this  term,  the 
better.  We  are  already  training  a  most  important  s.r. 

We  should  not  be  satisfied  with  the  best  answers  made  by  the  most 
intelligent  children.  In  a  large  class  there  may  even  be  a  child  who  tells 
us  bluntly  that  it  is  impossible  to  tell  'air  about  the  apple.  We  should 
concentrate  on  the  less  intelligent  children  and  deal  particularly  with 
them.  There  are  many  and  important  reasons  for  this.  For  one  thing, 
the  children  become  more  eager  and  more  interested  in  their  own 
achievement.  Then,  too,  they  easily  learn  by  example  what  a  difference 
in  intelligence  means.  This  understanding  of  the  shortcomings  of  others 
has  an  important  semantic,  broadening  effect.  In  life,  numerous  serious 
'hurts’  occur  precisely  because  we  do  not  appreciate  some  natural  short¬ 
comings  and  expect  too  much .  Expecting  too  much  leads  to  very  harm¬ 
ful  semantic  shocks,  disappointments,  suspicions,  fears,  hopelessness, 
helplessness,  pessimism , . 

The  less  bright  children  benefit  also.  The  experiment  is  conducted 
on  their  level,  so  that  they  also  have  the  maximum  chance  to  benefit. 
Soon  the  children  begin  to  argue  about  the  new  method  and  to  explain  it 
to  each  other  by  themselves ;  for  we  have  touched  very  vital  and  complex 
semantic  processes  of  'curiosity*,  ‘achievement’,  'ambitions’. ,  character¬ 
istics  strongly  represented  in  the  child’s  life.  We  evade,  also,  the  danger 
of  taking  clever,  yet  shallow,  replies  as  standard.  The  last  error  would 
be  fatal,  as  the  issues  are  fundamental,  and  we  should  not  rest  content 
with  mere  verbal  brilliancy. 

When  the  subject  seems  exhausted,  and  the  list  of  characteristics 
of  the  apple  ‘complete’  (we  repeatedly  make  certain  that  the  children 
assume  they  have  told  us  ‘all’  about  it),  we  cut  the  apple  into  pieces 
and  show  the  children  experimentally,  using  eventually  a  microscope  or 
a  magnifying  glass,  that  they  did  not  tell  us  ‘all’  about  the  apple. 

It  may  appear  to  some  educators  that  such  training  might  involve 
some  undesirable  psycho-logical  results.  But  later,  when  consciousness 
of  abstracting  is  acquired  as  a  lasting  semantic  state,  this  fear  appears 
entirely  unjustified,  as  explained  further  on.  The  first  step  in  dealing 
with  ‘reality’  seems  to  demand  that  we  abandon  entirely  the  older  delu¬ 
sional  methods. 

When  the  children  have  become  thoroughly  convinced  of  the  non- 
allness  and  the  impossibility  of  ‘allness’,  we  are  ready  to  explain  to 
them  what  the  word  abstracting  means,  using  again  the  terms  ‘all’  and 
'not  all’.  We  show  them  a  small  rotating  fan  and  explain  to  them  about 
the  separate  blades  which  when  rotating  we  see  as  a  disk.  In  such 
demonstrations  we  can  go  as  far  as  desired.  All  science  supplies  data 

ON  NON-ARISTOTELIAN  TRAINING 

(e.g.,  the  dynamic  structure  of  seemingly  solid  materials).  We  must 
select  the  data  according  to  the  age  of  the  children  or  the  knowledge  of 
the  grown-ups.  Everything  said  should  be  demonstrated  empirically 
from  a  structural  point  of  view. 

The  next  step  is  to  demonstrate  practically  that  an  object  taken 
from  different  points  of  view  has  different  aspects  for  different  ob¬ 
servers.  We  may  use  different  objects  or  wooden  geometrical  figures 
painted  with  different  colours  on  different  sides.  We  may  place  the 
object  in  different  positions  and  ask  the  children  their  descriptions, 
which  should  be  written  down.  The  descriptions  will,  of  course,  be  dif¬ 
ferent,  and  the  children  should  be  made  thoroughly  aware  of  this.  In  all 
these  preliminary  exercises  the  ingenuity  of  the  teacher  has  a  vast  field 
for  exercise,  and  we  do  not  need  to  enter  into  details. 

When  all  these  results  have  been  accomplished  on  the  level  of  the 
least  developed  child,  we  then  proceed  to  explain  the  Differential  as  a 
structural  diagrammatic  summary  of  the  above  results.  It  is  a  positive 
condition  that  the  new  language  be  used,  and  that  an  object  be  described 
as  an  abstraction  of  some  order.  If  this  vital  structural  point  is  disre¬ 
garded,  most  of  the  psycho-logical  semantic  benefits  of  ‘non-allness’  are 
either  lost  or  greatly  lessened.  We  should  make  this  term  clear  to  the 
child,  and  should  train  him  in  its  use,  as  it  appears  uniquely  in  accord¬ 
ance  with  the  structure  and  the  functioning  of  his  nervous  system.  The 
child  should  be  warned  that  the  old  languages  are  not  structurally  suit¬ 
able  for  their  future  understanding  and  semantic  adjustment.  This 
warning  should  be  repeated  seriously  and  persistently. 

Having  eliminated  ‘allness’,  we  begin  to  eliminate  the  ‘is’  of  iden¬ 
tity,  which,  at  the  primitive  and  infantile  stages  of  racial  human  develop¬ 
ment,  happens  to  be  extremely  ingrained  in  our  s.r,  embodied,  as  it  is, 
in  the  structure  of  our  daily  language.  As  was  explained  before,  identi¬ 
fication  is  a  natural  reaction  of  the  animal,  the  primitive  man,  and  the 
infant,  reflected  and  systematized  in  the  A  and  older  linguistic  systems, 
which,  through  the  ignorance  or  neglect  of  parents  and  teachers,  is  not 
counteracted  and  so  is  continued  into  the  lives  of  children  and  grown¬ 
ups,  until,  finally,  it  becomes  embodied  in  the  structure  of  what  we  call 
‘civilization’  (1933).  In  a  theory  of  adjustment  or  sanity  we  must 
counteract  this  animalistic,  primitive,  or  infantile  s.r  by  building  a 
/4-system,  which  entirely  rejects  the  ‘is’  of  identity. 

In  the  ^-system,  through  the  use  of  this  ‘is’,  different  orders  of  ab¬ 
stractions  were  unconsciously  identified  in  values,  in  obvious  contradic¬ 
tion  to  empirical  facts.  In  other  words,  being  identified  in  values,  they 
were  treated  as  of  one  order  or  on  one  level  and  so  did  not  necessitate 

474  VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OK  TIME-BINDING 

indefinitely  many  expanded  orders  of  horizontal  and  vertical  differences. 
Similarly  with  the  objectively  meaningless  ‘infinite  velocity’  of  a  process, 
it  does  no*  allow  order.  But  once  we  have  a  finite  velocity  of  a-  process, 
order  makes  its  appearance  as  an  indispensable  aspect  of  a  process.  The 
finite  and  known  velocity  of  nerve  currents  on  the  physic o-mathe- 
matical  levels  results  in  ordered  series  on  physiological  levels ;  in  non¬ 
identity  and  proper  evaluation  on  semantic  levels ,  and  in  orders  of 
abstractions  and  a  non-aristotelian  system  and  general  semantics  on 
verbal  levels . 

Once  we  abolish  in  our  language  the  always  false  to  fact  ‘is*  of 
identity,  we  automatically  stop  identifying  different  orders  of  abstrac¬ 
tions.  We  do  not  assume  that  they  represent  one  level,  which  becomes 
expanded  into  a  natural  ordered  series  of  indefinitely  many  different 
orders  of  abstractions,  with  different  values.  Adjustment,  therefore, 
sanity  and  adulthood  of  humanity,  depend  on  proper  evaluation,  impos¬ 
sible  under  conditions  of  delusional  identification  of  fundamentally 
different  orders  of  abstractions.  We  must  then  train  the  s.r  in  the  natural 
physiological  order  of  the  process  of  abstracting  which,  on  the  psycho¬ 
logical  levels,  become  non-pathological  semantic  evaluation. 

In  the  case  of  training  in  the  ‘non-allness’,  it  was  necessary  to  start 
with  the  analysis  of  an  ordinary  object,  to  give  the  child  a  simplified 
theoretical  explanation,  and  then  to  demonstrate  it  empirically.  The 
child  will  be  easily  ‘convinced',  but  this  conviction  is  not  enough,  because 
it  will  not  affect  permanently  his  s.r .  We  explain  this  difficulty  very 
simply,  telling  him  that,  although  he  ‘agreed’  with  our  presentation,  he 
will  vety  soon  forget’  it,  and  so  we  need  a  permanent  visual  reminder 
which  is  supplied  by  the  strings,  freely  hanging  from  the  event  and 
from  the  object,  and  indicating  those  ‘characteristics  left  out’,  or  not 
abstracted. 

In  the  elimination  of  the  ‘is*  of  identity,  we  have  also  structurally 
interconnected  aspects.  The  rejection  of  this  ‘is’  becomes  an  equivalent 
to  the  stressing  of  the  stratification  in  the  structure  of  ‘human  knowl¬ 
edge’.  To  facilitate  training,  we  should  stress  both  aspects  by  ail  avail¬ 
able  means,  and  should  involve  as  many  nerve  centres  as  we  can.  Thus 
through  the  ear  we  stress  verbally  the  formula  of  the  rejection  of  the 
‘is'  of  identity  by  indicating  with  our  finger  the  different  orders  of 
abstractions,  in  the  meantime,  affecting  the  eye  while  we  repeat  ‘this 
is  not  this'.  We  utilize  the  kinesthetic  centres,  not  only  by  pointing  the 
finger  to  different  levels,  but  also  by  making  broad  motions  with  our 
hands,  indicating  the  stratifications.  We  should  train  in  both  horizontal 
and  vertical  stratifications,  always  using  the  hands.  The  horizontal 

ON  NON-ARISTOTELIAN  TRAINING 

stratification  indicates  the  difference,  or  ordering  of  different  order  ab¬ 
stractions;  the  vertical  stratification  indicates  the  difference  between 
‘man’  and  ‘animal’  and  the  differences  between  the  different  absolute 
individuals.  In  both  cases,  the  semantic  effect  of  the  ‘is’  of  identity  is 
counteracted. 

The  above  procedure  in  training  has  an  important  neurological 
foundation.  Besides  what  has  been  explained  already,  we  find  that  a 
word  has  four  principal  characteristics  with  corresponding  cortical  rep¬ 
resentations.  A  word  can  be  heard,  seen,  spoken,  and  written.  Lan¬ 
guage,  thus,  involves  many  nervous  functions ;  e.g.,  auditory,  visual,  and 
diversified  motor  nerve  centres,  interconnected  in  a  most  complex  net¬ 
work  of  ‘horizontal’  and  ‘vertical’  fibres.  The  use  of  the  Differential 
involves  all  available  nervous  channels;  we  see,  we  hear,  we  speak,  we 
move  our  hands,  indicating  stratification,  *non-allness’ . ,  engaging  large 
cortical  areas,  and  so  have  the  maximum  probability  of  affecting,  through 
non-el  methods,  the  organism-as-a-whole.  The  Differential  gives  us  a 
special,  simplified,  yet  advanced  interracial  structural  symbolism  (1933), 
which  affects  wide  nervous  areas  of  the  illiterate,  or  nearly  illiterate  per¬ 
son,  or  of  the  infant . ,  which  otherwise  could  not  be  affected.  It  is  known 
that  extensive  reading  and  writing,  as  well  as  speaking  a  number  of 
languages,  has  a  very  marked  cultural  effect  and  helps  visualization  and 
consciousness  of  abstracting.  The  reason  can  be  found,  perhaps,  in  the 
fact  that  a  learned  polyglot,  or  a  scholar,  utilizes  many  nerve  centres  in 
co-ordination.  In  the  older  days,  unless  one  became  a  scholar  of  some 
sort,  it  was  extremely  difficult  to  train  these  nerve  centres  in  co-ordina¬ 
tion.  With  the  Differential  we  can  train  simply,  and  comparatively 
quickly,  all  necessary  nerve  centres,  and  so  impart  to  children  and  to 
practically  illiterate  persons  the  cultural  results  of  prolonged  and  dif¬ 
ficult  university  training  without  any  complicated  technique.  This  last 
should  always  be  regarded  as  a  means  and  not  as  an  end. 

In  my  experience  with  children,  and  with  men  from  the  lowest 
‘mentality’  to  the  highest,  the  non-identity  of  different  orders  of  ab¬ 
stractions  is  usually  taken  lightly.  It  all  seems  so  simple  and  self-evident 
that  no  one  assumes  that  there  could  be  serious,  unconscious,  structural, 
semantic,  linguistic,  and  neurological  delusional  mechanisms  involved, 
which  cannot  be  reached  without  specially  devised  non-identity  training. 
The  delusional  feelings  of  ‘allness’  and  ‘identity’  are  peculiar  in  that,  like 
other  pathological  states,  they  tend  to  appear  as  all-pervading.  It  is  the 
most  difficult  in  daily,  as  well  as  in  medical,  experience  to  make  a 
breach  in  this  all-pervading  tendency,  but  once  this  delusional  state  is 
even  partially  replaced  by  glimpses  of  m.o  reality,  the  further  elabora- 

VI 1.  THE  MECHANISM  OK  TIME-BINDING 

tion  and  training  in  adjustment  to  ‘reality*  becomes  comparatively 
simple.  Thus,  in  practice,  if  we  start  with  ordinary  objects,  feelings, 
and  words,  and  train  in  the  non-allness  and  non-identity,  any  child,  or 
any  grown-up,  even  an  imbecile,  can  follow  this  easily.  Once  this  feel¬ 
ing  has  been  acquired,  and  in  most  cases  it  is  only  a  matter  of  method 
and  persistence  to  acquire  it,  the  main  semantic  blockage  has  been  elimi¬ 
nated,  and  the  rest  is  comparatively  easy.  I  have  had  no  opportunity  yet 
to  verify  it,  but  I  am  convinced  that  even  a  superior  imbecile  could  be 
trained  to  differentiate  between  descriptions  and  inferences,  after  he  has 
learned  to  differentiate  between  the  objective  levels  and  words.  In  such 
a  training  with  imbeciles  we  can  go  in  simplicity  as  far  as  desired ;  thus, 
if  the  given  individual  is  hungry  and  says  he  wants  ‘bread*,  we  hand  him 
a  label  which  is  attached  to  the  objective  bread,  and  he  would  be  quickly 
made  to  realize  that  the  symbol  is  not  the  thing  symbolized. 

It  should  be  realized  that  in  the  training  we  should  impart  the 
obvious  fact  that  words  or  labels  represent  conveniences,  and  are  not 
the  objects  or  feelings  themselves.  We  should  carry  the  labels  in  our 
pockets,  so  to  say,  as  we  carry  our  money,  or  checks  for  hats  or  trunks, 
and  not  identify  them  ‘emotionally*  with  what  they  eventually  stand  for, 
because  monetary  standards  change,  and  hats  and  trunks  get  exchanged, 
lost  or  burnt.  To  accomplish  this,  we  must  have  objective  labels ,  which 
we  may  handle  and  carry  in  our  pockets,  and  also  an  objective  something 
to  which  we  can  attach  the  labels.  In  the  present  ^-system  the  rejection 
of  the  ‘is*  of  identity  is  complete  and  applies  to  all  levels.  Thus,  the 
event  is  not  the  object ;  the  object  is  not  the  label ;  description  is  not 
inference ;  a  proper  name  is  not  a  class  name . ;  the  characteristics 
ascribed  to  events,  objects,  or  labels  are  not  identical,  an  object,  a  situa¬ 
tion,  or  a  feeling  is  not  identical  with  another  object,  situation  or  feel¬ 
ing  . ,  . ,  all  of  which  establishes  a  structure  of  horizontal  and  vertical 
stratification.  At  an  early  stage  of  the  training,  we  must  begin  with 
what  appears  the  simplest  and  most  obvious  to  the  child ;  namely,  the 
absence  of  identity  between  the  word  and  the  object,  or  that  the  word 
is  not  the  object.  We  accomplish  this  by  stressing  that  one  cannot  sit 
on  the  word  ‘chair*,  that  one  cannot  write  with  the  word  ‘pencil*,  or 
drink  the  word  ‘milk*, .  These  simple  facts  should  always  be  trans¬ 
lated  into  the  generalized  form ,  indicating  with  the  hand  the  two  levels 
on  the  Differential,  conjointly  with  the  fundamental  formula  ‘this  is  not 
this*.  We  should  always  tell  the  child  that  the  formula  is  entirely  gen¬ 
eral,  but  for  the  present  we  should  not  go  into  any  further  details. 

At  this  stage  we  can  advance  one  step  further,  still  using  only 
ordinary  objects  as  examples,  and  explain  the  un-speakable  character 

ON  NON-ARISTOTELIAN  TRAINING 

nf  the  object;  namely,  that  whatever  we  can  see,  taste,  smell,  handle., 
ih  an  absolute  individual  (demonstrated  empirically)  and  unspeakable . 
We  then  take  the  apple,  bite  it  (actually  performing),  and  explain  that, 
uH hough  the  object  is  not  words . ,  yet  we  are  very  much  interested,  and 
traditionally  so,  in  this  un-speakable  level.  Then  we  explain  repeatedly 
mid  at  length,  emphasizing  the  important  principle  of  evaluation,  that 
to  live  we  must  deal  with  the  objective  level;  yet  this  level  cannot  be 
reached  by  words  alone.  As  a  rule,  it  takes  a  few  weeks,  or  even  months, 
before  this  simple  s.r  is  established,  the  old  identification  being  psycho- 
physiologically  very  much  ingrained.  Once  this  is  established,  we  stress 
I  Ik*  fact  that  we  must  handle,  look,  and  listen  . ,  never  speak,  but  remain 
Nilcnt,  outwardly  as  well  as  inwardly,  in  order  to  find  ourselves  on  the 
objective  level.  Here  we  come  to  one  of  the  most  difficult  steps  in  the 
whole  training.  This  ‘silence  on  the  objective  level*  involves  checking 
upon  neutral  grounds  of  a  great  many  ‘emotions*,  ‘preconceived  ideas*,. 
'I  bis  step,  in  the  meantime,  appears  as  the  first,  the  simplest,  most  obvi- 
»  ms  and  most  effective  psychophysiological  ‘reality-factor*  in  eliminating 
t  lie  delusional  identifications. 

Once  the  child  is  thoroughly  aware  of  the  absence  of  identity  be¬ 
tween  words  and  objects,  we  may  attempt  the  expanding  of  the  notion 
‘object’  to  the  ‘objective  levels*.  Such  training  requires  persistence,  even 
though  it  seems  fundamentally  simple.  We  demonstrate  and  explain  that 
uction,  actual  bodily  performance,  and  all  objective  happenings,  are  not 
words.  At  a  later  stage  we  explain  that  a  toothache,  or  demonstrate  that 
the  actual  pain  of  a  prick . ,  are  not  words,  and  belong  to  the  objective 
unspeakable  levels .  Still  later,  we  enlarge  this  notion  to  cover  all  ordi¬ 
nary  objects,  all  actions,  functions,  performances,  processes  going  on 
outside  our  skin,  and  also  all  immediate  feelings,  ‘emotions’,  ‘moods*., 
going  on  inside  our  skins  which  also  are  not  words.  We  enlarge  the 
’silence’  to  all  happenings  on  the  objective  levels  and  the  animalistic, 
’human  nature’  begins  to  be  ‘changed’  into  quite  a  different  human 
nature. 

When  this  is  accomplished  the  rest  is  much  simplified,  although 
1 1 inch  more  subtle.  We  explain,  as  simply  as  we  can,  the  problems  of 
evaluation  and  s.r ,  stressing  and  making  obvious  the  fact  that  our  actual 
lives  are  lived  entirely  on  objective,  un-speakable  levels.  We  illustrate 
this  all  the  time  by  simple  examples,  such  as  our  sleeping,  or  eating,  any 
activities,  or  pain,  or  pleasure,  or  immediate  feelings,  ‘emotions*.,  which 
arc  not  words.  If  words  are  not  translated  into  the  first  order  unspeak¬ 
able  effects,  with  the  result  that  we  do  not  do  something,  or  do  not  feel 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

something,  or  do  not  learn  or  remember  something . ,  such  words  take 
no  effect  and  become  useless  noises. 

One  fact  should  be  stressed;  namely,  that  the  problem  is  not  one 
of  ‘inadequacy  of  words*.  We  can  always  invent  ‘adequate  words*,  but 
even  the  most  ideal  and  structurally  adequate  language  will  not  be  the 
things  or  feelings  themselves.  On  this  point  there  is  no  possible  com¬ 
promise .  Many  people  still  utter  quite  happily,  pessimistic  expressions 
about  the  present  language ,  based  on  silent  assumptions  connected  with 
unconscious  delusional  identification,  and  believe  that  in  an  ‘adequate* 
language  the  word  by  some  good  primitive  magic  would  be  identical  with 
the  thing.  The  more  the  denial  of  the  ‘is*  of  identity  is  driven  home,  and 
the  sooner  it  becomes  a  part  of  one*s  s.r,  the  sooner  the  ‘consciousness  of 
abstracting*  is  acquired. 

We  are  now  ready  to  go  further  into  the  theory  of  natural  evalua¬ 
tion  based  on  natural  order .  As  a  preliminary  step,  we  must  show  re¬ 
peatedly  the  difference  between  descriptions  and  inferences,  using  simple 
examples.  We  must  stress  the  fact  that  words,  as  such,  must  be  divided 
into  two  categories:  a  first,  of  descriptive,  in  the  main,  functional 
words ;  and  a  second,  of  inferential  words,  which  involve  assumptions  or 
inferences.  Thus,  ‘A  does  not  get  up  in  the  morning*  may  be  considered 
as  descriptive.  If  A  explicitly  refuses  to  get  up,  the  statement  ‘A  refuses 
to  get  up  in  the  morning’  may  also  be  considered  as  descriptive.  If  A  did 
not  explicitly  refuse,  this  statement  becomes  inferential,  because  A  may 
be  dead  or  paralysed.  If  we  would  say  simply,  ‘A  is  lazy*,  such  a  state¬ 
ment  represents  an  illegitimate  inference  of  high  orders  based  on  ignor¬ 
ance,  because  in  1933  it  is  known  that  ‘laziness*  represents  a  symptom  of 
physico-chemical,  colloidal,  or  semantic  disturbances.  It  should  be 
stressed  that  this  discrimination  between  descriptive  and  inferential 
words,  although  extremely  important,  is  not  based  on  any  ‘absolute* 
differences,  but,  to  a  large  extent,  depends  on  the  context.  I  shall  not 
analyse  this  problem  further,  because  any  parent  or  teacher  who  has 
acquired  the  consciousness  of  abstracting  himself  will  find  more  examples 
at  hand  than  are  needed. 

We  should  notice  here  a  very  vital,  yet  generally  diregarded,  struc¬ 
tural  fact — that  human  life  is  lived  under  conditions  which  establish  a 
natural  order  of  importance  between  different  orders  of  abstractions. 
This  natural  order  should  be  made  the  basis  of  natural  adaptive  evalua¬ 
tion  and  so  survival  s.r.  As  our  lives  are  lived  entirely  on  the  un-speak- 
able  level ,  which  includes  not  only  scientific  objects  and  ordinary  objects, 
but,  also,  actions,  functions,  processes,  performances,  feelings,  ‘emo¬ 
tions*.,  this  level  is  obviously  first  in  importance,  and  the  verbal  level. 

ON  NON-ARISTOTELIAN  TRAINING 

which  is  only  auxiliary,  comes  next  in  importance.  The  analysis  of  the 
relative  evaluation  between  description  and  inferences  appears  extremely 
complex  and  would  require  a  separate  volume,  beyond  the  scope  of  the 
present  work.  Here  we  may  assume  the  generally  accepted  opinion  that 
the  reliability  of  inferences  depends  on  the  reliability  of  the  descriptive 
premises,  and  that  description  is  more  reliable  than  inference.  In  im¬ 
portance  and  in  temporal  and  neurological  natural  order ,  description 
comes  first;  inferences,  next.  If  we  consider  different  orders  of  infer¬ 
ences,  or  inferential  words,  inferences  or  inferential  words  of  lower 
order  are  more  reliable  and  so  more  important  than  inferences  of  higher 
orders  (Inferences  from  inferences  of  lower  orders). 

As  science  is  a  racial  product  and  so  represents  structural  descrip¬ 
tions  and  inferences  of  an  enormous  amount  of  constantly  revised 
observations  and  formulations  of  past  generations,  this  racial  product, 
‘science',  is  more  reliable  and  important  in  principle ,  particularly  in  its 
negative  results,  than  the  individual  abstractions  of  individuals.  If  some 
individuals  happen  to  be  ‘geniuses',  who  upset  racial  scientific  abstrac¬ 
tions,  they  are  under  the  scrutiny  of  other  scientists  who,  no  matter  how 
biased  or  slow,  remain  judges  of  their  products.  In  1933  the  opinion 
of  scientists  is  the  most  dependable  opinion  we  have.  We  must  accept, 
at  a  given  date,  the  racial,  particularly  negative,  abstractions  as  more 
reliable,  establishing  in  evaluation  the  event  (scientific  object)  first,  and 
the  ordinary  object  next.  It  should  be  stressed  that  the  ‘object*  of  daily 
experience,  in  human  life,  is  by  far  not  so  reliable  as  that  in  the  life  of 
animals  entirely  without  human  interference.  Thus,  a  high  tension  wire, 
or  a  third  rail,  or  high  explosives  are  not  found  in  unaided  nature  and 
do  not  forewarn  us  as  ordinary  objects  do.  These  ‘objects'  possess 
characteristics  concealed  or  not  obvious  on  the  objective  level  of  our 
ordinary  inspection  of,  let  us  say,  sight,  hearing,  or  smell;  yet  these 
characteristics  appear  just  as  ‘real'  and  dangerous  as  ever.  It  appears, 
then,  that  the  ‘scientific  object',  or  the  event,  in  contradistinction  to  the 
ordinary  object,  is  more  important  than  the  daily  object,  no  matter  how 
important  the  latter  might  be.  In  fact,  the  only  macroscopic  importance 
of  objects,  outside  of  aesthetic  and  symbolic  values,  may  be  found  in 
those  not  obvious  physico-chemical,  microscopic,  and  sub-microscopic 
characteristics.  Thus  the  importance  of  food,  or  air,  or  a  chair  is  found 
precisely  in  these  physico-chemical  effects  which  result  from  eating,  from 
breathing,  and  from  resting  on  a  chair,  and  so  again  these  hidden  char¬ 
acteristics,  revealed  only  by  science,  appear  much  more  important  than 
the  gross  characteristics  manufactured  by  our  nervous  systems  which 
we  recognize  as  an  object 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

We  come  thus  to  a  natural  scale  of  a  definite  natural  order ,  which 
also  establishes  the  natural  order  of  genetic  importance  and  represents 
the  natural  base  for  survival  semantic  evaluation.  For  our  purpose  the 
relative  order  may  be  represented  as  the  scientific  object  or  the  event 
first,  ordinary  object  next ;  the  ordinary  object  first,  the  label  next ;  de¬ 
scription  first,  inferences  next,  extended  to  descriptive  and  inferential 
words. 

If  we  use  the  ‘is*  of  identity  and  identify  in  value  or  importance  the 
different,  ultimately  non-identical,  levels,  we  nullify  in  principle  the 
natural  order  of  evaluation,  which,  by  psychophysiological  necessity, 
appears  as  a  reversal  of  natural  order  in  various  degrees.  We  find  many 
reasons  for  this  curious  fact,  but,  for  our  purpose,  it  will  be  enough  to 
suggest  that :  ( 1 )  words  are  simpler  and  take  less  effort  to  handle  than 
objects ;  (2)  inferences  being  higher  order  abstractions  than  descrip¬ 
tions,  are  psycho-logically  closer  to  our  feelings  and  easier  for  any  indi¬ 
vidual  to  manage  than  impersonal  descriptions  which  require  developed 
linguistic  training,  power  of  observation,  self-mastery.,  and,  in  general, 
consciousness  of  abstracting.  The  reversal  of  the  natural  order  must  lead 
to  non-adjustment  and  results  in  pathological  symptoms  in  different 
degrees.  The  natural  order  consists  of  asymmetrical  relations  expressed 
by  an  ordered  series,  not  only  as  to  space-time,  but  as  to  values.  All  our 
experiences  and  all  we  know  indicate  definitely  that  ordinary  materials 
(‘objects*)  are  extremely  rare  and  very  complex  special  cases  of  the 
beknottedness  of  the  plenum ;  that  the  organic  world  and  ‘life*  represent 
extremely  rare  and  still  more  complex  special  cases  of  the  material 
world;  and,  finally,  so-called  ‘intelligent  life*  represents  increasingly 
complex  and  still  rarer  special  cases  of  ‘life*.  When  we  identify  the  mem¬ 
bers  of  these  series,  we  disregard  the  asymmetrical  character  of  this 
series  and  transform  it  into  a  fictitious,  or  delusional,  or  false  to  facts 
symmetrical  relation  of  identity.  It  becomes  also  obvious  why  in  the 
^-system,  which  did  not  allow  asymmetrical  relations,  proper  evaluation, 
adjustment,  and  sanity  in  general  were,  in  principle,  impossible. 

Although  the  language  used  in  this  connection  is  not  familiar,  it  is 
not  entirely  arbitrary.  It  appears  experimentally  that  four-dimensional 
order  has  physiological  importance  on  the  one  hand ;  on  the  other,  that 
on  the  psycho-logical  levels  it  involves  the  semantic  factors  of  evaluation. 
In  training  in  the  physiological  natural  order ,  we  train  the  evaluation  or 
appropriate  human  and  adult  s.r  on  the  psycho-logical  levels . 

In  the  difference  between  the  un-speakable  ‘scientific  object*  and 
the  ordinary  object,  the  objective  level  and  the  verbal  level,  we  find  the 
precise  spot  at  which  we  differ  most  radically  from  the  animals.  If  we 

ON  NON-AKISTOTELIAN  TRAINING 

disregard  these  differences  and  retain  the  ‘is’  of  identity,  we  must  some¬ 
how  copy  animals  in  our  nervous  processes.  Through  wrong  evaluation 
we  are  using  the  lower  centres  too  much  and  cannot  'think*  properly. 
We  are  'over-emotional* ;  we  get  easily  confused,  worried,  terrorized,  or 
discouraged ;  or  else  we  become  absolutists,  dogmatists , .  The  results  of 
such  copying  of  animals  are  usually  tragic,  as  might  be  expected.  Owing 
to  wrong  evaluation  we  add  self-made  semantic  difficulties  to  the  dif¬ 
ficulties  which  we  actually  find  in  nature.  When  we  live  in  a  delusional 
world,  we  multiply  our  worries,  fears,  and  discouragements,  and  our 
higher  nerve  centres,  instead  of  protecting  us  from  over-stimulation, 
actually  multiply  the  semantic  harmful  stimuli  indefinitely.  Under  such 
circumstances  'sanity*  is  impossible. 

It  seems  that  here  in  the  elimination  of  the  'is*  of  identity  we  have 
put  our  hands  on  an  extremely  powerful  reflex-mechanism  for  the  edu¬ 
cation,  or  re-education,  of  our  'emotional1  life.  As  has  already  been  said, 
suppressing  or  repressing  our  feelings  is  dangerous,  and  should  be 
avoided.  The  old  animalistic  educational  systems  were  built  on  repres¬ 
sion  and  suppression,  with  sad  results.  But  since  we  had  no  other  means 
of  education,  we  had  to  use  the  older  means  or  else  abandon  this 
special  education  altogether.  Not  so  in  the  new  A  way  with  the  Struc¬ 
tural  Differential.  We  do  not  repress  or  suppress.  We  teach  silence  on 
the  objective  level  in  general ,  which  is  a  most  impressive  * emotional *  edu¬ 
cation,  on  perfectly  neutral  grounds,  one  of  the  consequences  of  the 
elimination  of  the  'is*  of  identity.  Any  bursting  into  speech  is  not 
repressed;  a  gesture  of  the  hand  to  the  labels  reminds  us  that  words 
are  not  objects,  or  action,  or  happenings,  or  feelings.  Such  a  procedure 
lias  a  most  potent  semantic  effect.  It  gives  a  semantic  jar ;  yet  this  jar  is 
not  repression,  but  the  realization  of  a  most  fundamental,  natural,  struc¬ 
tural  fact  of  evaluation  in  which  we  should  all  be  well  trained.  Dis¬ 
turbing  s.r  subside,  and  no  one  is  'hurt*.  It  takes  long  and  persistent 
training,  but  the  results  are  most  beneficial. 

We  must  note  an  important  difference  between  a  statement  involv¬ 
ing  the  'is*  of  identity,  that  'we  are  animals— which  has  nothing  to  do 
with  the  actual  facts;  all  of  us  (the  animals,  too)  are  not  words,  but  rep¬ 
resent  absolute  individuals  and  all  different — and  the  statement  that  we 
'copy  animals*  in  our  nervous  reactions.  In  the  first  case,  nothing  can 
be  done.  In  the  second  case,  although  the  results  are  equally  sad,  we 
can  stop  'copying  animals*  the  moment  the  mechanism  is  discovered  and 
we  begin  to  realize  that  we  are  doing  so.  Thus,  the  old  hopeless  becomes 
hopeful. 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  T1ME-B1NIM N(i 

I  have  already  mentioned  that  some  educators  may  assume  the 
eventual  harmfulness  of  training  in  the  consciousness  of  abstracting  on 
the  ground  that  children  should  be  kept  ‘close  to  reality’.  The  answer  to 
such  an  argument  can  be  found  in  the  recognition  that  what  in  the  older 
days  seemed  ‘reality'  must  now,  in  the  light  of  new  knowledge,  be  con¬ 
sidered  delusions,  and  the  older  training  as  preparatory  for  acquired 
un-sanity.  The  modern  conditions  of  human  life  appear  much  more 
complex  than  those  of  animal  life,  or  of  the  primitive  man.  Every  year, 
perhaps  even  every  month,  new  human  ‘realities'  make  their  appear¬ 
ance;  complexities  arise  and  our  educational  systems  do  not  equip  the 
children  semantically  to  meet  these  new  conditions.  After  investigation 
one  may  find  by  himself  that  the  older  ‘allness'  and  identifications  repre¬ 
sent  delusional  factors  found  nowhere  in  the  empirical  world,  and  thus 
have  to  conclude  that  if  we  train  children  in  such  delusions,  adjustment 
to  the  actual  world  is  made  extremely  difficult,  if  not  impossible.  It  is 
true  that  some  beneficial  results  do  not  appear  at  once,  but  only  after  the 
full  consciousness  of  abstracting  is  acquired.  Thus,  at  an  early  stage  of 
the  training,  when  the  student  begins  to  realize  the  delusional  character 
introduced  by  the  ‘is'  of  identity,  the  general  and  well-known  tendency 
may  struggle  hard  to  retain  the  delusions.  His  first  reaction  may  be  that 
of  disappointment,  with  its  many  concomitants,  depending  on  his  tem¬ 
perament,  metaphysics . ;  but  when  he  acquires  the  freedom  of  the  full 
consciousness  of  abstracting,  all  levels  will  be  evaluated  properly  and 
he  will  be  able  to  adjust  himself  to  conditions  of  m.o  reality  described 
in  the  present  work,  which  cannot  be  avoided  by  any  one.  ‘Knowledge’ 
or  ‘intelligence'  is  only  possible  with  abstracting,  and,  therefore,  it  fun¬ 
damentally  involves  ‘non-allness'.  ‘Omniscience’  would  involve  a  ‘knowl¬ 
edge’  of  every  point-event.  These  are  fundamentally  different,  and  such 
a  world  would  be  one  of  chaos,  where  knowledge  would  be  impossible. 
Life,  m.o  abstracting,  and  m.o  intelligence  start  together  and  are  con¬ 
ditioned  by  the  m.o  process  of  abstracting . 

Among  the  many  semantically  beneficial  results  of  such  training, 
besides  the  training  in  sanity  and,  therefore,  in  adjustment,  a  few  other 
benefits  should  be  mentioned.  Our  life,  our  m.o  mentation,  the  structure 
of  our  language,  with  its  syllogisms,  fallacies . ,  consist  for  the  most  part 
of  the  constant  utilization  of  the  different  levels  of  abstractions.  This 
appears  as  an  inherent  characteristic  of  ‘human  knowledge',  and,  there¬ 
fore,  we  cannot  abolish  it  without  abolishing  m.o  intelligence  altogether. 
Intelligence  requires  the  passing  from  level  to  level  in  both  directions. 
All  the  benefits  we  possess  follow  from  this;  but  also  many  semantic 
dangers  are  hidden  in  it.  Similar  remarks  could  be  made  about  an  auto- 

ON  NON-ARISTOTELIAN  TRAINING 

mobile , .  A  great  many  beneficial  results  foll.ow  from  the  use  of  auto¬ 
mobiles.,  but  there  are  also  great  dangers  involved.  For  instance,  at 
present  we  have  regulations  for  the  driving  of  an  automobile.  A  driver 
has  to  pass  his  examination,  demonstrate  his  practical  reflex-ability  in 
driving.,  before  he  is  allowed  to  drive  in  public.  Similarly  with  our 
language ;  we  find  the  greatest  benefits  in  it,  and  we  should  utilize  them. 
Proper  training  in  the  use  of  language  should  teach  us  how  to  avoid 
dangers.  Obviously,  ‘consciousness  of  abstracting*  teaches  us  how  to 
avoid  these  dangers ;  likewise,  once  we  become  trained  in  the  passing  to 
higher  and  higher  order  of  abstractions,  we  become  capable  of  the  per¬ 
formance  of  what  we  call  ‘high  intelligence*.  The  difference  between 
‘high  intelligence*  and  ‘low  intelligence*  consists  in  the  fact  that  a  high 
intelligence*  has  a  larger  outlook  backwards  as  well  as  forward ;  a  ‘low 

intelligence*,  as  suggested  in  Fig.  2, 
sees  only  a  little  backwards  (ignor¬ 
ance)  and  foresees  only  a  little.  A 
‘high  intelligence’  has  a  larger  span 
or  field;  it  knows  more  about  the 
past  and  looks  further  into  the 
future. 

‘Low  in-  ‘High 

telligence*  intelligence’ 

It  is  no  mystery  that  when  we 

Fig.  2 

want  to  look  further  into  the  past 

and  the  future  we  need  higher  and  higher  order  abstractions.  By  training 
in  this  passing  to  higher  and  higher  abstractions  we  train  the  ‘mind’  to 
be  more  efficient ;  this  ‘mental*  expanding  should  be  the  structural  and 

semantic  aim  of  every  education. 

Once  we  eliminate  identification,  we  must  accept  structure  as  the 
only  possible  content  of  ‘knowledge*  and  also  realize  that  no  ‘knowledge* 
is  ever  free  from  some  structural  assumptions.  Sometimes  it  is  pathetic 

to  watch  the  metaphysical  performances  of  some  otherwise  very  eminent 
scientists,  who  seem  entirely  innocent  of  these  facts.  They  often  attempt 
to  divorce  their  metaphysics  from  science,  and  miss  the  point  that  primi¬ 
tive  metaphysics  represents  ‘science*  or  the  structural  assumptions  of  that 
period,  whereas  modern  science  represents  structural  assumptions  or 
metaphysics  of  modern  ‘times*,  which  cannot  be  reconciled  with  the 
older  ‘science*.  The  difference  appears  in  dates,  not  in  kind.  The  real 
problem  before  mankind  presents  itself  in  the  selection  of  a  structural 
metaphysics.  If  we  select  the  primitive  structural  assumptions  and  have 
to  live  under  present  conditions,  we  must  become  a  split  personality 
which  cannot  adjust  itself.  If  we  accept  modern  structural  assumptions 
called  science,  we  may  adjust  ourselves.  In  no  case  can  we  free  ourselves 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

entirely  from  some  structural  assumptions.  The  problem  becomes  one  of 
dates ,  and  of  un-sanity  versus  sanity.  These  problems  appear  of  unusual 
importance,  because  the  difficult  scientific  technique  does  not  enter  into 
this  field  at  all,  and  the  few  structural  data  (1933)  can  be  given  in  the 
simplest  form  to  children  and  even  to  the  feeble-minded.  In  the  older 
days  this  problem  was  entirely  misunderstood.  We  tried  to  ‘popularize* 
science  in  the  sense  that  we  translated  structurally  correct  language  into 
the  daily  language  of  primitive  structure;  this  resulted  only  in  bewilder¬ 
ment  ;  we  did  not  analyse  the  structure  of  language  and  its  role  in  our 
lives  and  begin  with  a  structural  linguistic  revision.  Once  this  revision 
is  accomplished,  and  we  build  a  A  language,  the  semantic  background  is 
prepared  for  a  natural  acceptance  of  modern  structural  metaphysics 
(science)  of  each  date  and  the  older  ‘popularization*  becomes  unneces¬ 
sary.  Such  procedure  would  help  to  integrate  the  individual,  while  the 
older  methods  only  help  to  split  him. 

Let  us  recall  that  the  animal  stops  somewhere  in  his  abstracting. 
When  we  come  to  a  stop ,  and  consider  it  ‘final*  or  that  we  ‘know  all 
about  it*,  we  copy  animals  in  our  nervous  reactions.  Training  in  passing 
from  order  to  order  of  abstractions  as  such,  trains  the  particularly 
human ,  fluid,  non-blocked  s.r ,  counteracts,  and  ultimately  abolishes,  the 
animalistic  blockage.  In  a  language  of  a  given  structure  we  can  express 
ourselves  in  a  definite  way ;  and,  if  that  way  is  incomplete,  we  must  leave 
the  field  open,  for  in  a  structurally  different  language  the  issues  may 
look  entirely  different. 

It  is  fundamental  to  stress  that  the  old  ‘unknowable*  becomes  en¬ 
tirely  abolished.  This  ‘unknowable*  originated  in  the  primitive  identi¬ 
fication  and  elementalism.  Our  ancestors  could  not  miss  indefinitely 
that  identification  was  false  to  facts ;  yet  somehow  the  emphasis,  which 
the  ecclesiastical  authorities  (for  their  purpose)  laid  on  the  im¬ 
portance  of  the  A-system,  prevented  them  from  completely  rejecting  the 
‘is*  of  identity.  The  un-speakable  was  called  the  ‘unknowable’,  a  very 
gloomy  term,  indeed.  The  use  of  this  term  prevented  them  from  dis¬ 
covering,  long  ago, '  that  the  only  content  of  ‘knowledge*  appears  as 
structural,  with  all  the  following  non-el  consequences.  ‘Knowledge*  was 
expected  to  represent  somehow  more  than  ‘knowledge’ — a  silent  self- 
contradiction.  On  this  foundation  whole  systems  of  delusions  were  built. 
With  the  newer  realizations,  we  understand  that  the  only  possible  con¬ 
tent  of  ‘knowledge*  appears  as  structural,  so  that  we  can  know  all  which 
belongs  to  the  structural  legitimate  field  of  ‘knowledge*.  What  does  not 
belong  to  the  field  of  ‘knowledge*  must  be  considered  meaningless,  and 
making  noises  about  it,  one  way  or  another,  will  not  help  us  at  all ;  quite 

ON  NON-ARISTOTELIAN  TRA1 NINO 

the  contrary,  it  involves  us  in  delusional  states.  Students  of  the  history 
of  ‘philosophy’  may  realize,  in  this  case,  particularly,  the  drama  and  the 
dangers  which  the  playing  on  such  m.o  terms  as  ‘knowledge’  may  need¬ 
lessly  produce. 

Through  the  semantic  mechanism  which  it  involves,  ‘consciousness 
of  abstracting’  abolishes  many  fears,  despairs,  and  other  disturbances 
which  follow  from  the  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions.  We  became 
introverted  extroverts ;  in  other  words,  we  become  affectively  well-bal¬ 
anced,  and  ready  to  deal  with  empirical  first  order  effects  on  their  levels, 
and  with  verbal  problems  on  their  different  levels.  We  learn,  also,  to 
observe ,  as  soon  as  we  have  learned  ‘silence’  on  the  ‘objective  levels*. 
Realizing  that  we  abstract  in  different  orders,  we  slowly  acquire  the  most 
creative  structural  feeling  that  human  knowledge  is  inexhaustible;  we 
become  more  and  more  interested  in  knowledge ;  our  curiosity  becomes 
aroused ;  our  sporting  spirit  stimulated  and  our  level  of  m.o  intelligence 
raised. 

It  is  well  known  that  the  higher  intelligence  is  characterized  by  a 
critical  attitude.  By  training  with  the  Structural  Differential  until  the 
memory  of  the  characteristics  left  out  and  the  non-identity  become  a 
permanent  semantic  acquisition  with  us,  this  critical  attitude  is  also  devel¬ 
oped.  No  one  who  feels  habitually  these  ‘characteristics  left  out’ — ‘this 
is  not  this’ — will  ever  take  a  word  or  a  statement  for  granted .  He  will 
enquire,  investigate ;  will  always  ask  ‘what  do  you  mean’,  a  question 
which  automatically  leads  to  further  investigation,  and  finally  strikes 
the  bottom  of  the  undefined  terms  which  divulge  our  silent  structural 
creeds  and  metaphysics. 

We  should  avoid  the  mistake  of  assuming  that  the  average  man,  or 
a  moron,  does  not  ‘think*.  His  nervous  system  works  continually, 
as  does  that  of  a  genius.  The  difference  consists  in  that  its  working  is  not 
productive  or  efficient.  Proper  training  and  understanding  of  the  seman¬ 
tic  mechanism  must  add  to  efficiency  and  productiveness.  By  the  elimi¬ 
nation  of  semantic  blockings,  as  in  identification,  we  release  the  creative 
capacities  of  any  individual.  We  release  him  from  the  primitive  seman¬ 
tic  bondage  in  the  daily  and  constant  use  of  a  powerful  instrument  called 
language — full  of  benefits,  but  also  full  of  dangers — the  structure  of 
which  he  totally  misunderstands.  Such  misunderstanding  must  lead  to 
inefficiency  in  the  use,  and  so  to  the  abuse,  of  this  function.  Instead  of 
being  a  semantic  slave  of  the  structure  of  language,  he  becomes  its 
master. 

When  we  become  more  civilized  and  enlightened,  no  public  speaker 
or  writer  will  be  allowed  to  operate  publicly  without  demonstrating  first 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

that  he  knows  the  structure  and  semantic  functioning  of  the  linguistic 
capacities.  Even  at  present  no  professor,  teacher,  lawyer,  physician,  or 
chemist . ,  is  allowed  to  operate  publicly  without  passing  examination  to 
show  that  he  knows  his  subject.  The  above  statement  does  not  mean 
control  or  censorship.  Far  from  it.  Our  language  involves  a  much 
more  intricate,  beneficial,  or  dangerous  semantic  mechanism  than  any 
automobile  ever  had  or  will  have.  We  do  not  control  the  drivers  in  their 
destinations.  They  come  and  go  as  they  please,  but  for  public  safety  we 
demand  that  they  should  have  acquired  the  necessary  reflex-skill  for 
driving,  and  so  we  eliminate  unnecessary  tragedies.  Similarly  with  lan¬ 
guage,  of  which  the  ignorant  or  pathological  use  becomes  a  public  danger 
of  a  very  serious  semantic  character.  At  present  public  writers  or 
speakers  can  hide  behind  ignorance  (1933)  of  the  verbal,  semantic,  and 
neurological  mechanism.  They  may  ‘mean  weir ;  yet,  by  playing  upon 
.  the  pathological  reactions  of  their  own  and  those  of  the  mob,  they  may 
‘put  over’  some  very  vicious  propaganda  and  bring  about  very  serious 
sufferings  to  all  concerned.  But  once  they  would  have  to  pass  an  exami¬ 
nation  to  get  their  licence  as  public  speakers  or  writers,  they  could  not 
hide  any  longer  behind  ignorance.  If  found  to  have  misused  the  lin¬ 
guistic  mechanism,  such  an  abuse  on  their  part  would  be  clearly  a  wilful 
act ,  and  ‘well  meaning*  would  cease  to  be  an  alibi. 

We  must  accept  the  obvious  facts  which  make  the  older  theoretical 
‘democracy*  or  the  older  theoretical  ‘socialism*  a  scientific  impossibility. 
If,  m  1933,  99%  of  the  population  of  the  globe  appear  as  infantile  or 
‘mentally*  deficient,  how  can  any  one  expect  that  the  majority  or  the 
mass  could  ever  have  proper  evaluation  or  non-pathological  s.rl  All  his¬ 
tory  shows  at  present,  and  this  evidence  should  not  be  taken  lightly  by 
scientifically  enlightened  society,  that  the  majority  appears  ‘always 
wrong*,  and  that  all  that  we  call  ‘progress*,  ‘civilization*,  ‘science*. ,  has 
been  achieved  by  a  very  small  minority.  Such  an  understanding  should 
guide  our  future  conduct  if  we  desire  better  results  than  we  have  at 
present.  Under  A  conditions,  not  the  state,  nor  different  private  so¬ 
cieties,  but  professional  scientific  bodies  would  have  to  set  the  standards 
and  perfect  the  technique  of  the  linguistic  structural  examinations.  They 
would  also  select  members  who  would  serve  on  the  examination  boards. 
It  might  seem  that  such  a  A  innovation  would  not  be  important  or  far- 
reaching.  This  would  be  a  mistake.  It  seems  that  most  of  those  public 
writers  and  speakers  may  be  considered  privately  as  ‘honest*  men,  who 
do  not  realize  that  under  A  conditions  they  often  impose  on  defenceless 
masses  delusional  states  which  too  often  become  of  a  pronounced  morbid 
character.  Once  such  an  examination  would  force  them  to  look  into 

ON  NON- ARISTOTELIAN  TRAINING 

structural,  semantic,  and  linguistic  problems,  we  may  take  for  granted 
that  a  great  many  of  them  would  become  able  to  evaluate  properly  their 
own  activities  and  comprehend  the  harm  they  do.  As  a  result,  quite  prob¬ 
ably,  a  great  amount  of  useless,  befogging  issues,  delusional  writings 
and  speeches  would  not  be  produced,  with  great  benefit  to  all  concerned. 
No  one  would  censure  them.  Consciousness  of  abstracting  would  accom¬ 
plish  that.  They  would  become  their  own  censors,  aided,  also,  by  the 
newly  developed  consciousness  of  abstracting  on  the  part  of  some  mem¬ 
bers  of  the  audiences  or  readers. 

It  would  be  desirable  to  experiment  and  introduce  parallel  classes 
in  schools  for  a  while;  one  group  continuing  in  the  old  ^-system,  the 
other  being  trained  in  the  ^-system.  We  may  expect  that  at  the  end  of 
a  year  the  results  would  be  fairly  tangible.  The  ones  which  acquire  the 
‘consciousness  of  abstracting'  should  show  a  marked  improvement  in 
character,  should  behave  better,  and  should  also  show  better  results  in 
scholarship,  not  to  mention,  in  addition,  the  preventive  semantic  benefits 
in  their  future  life  and  adjustment.  Experimenting  under  various  con¬ 
ditions  is  very  desirable,  as  we  deal  with  such  a  tremendously  broad  and 
fundamental  structural  problem  that  it  is  impossible  at  present  to  foresee 
more  than  the  main  results  and  bearings. 

In  a  school  one  three-dimensional  Differential  should  be  enough,  but 
in  each  classroom  a  large  printed  diagram,  which  is  published  also,  should 
be  permanently  exhibited  on  the  walls  and  applied  in  all  studies.  This  is 
necessary,  not  only  because  such  a  reminder  makes  the  children  thor¬ 
oughly  familiar  with  the  ‘characteristics  left  out',  ‘natural  order'. ,  but 
also  because  the  children  will  discuss  it  and  settle  their  educational  and 
personal  difficulties  by  its  aid  and  so  train  themselves  in  A  reactions.  In 
my  practice,  I  have  found  that  one  of  the  main  difficulties  of  the  learner, 
or  in  ‘thinking’,  in  general,  consists  in  the  fact  that  in  any  verbal  discus¬ 
sion  we  must  utilize  different  orders  of  abstractions  and  m.o  terms.  If 
we  do  not  realize  this,  the  problem  often  seems  very  involved ;  once  we 
are  conscious  of  it,  however,  the  problem  becomes  simple.  In  fact,  it 
may  be  said  that  this  special  flexibility  which  is  entirely  absent  in  animals 
and  little  developed  in  the  primitive  man,  represents  the  working  mechan¬ 
ism  of  ‘high  intelligence*,  and  that  this  special  flexibility  can  be  acquired 
through  proper  A  training. 

The  dealing  with  reflex-reactions  and  with  experimental  theories  in 
general  has  one  very  encouraging  characteristic ;  namely,  that  no  matter 
how  difficult  the  theoretical  side  may  be,  the  practical  is  invariably  ex¬ 
tremely  simple.  Thus,  a  theoretical  treatise  on  the  Einstein  theory,  or 
the  new  quantum  mechanics,  or  on  an  automobile,  radio,  or  piano,  or 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OE  TIME-BINDING 

on  music,  or  the  conditional  reflexes  of  Pavlov.,  may  present,  and,  in 
fact,  generally  does  present,  difficulties,  because  it  is  formulated  on 
purely  verbal  and  analytical  levels.  But  these  levels  are  most  important, 
for  we  find  that  on  these  levels  the  full  evaluation,  and  so  the  full  realiza¬ 
tion,  of  existing  or  possible  relations  and  meanings  is  accomplished.  In 
these  verbal  levels  we  find  also  economical  and  effective  means  to  analyse 
further  developments  on  which  the  possible  range  of  applications  ulti¬ 
mately  depends.  Such  a  treatise  can  be  produced  by  a  single  man  and 
thereby  becomes  available  for  the  rest  of  us. 

A  description  of  the  application  is,  however,  very  simple ;  we  label 
the  related  parts  of  some  structure,  describe,  mostly  in  terms  of  order, 
their  interrelations,  and  then  give  instructions  how  to  act,  push,  pull,  or 
turn  a  given  part  to  get  such  and  such  results.  These  descriptions,  al¬ 
though  verbal,  refer  exclusively  to  some  physical  structure,  so  that  men 
of  very  low  ‘mentality’  can  soon  become  acquainted  with  the  practical 
problems  concerned.  When  the  reflex-handling  of  the  physical  structure 
is  acquired,  the  experimental  and  behaviouristic  aspects  become  child¬ 
ishly  simple.  A  child  can  see  the  experimental  results  of  any  theory,  or 
notice  the  ease  and  simplicity  of  the  reflex-adjustments  a  good  driver 
can  make. 

But  what  an  infant,  a  savage,  or  an  ignorant  man  can  not  do,  is 
appreciate  the  meanings  of  given  occurrences  and  evaluate  them ;  in  other 
words,  they  cannot  relate  the  given  occurrences  to  other  occurrences 
which  alone  give  the  significance  of  the  happenings.  Thus,  not  only 
physicists,  but  even  the  average  man,  knew  of  the  equality  of  gravi¬ 
tational  and  inertial  mass  \  it  took  the  genius  of  an  Einstein,  however, 
to  evaluate  properly,  to  have  the  proper  semantic  reaction  toward 
this  commonplace  fact1.  The  present  work  shows  clearly  that  all 
semantic  disturbances  exhibit  a  lack  of  proper  evaluation ;  or  in  getting 
hold  of  the  meanings,  or  relations,  or  order  of  different  order  abstrac¬ 
tions.  Only  a  full  theoretical  understanding  can  supply  us  with  those 
meanings  and  produce  in  us  the  proper  s.r  of  evaluation — a  necessary 
psychophysiological  step  for  further  advance,  and  for  full  application  of 
the  conquests  already  made. 

As  the  present  work  is  experimental  throughout,  and  deals  with 
verifiable  subjects,  such  as  the  structure  of  languages  on  record,  the 
natural  order  of  development,  the  pathological  reversal  of  order,  which, 
if  again  reversed,  restores  the  natural  order. ,  and,  when  applied,  brings 
about  most  beneficial  experimental  results,  all  that  has  been  said  about  s 
experimental  theories  applies  fully  in  our  case. 

UN  NON-AKISTOTELIAN  TRAINING 

Just  as  in  other  disciplines,  the  instructions  are  simple :  ‘push  these’, 
'pull  this’,  or  ‘turn  that’ ;  so,  in  our  case,  this  simple  descriptive  rule 
which  refers  to  the  objective  Differential  is  given  as :  ‘this  is  not  this’. 

( )nce  the  reflex -activities  have  been  acquired,  we  can,  for  instance,  enjoy 
the  pleasure  of  an  automobile  trip,  the  music  of  a  radio,  or  a  semantic 
trip  toward  sanity  in  harmony  with  ourselves  and  others,  very  simply, 
in  spite  of  the  underlying  theoretical  complexities  which  are  always 
means  and  not  ends  in  themselves. 

But  here  we  must  face  an  important  difference.  It  is  easy  to  dem¬ 
onstrate  empirically  to  the  majority  of  us  the  usefulness  or  pleasurable¬ 
ness  of  automobiles  and  radios,  but  it  is  very  difficult  to  demonstrate 
the  benefits  of  consciousness  of  abstracting  to  those  who  have  not  ac¬ 
quired  it.  Before  the  experimental  data  begin  to  accumulate  and  become 
common  knowledge,  the  main  evaluation  will  have  to  be  made  on  theo¬ 
retical  grounds.  Besides,  before  children  can  be  trained  by  the  simple 
and  easy  methods  outlined  above,  adults  must  first  re-train  and  re-shape 
their  own  s.r,  which  re-training  and  re-shaping  are  not  easy,  and  require 
even  more  difficult  theoretical  considerations.  Because  of  this,  the  present 
work  had  to  be  written  in  the  form  of  a  text-book  for  parents,  teachers, 
physicians,  and  workers  in  ‘mental’  hygiene,  and  for  future  students  and 
research  workers  in  psychophysiology  and  semantic  hygiene. 

At  the  beginning,  in  the  application  of  the  method,  a  number  of  dif¬ 
ficulties  will  be  discovered  which  will  have  to  be  overcome.  As  a  rule, 
the  training  in  non-pathological  s.r  proves  to  be  easiest  and  simplest  with 
very  young  children.  Most  of  it,  or  at  least  the  laying  down  of  the 
semantic  foundations  for  such  reactions,  should  be  accomplished  at  home 
by  specially  trained  teachers,  if  the  parents  are  unable  to  do  that  them¬ 
selves.  In  countries  or  communities  where  the  national  or  local  govern¬ 
ments  show  an  interest  in  the  health  of  the  population  by  providing,  for 
instance,  specialists  in  preventive  vaccination,  specialists  to  train  in  pre¬ 
ventive  measures  against  semantic  disturbances  will  probably  also  be 
provided. 

In  elementary  schools  the  teachers  at  first  will  have  to  train  them¬ 
selves  as  best  they  can  with  the  help  of  specialists;  but  in  high  schools, 
colleges,  and  universities,  special  instructors  will  have  to  be  employed. 

The  first  concern,  then,  is  to  start  the  education  and  training  of 
teachers.  With  this  end  in  view,  the  present  work  has  been  written  so 
«h  to  form  a  fairly  complete  outline  of  the  whole  problem;  reference 
literature  has  been  indicated,  so  that  any  one  who  wants  to  specialize  in 
the  subject  can  find  some  suitable  text-book  as  a  primer.  As  to  qualifica¬ 
tions  for  the  professional  A  instructors, — it  is,  at  present,  very  difficult 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

to  foresee  details,  but,  as  the  full  consciousness  of  abstracting  leads  to 
s.r  which,  also,  follow  unconsciously,  or  which  should  so  follow,  from 
the  study  and  acquiring  the  feel  of  the  calculus, — students  of  mathe¬ 
matics  would,  perhaps,  be  the  most  desirable.  Any  specialist  in  a  new 
line  of  work  has  to  learn  a  great  deal,  and  this  cannot  be  avoided ;  but 
it  makes  a  difference  what  kind  of  training  one  has  had  as  a  young  per¬ 
son.  Thus,  it  is  simpler  for  a  student  of  mathematics  to  learn  about 
psychiatry,  or  psycho-logics,  than  for  a  psychiatrist  or  a  psycho-logician 
to  learn  mathematics.  However,  for  a  person  with  university  training, 
this  is  less  important  than  a  genuine  willingness  to  master  the  subject. 
Once  the  consciousness  of  abstracting  has  been  acquired  by  such  a 
student,  his  semantic  blockages  will  be  eliminated.  He  will  then  have  no 
difficulties  whatsoever  with  details,  or  even  in  doing  creative  work 
along  this  line. 

With  very  young  children,  in  the  beginning  an  hour  a  day  for  sev¬ 
eral  months  should  be  devoted  to  the  subject.  When  they  have  acquired 
the  consciousness  of  abstracting,  the  results  should  not  be  entirely  trusted 
as  to  permanence,  but,  at  least,  once  a  week  the  problems  should  be 
recalled  to  them.  How  many  hours  a  week  should  be  devoted  to  it  in 
high  schools,  colleges,  and  universities  I  shall  not  venture  to  suggest, 
because  the  working  hours  in  these  institutions  are  already  very  crowded. 
The  training  in  consciousness  of  abstracting  automatically  eliminates  an 
enormous  amount  of  semantic  blockages,  and  would  facilitate  the  acqui¬ 
sition  of  learning  in  all  branches  of  knowledge,  and  so  save  ‘time’  and 
effort — the  more  so,  if  the  respective  teachers  themselves  were  to  become 
conscious  of  abstracting. 

The  beneficial  results  which  are  to  be  expected  may  be  found  in 
better  scholarship,  more  interest  in  studies,  improved  character,  higher 
m.o  intelligence,  and  a  better  general  adjustment.  All  of  this  seems  quite 
apart  from  the  preventive  character  of  the  training  as  a  protection 
against  many  semantic  disturbances  in  the  future.  But  when  teachers  of 
all  subjects  acquire  consciousness  of  abstracting  themselves,  they  will 
probably  discover  new  means  and  methods  of  conveying  mpre  simply 
and  more  effectively  what  they  wish  to  convey  to  their  pupils.  I  am 
convinced  that  the  hours  spent  on  semantic  training  would  actually  turn 
out  to  be  an  important  economy  of  efforts.  Moreover,  it  would  effec¬ 
tively  give  the  children  and  students  the  highest  grade  of  cultural  train¬ 
ing,  which  at  present  we  acquire  only  occasionally  and  with  difficulty, 
without  the  conscious  co-operation  of  our  teachers. 

CHAPTER  XXX 

IDENTIFICATION,  INFANTILISM,  AND  UN-SANITY 
VERSUS  SANITY 

Common  sense,  do  what  it  will,  cannot  avoid  being  surprised  occasionally. 
The  object  of  science  is  to  spare  it  this  emotion  and  create  mental  habits 
which  shall  be  in  such  close  accord  with  the  habits  of  the  world  as  to  secure 
that  nothing  shall  be  unexpected.  (457)  bertrand  russell 

Medicine  is  to-day  an  Art  or  Calling,  to  whose  exercise  certain  Sciences 
are  no  doubt  ancillary;  but  she  has  forfeited  pretension  to  be  deemed  a 
Science,  because  her  Professors  and  Doctors  decline  to  define  fundamentals 
or  to  state  first  principles,  and  refuse  to  consider,  in  express  terms,  the 
relations  between  Things,  Thoughts  and  Words  involved  in  their  com¬ 
munications  to  others.  <122)  f.  G.  crookshank 

Unless  physiology  like  any  other  of  the  sciences  basic  to  medicine  will 
teach  less  fact  and  more  method,  it  might  as  well  be  deleted  from  the 
catalogue. 

Can  anything  be  done  to  help  the  situation?  Not,  I  think,  without 
large  vision.  The  student  of  medicine  needs  not  more  external  but  more 
internal  discipline.*  martin  h.  fischer 

I  wonder  how  soon  we  shall  be  far  enough  along  to  have  the  physician 
ask:  How  much  and  what,  if  anything,  is  structural ?  how  much  functional, 
somatic  or  metabolic?  how  much  constitutional,  psychogenic  and  social?** 

ADOLF  MEYER 

Section  A .  General . 

The  name  of  Freud  is  usually  associated  with  the  term  ‘the  uncon¬ 
scious*.  This  term  appears  as  a  general  descriptive  term  standing  for  a 
great  many  psycho-logical  semantic  processes.  In  1933  the  work  of 
Freud  is  generally  accepted  as  important  and  very  suggestive,  although 
further  experiments  by  many  research  workers  and  practicians  have 
shown  that  the  freudian  formulations  have  not  the  exclusiveness  for¬ 
merly  assumed  for  them. 

It  is  useless  to  deny  that  the  term  ‘unconscious*  is  fundamental  and 
necessary.  The  use  of  the  term  is  best  shown  in  the  study  of  hypnotic 
phenomena.  Some  patients  do  certain  things  under  hypnotic  influence, 
and  then  seemingly  lose  all  memory  traces  of  such  doings  upon  emerging 
from  hypnosis.  Careful  experiments  showed  that  after  prolonged  efforts 
these  recollections  could  be  made  accessible  to  the  patients*  waking  con¬ 
sciousness.  The  difficulty  in  recalling  was  not  ordinary  ‘forgetting*. 
What  is  ‘forgotten*  can  also  be  spontaneously  ‘recollected*.  Here  the 
situation  seemed  different,  in  that  these  lost  ‘memories*  required  con¬ 
siderable  work  and  effort  for  their  reconstruction.  The  psycho-logical 

♦Teaching  of  Physiology.  Jour.  Asso.  Med.  Colleges.  Apr.  1929. 

**The  “Complaint”  as  the  Center  of  Genetic-Dynamic  and  Nosological  Teaching  In  Psychiatry 
New  Eng.  Jour .  of  Med .  Aug.  23,  1928. 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

state  in  such  cases  of  perfected  ‘forgetting’  was  called  ‘unconscious’, 
which,  as  a  descriptive  term,  is  very  satisfactory. 

The  origin  of  the  freudian  theory  of  the  unconscious  was  strictly 
scientific.  The  theory  was  a  new  generalization  in  a  new  structurally 
appropriate  language  to  account  for  experimental  facts.  Subsequently,  a 
large  number  of  other  experimental  facts  showed  that  the  work  of 
Freud  was  sound  as  far  as  it  went.  Different  workers,  from  different 
sets  of  facts,  amplified  or  reshaped  the  freudian  theories.  At  present, 
there  are  several  schools  that  differ  widely  in  language,  all  of  them  based 
on  the  fundamental  system-function  of  Freud,  however. 

In  reading  the  literature  of  the  subject,  one  finds  most  diversified 
material.  Seemingly,  there  are  facts  which  prove  ‘beyond  doubt’  each 
and  every- theory ,  no  matter  how  widely  they  differ  among  themselves. 
It  is  also  easy  to  find  experimental  facts  which  can  be  accounted  for  by 
several  different  theories. 

Such  a  situation  appears  unsatisfactory.  This  lack  of  generality 
conceals  a  very  important  and  workable  semantic  mechanism,  which, 
under  A  identification,  ‘allness’,  and  elementalism,  becomes  pathological, 
resulting  in  arrested  or  regressive  symptoms.  Once  we  pass  to  a  ^-sys¬ 
tem  free  from  the  above  harmful  semantic  factors  of  delusional  evalua¬ 
tion,  the  difficulties  do  not  arise.  The  more  my  enquiry  progressed,  the 
more  it  became  obvious  that  the  underlying  mechanism  appears  similar 
in  all  psychoanalytical  theories.  It  seems  that  the  general  problem  may 
be  formulated  as  the  need  to  discover  methods  for  non-delusional  evalua¬ 
tion  affecting  our  s.r ,  and  so  be  able  to  make  the  ‘unconscious’  ‘conscious’. 

The  term  ‘consciousness’  is  an  incomplete  symbol,  as  it  lacks  con¬ 
tent.  If  we  use  the  term  ‘consciousness  of  abstracting’,  we  ascribe 
content  and  also  gain  empirical  means  to  bring  under  educational  control 
a  vast  array  of  important  psycho-logical  processes.  The  negative  term 
‘unconscious’  does  not  imply  specific  content,  and  the  main  difficulty  in 
its  practical  application  is  to  find  its  content,  or  to  ascribe  content  to  it. 
Once  this  is  achieved,  the  ‘unconscious’  becomes  ‘conscious’.  A  patient 
whose  unconscious  semantic  difficulty  is  made  conscious  either  improves 
or  is  entirely  relieved.  For  a  general  theory,  we  must  find  general  struc¬ 
tural  means  of  ascribing  semantic  content  to  the  ‘unconscious’.  Different 
schools  have  elaborated  different  means  of  discovering  this  desired  content. 
All  schools  agree  that  the  behaviour  difficulties  are  due  to  experiences 
hidden  in  the  ‘unconscious’  and  that  bringing  them  to  ‘consciousness’ 
seems  the  main  goal.  The  diverse  schools  have  an  unduly  bitter  atti¬ 
tude  toward  one  another,  and  have  not  attempted  to  analyse  the  prob¬ 
lems  at  hand  from  a  more  general,  more  workable  non-el  structural, 

UN-SANITY  VKRSUS  SANITY 

semantic,  system-function,  and  linguistic  point  of  view.  Whether  or 
not  the  term  ‘consciousness’  has  any  content  besides  ‘consciousness  of 
abstracting’  may  be  disregarded  for  the  moment.  At  any  rate,  the  term 
‘consciousness  of  abstracting’  gives  very  vital  and  workable  psycho- 
physiological  means  of  analysis,  of  an  impersonal,  and  general  structural, 
and  semantic  character.  Enquiry  into  the  clinical  cases  and  literature 
shows  that  pathological  cases,  amenable  to  treatment,  appear  improved 
by  a  similar  evaluational  treatment ;  namely,  the  correction  in  some  form 
or  another  of  the  semantic  disturbance  of  the  lack  of  ‘consciousness  of 
abstracting’. 

‘Mental’  illnesses  (infantilism  included)  appear  as  semantic  arrested 
development  or  a  regression  to  lower  levels,  to  those  of  the  primitive 
man,  the  infant,  the  animal.  The  animal  is  not  conscious  of  abstracting ; 
man  can  become  so.  Here  we  find  the  precise  mechanism  of  a  decisive 
nature  which  not  only  supplies  us  with  preventive  measures,  but  which 
should  also  become  of  therapeutic  value. 

All  life  exhibits  conservative  characteristics  acquired  during  the 
long  periods  of  its  development.  In  the  facts  of  heredity  and  embry¬ 
ology,  we  have  an  excellent  evidence  of  this.  In  its  development,  the 
germ  cell  of  an  animal  or  man  repeats  in  a  very  abbreviated  way  the 
structures  of  forms  from  which  it  descended.  The  ever-changing  envir¬ 
onmental  conditions,  although  they  affect  each  organism  to  a  large  extent, 
produce  extremely  few  hereditary  changes,  which  again  may  be  con^ 
sidered  an  indication  of  the  conservative  characteristics  of  life. 

As  we  have  already  explained,  life,  abstracting,  and  ‘intelligence’ 
started  together,  and  are  consequences  of  the  physico-chemical  colloidal 
structure  of  the  protoplasm.  Psychiatry  also  assumes  that  ‘the  uncon¬ 
scious’,  ‘tendencies’,  and  ‘impulses’  originated  with  life  itself.  From  this 
point  of  view  the  past  piled  up  structurally  upon  the  past  until  the  highly 
complex  organism  called  Smith  made  its  appearance.  In  this  process 
of  evolution  the  ‘instincts’  and  ‘impulses’  have  had  an  important  role,  not 
only  conservative,  but  also  compensatory  and  protective.  In  man,  s.r 
should  be  based  on  proper  evaluation  and  so  play  both  a  stimulating  and 
protective  role.  Under  A  conditions  of  delusional  evaluation,  the  pro¬ 
tective  role  appears  practically  non-existent ;  the  human  organism,  under 
modern  conditions,  becomes  over-stimulated,  resulting  often  in  patho¬ 
logical  conditions.  Consciousness  of  abstracting,  or  the  elimination  of 
delusional  evaluation,  abolishes  man-made,  artificial,  and  harmful 
irritants. 

I  shall  borrow  from  Jelliffe  an  excellent  diagram  to  illustrate  the 
evolution  of  the  periods  of  growth  and  shall  follow  closely  his  exposition.1 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

9  mos. _ 7  years _ 7-14  years _ 14  yr.  and  on 

iiiiiim 

Archaic  Organ  erotic  or  Narcissistic  Social 

100,000,000  yr.  Autoerotic  100,000  yr.  10,000  yr. 

1,000,000  yr. 

Fig.  1 

Some  such  classification  of  the  periods  of  growth  has  been  forced  upon 
psychiatrists  by  the  study  of  ‘mental’  ills,  and  is  justified  by  embryology 
and  an  endless  chain  of  empirical  observations. 

The  first  period  represents  the  archaic  period  and  is  of  the  greatest 
antiquity.  In  it  the  past  is  roughly  recapitulated  from,  let  us  say,  the 
beginning  of  unicellular  life  to  the  anthropoid  ape.  At  the  fertilization  of 
the  egg  the  hereditary  constitution  is  established,  and  during  the  gesta¬ 
tion  period  all  prenatal  influences  are  laid  down.  The  life  of  the  baby 
before  birth  may  be  described  as  a  vegetative  existence  of  full  indolence 
with  all  needs  supplied  by  the  mother’s  body. 

At  birth,  the  first  ‘struggle  for  existence’  begins,  the  struggle  for 
air,  as  symbolized  by  the  first  cry.  At  this  epoch  the  baby  already  appears 
as  a  self -running  organism  with  some  s.r.  His  vegetative  nervous  system 
is  integrated  and  functioning.  He  begins  to  ‘feel’.  Pleasure  and  pain 
begin  to  be  significant  semantic  factors.  This  period  is  called  the  organ 
erotic  or  autoerotic,  since,  as  with  animals,  its  main  interests  are  ‘sense* 
gratifications.  Many  millions  of  ‘sense’  receptors  suddenly  have  thrust 
upon  them  from  the  environment  a  mass  of  energy  with  which  the 
organism  has  to  deal  somehow.  At  first  there  is  a  rivalry  between  differ¬ 
ent  ‘senses’.  Later,  co-ordination  appears.  Each  group  of  receptors 
establishes  its  own  semantic  values  for  itself,  depending  upon  its  own 
cell  growth.  This  period  may  be  divided,  schematically,  from  birth  to 
seven  years,  and  corresponds  roughly  to  the  evolution  from  the  higher 
animals  to  primitive  man.  This  period  is  extremely  important  from  a 
semantic  and  educational  point  of  view.  At  this  stage  in  the  human 
child  the  nervous  system  is  not  fully  developed;  and  different  environ¬ 
mental  influences  (language,  doctrines  included)  may  twist  this  develop¬ 
ment,  so  that  irreparable  harm  can  easily  be  done. 

The  narcissistic  period  is  named  after  the  Greek  mythical  figure, 
Narcissus,  who,  seeing  his  reflection  in  a  pool  of  water,  became  so  en¬ 
grossed  in  self -adoration  that  he  rejected  the  attentions  of  Venus  and 
was  killed.  In  another  version  of  the  myth  his  punishment  was  loss  of 
sight.  This  period  covers,  more  or  less,  from  seven  years  to  fourteen 
years.  As  the  name  indicates,  it  represents  a  semantic  period  of  self-love. 

UN-SANITY  VERSUS  SANITY 

The  child  has  not  entered,  as  yet,  into  a  social  stage  of  development. 
I  le  remains  egotistical,  egoistical,  self-centred,  and  asocial. 

At  about  fourteen,  the  social  semantic  period  begins,  which  leads, 
when  ‘normal’,  to  the  adult  socialized  individual. 

We  should  realize  that  these  semantic  stages  are  ‘normal’  when 
they  are  lived  through  within  the  age  limits  indicated  here.  Even  if  chil¬ 
dren  show  some  characteristics  which  are  not  desirable  (organ  erotic  or 
autoerotic,  narcissistic),  this,  in  itself,  does  not  constitute  a  danger, 
provided  they  outgrow  these  undesirable  manifestations.  The  serious 
dangers,  and  even  tragedies,  begin  when  some  of  the  infantile  or  nar¬ 
cissistic  semantic  characteristics  are  carried  over  into  the  life  of  the 
grown-ups. 

Not  only  ‘intellectual’  growth  but  also  ‘emotional’  development  may 
be  arrested  on  some  earlier  lower  level.  In  such  cases  we  speak  of  idiots, 
imbeciles,  and  morons  on  the  ‘mental’  levels;  and  of  moral  imbecility, 
infantilism,  narcissism,  and,  in  general,  of  ‘mental’  illness  on  the  ‘emo¬ 
tional’  levels. 

Besides  arrested  growth,  or  under-development  in  some  respect, 
cases  of  so-called  regression  are  frequently  encountered.  Regression  fol¬ 
lows  the  general  scheme  as  outlined  in  Fig.  1,  but  in  a  reversed  order. 
The  following  diagram.  Fig.  2,  is  also  taken  from  Jelliffe,  with  slight 
modifications. 

As  processes,  life,  development,  or  regression  are  best  represented 
as  ‘vector  quantities’  which  have  direction  and  magnitude.  In  one  type 
of  cases  of  regression  the  progressive  tendency  or  energy  is  strong;  yet 
the  obstacle  is  also  very  great,  so  that  the  progressive  tendencies  may  not 
he  strong  enough  to  carry  over  the  obstacle  or  to  conquer  it.  Again,  the 
progressive  tendency  or  energy  may  be  weak,  and  the  obstacle  corre¬ 
spondingly  slight,  yet  strong  enough  to  start  the  regressive  movement. 

In  the  healthy  individual  the  progressive  tendency  is  not  easily 
diverted  from  its  forward  course.  He  conquers  his  obstacles  (C)  and 
goes  on  (arrow  A).  Weaker  individuals  (A')  may  surmount  their 
obstacles  with  more  difficulty  or  may  start  regression  on  smaller  ob- 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

stacles,  as  indicated  by  arrows  (B).  In  such  cases  they  may  regress  to 
different  levels,  developing  a  neurosis  or  a  psychosis,  in  accordance  with 
the  degree  of  regression.  It  is  extremely  instructive  to  study  these  dif¬ 
ferent  phases  in  regression  and  to  watch  how  the  symptoms  arrange 
themselves  in  a  perfectly  orderly  manner.  In  some  instances  the  regres¬ 
sion  goes  so  far  as  to  bring  the  patients  to  the  foetal  level.  Such  a  patient 
sits  in  a  dark  corner  in  the  foetal  position  with  the  head  covered  with  a 
rag.  His  ‘mentality’  and  semantic  responses  are  similar  to  those  of  the 
foetus,  practically  none. 

Regressions  to  the  archaic  level  are  usually  hopeless  of  improve¬ 
ment,  so  that  I  shall  not  analyse  them  in  this  work.  We  are  mostly 
interested  in  under-development,  or  in  regression  not  further  than  to 
the  autoerotic  or  the  narcissistic  semantic  levels,  in  which  treatment  ir 
many  instances  yields  curative  results. 

Jelliffe  gives  among  others  a  very  instructive  diagram  as  a  method 
of  showing  how  the  personal  make-up  of  an  individual  can  be  plotted 
(psychogram).  These  diagrams  afford  excellent  graphic  means  for 
orientation.  One  of  them  I  reproduce  on  the  opposite  page  (Fig.  3). 2 

The  circular  form  of  the  diagram  is  particularly  appropriate,  as  it 
shows  clearly  how  the  horizons,  activities,  and  interests  widen  from  the 
archaic  (animal?)  through  the  child  and  savage,  to  the  adult  socialized 
individual.  The  dips  in  the  eye,  stomach,  and  bladder  sectors  correspond 
to  definite  symptoms.  In  the  eye  sector  the  dip  goes  to  the  narcissistic 
semantic  level.  Whenever  this  patient  is  riding  in  an  automobile  and 
another  car  is  coming  close,  so  that  a  collision  seems  possible,  the  patient 
experiences  a  compulsory  shutting  of  the  eyes,  a  typical  narcissistic 
semantic  symptom  which  symbolizes  that  something  which  one  cannot 
see  cannot  happen.  The  patient  did  not  regress  to  the  organ  erotic  level 
and  become  actually  blind  or  deaf  (psychic  or  rather  semantic  blindness 
or  deafness)  ;  so  the  dips  are  not  plotted  to  the  organ  erotic  level.  Ir 
the  bladder  and  nutritive  sectors  we  see  that  the  curve  sinks  as  low  as 
the  organ  erotic  level.  These  dips  correspond  to  striking  semantic  symp¬ 
toms.  When  the  patient  drives  in  her  car  and  is  held  by  the  traffic,  she 
has  an  involuntary  passage  of  urine.  The  dip  in  the  nutritive  sector 
corresponds  to  the  symptom  that  after  eating  certain  foods  the  patient 
is  able  to  bring  them  back  into  her  mouth  (selective  rumination). 
Analysis  by  Doctor  Jelliffe  has  revealed  that  in  the  case  of  the  passage 
of  urine  when  the  patient  is  held  up  in  traffic,  her  unconscious  organ 
erotic  semantic  fantasy  triumphs  over  the  need  for  self-control,  and 
she  asserts  her  mastery  through  the  early  and  necessary  mastery  acquired 
over  the  control  of  the  bladder.  Since  she  is  prevented  from  doing  one 

UN-SANITY  VERSUS  SANITY 

genital,  urinary  eroticism.  The  deep  incision  in  a  fairly  well  socialized  nutri¬ 
tive  ‘libido’  represents  an  ‘emotionally’  conditioned  s.r  for  selective  rumination 
of  individual  ingredients  in  the  stomach.  The  patient  appears  as  a  severely  sick 
individual  on  the  border  of  a  psychotic  reaction.  Present  nosological  schemes 
would  call  this  an  anxiety-hysteria  or  a  manic-depressive  psychosis  if  the 
semantic  compensation  should  break  and  further  regression  occur.  (After 
Jelliffe.) 

thing,  her  power  of  doing  gets  semantic  expression  through  a  substitute 
act  which  cannot  be  prevented  by  outside  interference.  The  selective 
rumination  symptom  also  goes  back  to  the  nursing  semantic  period. 
When  suckling  she  would  vomit  after  a  full  meal,  and  demand  another 
nursing,  to  which  the  mother  foolishly  acceded.  Vomiting  then  became 
her  semantic  way  of  controlling  ‘reality*.  She  used  that  as  a  weapon  in 
getting  her  wishes  with  her  family.  She  has  amplified  and  refined  the 
methods  of  semantic  expression  of  this  old  mastery  over  ‘reality*,  and 
the  selective  rumination  seems  one  of  the  results. 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

The  patient  also  exhibits  other  neurotic  semantic  symptoms.  She  is 
too  impatient  to  read  and  does  not  remember  what  she  has  read.  She 
can  never  remain  quiet.  She  is  very  keen-sighted  to  find  fault  in  others, 
very  acute  to  hear  the  last  verbal  equivocations,  and  very  neat  and  clean 
with  reference  to  her  bodily  secretions.  Here  we  see  clearly  the  seman¬ 
tic  mechanism  of  infantilism  and  the  contradictions  between  the  con¬ 
scious  performance  and  the  unconscious  fantasies. 

In  an  hypothetically  healthy  individual,  his  make-up  could  be  repre¬ 
sented  graphically  by  a  circle  on  the  social  level  of  adjustment.  He  would 
have  outgrown  the  passing  semantic  stages  of  the  archaic,  organ  erotic, 
and  narcissistic  periods. 

Failure  in  semantic  adaptation  to  ‘reality*  might  be  represented  by 
dips  in  the  curve  to  such  a  level  as  the  individual  fixation  or  regression 
has  put  him.  By  such  means  we  have  an  excellent  method  to  represent 
clearly  the  weak  spots  and  to  show  the  focal  semantic  points  of  conflict 
in  evaluation  where  energy  is  diverted  to  useless  or  harmful  fantasy 
ends. 

When  the  dips  or  deviations  are  few  and  slight,  we  call  them  idio¬ 
syncrasies  ;  for  instance,  such  a  habit  as  the  narcissistic  tactile  fantasy  of 
toying  with  a  button,  a  moustache,  or  eyebrow.  When  the  number  of 
failures  is  larger  and  the  semantic  symptoms  go  to  lower  levels  of  devel¬ 
opment,  we  speak  of  hysteria,.  When  the  level  of  regression  is  still 
lower  (organ  erotic  or  archaic),  we  are  usually  entitled  to  speak  of  a 
psychosis.8 

We  have  already  emphasized  over  and  over  again  that  the  organism 
works  as-a-whole,  and  that,  therefore,  any  el  splittings  cannot  lead  to 
satisfactory  results.  The  verbal  division  of  ‘body’  and  ‘mind’  remains 
verbal,  and  also  involves  a  language  whose  structure  does  not  correspond 
to  the  structure  and  functioning  of  the  organism.  A  language  is  like  a 
map ;  it  is  not  the  territory  represented,  but  it  may  be  a  good  map  or  a 
bad  map.  If  the  map  shows  a  different  structure  from  the  territory 
represented— for  instance,  shows  the  cities  in  a  wrong  order ,  or  some 
places  east  of  others  while  in  the  actual  territory  they  are  west . , — then 
the  map  is  worse  than  useless,  as  it  misinforms  and  leads  astray.  One 
who  made  use  of  it  could  never  be  certain  of  reaching  his  destination. 
The  use  of  el  language  to  represent  events  which  operate  as-a-whole  is, 
at  least,  equally  misguiding  and  semantically  dangerous. 

With  this  in  mind,  let  us  briefly  analyse  the  ‘obstacle'  in  Fig.  2.  As 
we  deal  with  ‘obstacles*  in  a  life  sense,  we  can  generalize  the  obstacle 
to  some  semantic  factors  involving  meanings  and  evaluations  which  may 
arrest  the  development  as  well  as  result  in  regression. 

UN-SANITY  V  HRS  US  SANITY 

From  the  non-el  point  of  view  every  obstacle  and  difficulty  involves 
semantic  evaluation.  Any  and  all  reactions  to  lower  order  abstractions 
involve  the  cyclic  chain  of  higher  order  abstractions,  no  matter  how 
imperfectly.  In  ordinary  language,  a  physical  occurrence  with  which 
we  become  acquainted  through  lower  nerve  centres  involves  our  ‘men¬ 
tal’  attitudes,  doctrines . ,  in  general,  s.r  influenced  by  the  activities  of  the 
higher  centres.  From  this  non-el  point  of  view,  surprise,  fear,  fright . , 
enter,  and  usually  do  the  harm.  Physical  pain  seldom,  if  ever,  leads  to 
semantic  disturbances,  but  fear,  fright . ,  and  surprise  usually  do.  An¬ 
ticipation  of  danger,  or  proper  evaluation  of  a  situation,  has  a  protective 
effect,  as  it  usually  tends  to  diminish  or  abolish  the  fear,  fright . ,  or 
surprise .  The  outside  world  is  full  of  devastating  energies,  and  an 
organism  may  only  be  called  adapted  to  life  when  it  not  only  receives 
stimuli  but  also  has  protective  means  against  stimuli.  Now  such  antici¬ 
pation  or  expectation  makes  an  organism  prepared,  and  the  difference 
between  a  prepared  and  an  unprepared  organism  in  the  face  of  danger 
or  pain  may  turn  the  scale  of  the  outcome. 

Section  B.  Consciousness  of  abstracting. 

It  is  obvious  that  in  the  human  organism  the  field  for  stimulations 
is  vastly  greater  than  in  animals.  We  are  subjected  not  only  to  all 
external  stimuli  but  also  to  a  large  number  of  permanently  operating 
internal  semantic  stimuli,  against  which  we  have  had,  as  yet,  very  little 
protective  psychophysiological  means.  Such  structurally  powerful  seman¬ 
tic  stimuli  are  found  in  our  doctrines,  metaphysics,  language,  attitudes , . 
These  do  not  belong  to  the  objective  external  world,  and  so  the  animals 
do  not  have  them  in  a  like  degree.  As  our  enquiry  has  shown,  in  practi¬ 
cally  all  ‘mental’  ills,  a  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions  appears  as  a 
factor.  When  we  confuse  the  orders  of  abstractions  and  ascribe  objective 
reality  to  terms  and  symbols,  or  confuse  conclusions  and  inferences  with 
descriptions . ,  a  great  deal  of  semantic  suffering  is  produced. 

Obviously,  in  such  a  delusional  world,  different  from  the  actualities, 
we  are  not  prepared  for  actualities ,  and  then  always  something  unex¬ 
pected  or  ‘frightful*  may  happen.  The  organism  cannot  adjust  itself 
to  such  fictions;  it  is  not  prepared  to  face  oo-valued  m.o  realities  and 
must  suffer  from  constant  surprises  and  painful  semantic  shocks,  which 
do  the  harm. 

As  we  have  already  seen,  the  general  preventive  psychophysiological 
discipline  in  all  such  cases  of  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions  is  found 
in  ‘consciousness  of  abstracting*.  When  conscious  of  abstracting  we 
cannot  identify  the  symbol  with  the  thing , .  In  the  case  just  described, 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

the  difficulties  of  the  patient  were  precisely  in  intensified  mis-evcduation 
— the  confusion  of  the  symbol  on  the  infantile  semantic  level  with  m.o 
reality — and  this  persisted,  in  spite  of  later  serious  inconvenience  and 
difficulties  when  the  symbol  did  not  any  longer  produce  the  desired 
submission  of  others  and  became  in  itself  a  nuisance. 

We  could  analyse  from  this  semantic  point  of  view  all  psychiatry, 
and  we  would  find  that  the  intensified  mis-evaluation  or  confusion  of 
orders  of  abstractions  is  always  very  prominent  in  ‘mental’  illnesses. 
This  characteristic  is  very  general,  and  the  suffering  these  confusions 
produce  is  very  acute.  The  general  protective  psychophysiological  meas¬ 
ure,  however,  is  very  simple ;  namely,  ‘consciousness  of  abstracting’. 

A  fundamental  difference  between  ‘man*  and  ‘animal’  is  found  in 
the  fact  that  a  man  can  be  conscious  of  abstracting,  and  an  animal  can¬ 
not.  This  last  statement  could  be  reformulated:  that  animals  are 
‘unconscious  of  abstracting’.  Now  consciousness  of  abstracting  is  not 
inborn  as  a  rule,  but  becomes  a  s.r  acquired  only  by  education  or  through 
very  long,  and  usually  painful,  experience  in  evaluation.  If  we  are 
unconscious  of  abstracting,  we  obviously  copy  animals  in  our  ‘mental* 
processes  and  attitudes  and  cannot  completely  adapt:  ourselves  to  the 
structurally  more  complex  human  world  (with  higher  order  abstrac¬ 
tions),  so  that  some  arrested  or  regressive  processes  are  bound  to  result. 
In  such  a  more  complex  world  we  need  protection  against  semantic  over¬ 
stimulations,  which  the  animals  in  their  simpler  world  do  not  need.  If, 
therefore,  we  copy  animals  in  our  ‘mental’  processes,  we  could,  perhaps, 
live  in  their  simpler  world,  but  cannot  adapt  ourselves  easily  to  a  struc¬ 
turally  more  complex  human  world. 

We  see  here  the  general  semantic  mechanism  of  human  adaptation. 
Our  human  world  is  more  complex ;  the  number  of  stimuli  is  enormously 
increased.  Against  this  excessive  stimulation  we  need  protection,  which 
is  found  in  the  consciousness  of  abstracting.  One  adjusts  oneself  by 
increasing  the  field  of  ‘consciousness*,  and  by  giving  it  properly  evalu¬ 
ated  content  as  against  the  vast  ‘unconscious’  which  covers  the  animal’s 
life  and  our  own  past.  In  ‘mental’  ills  we  find  the  arrested  or  regressive 
stages,  with  a  vast  and  harmful  unconscious.  ‘Mental*  therapy  always 
has  the  semantic  aim  and  method ;  namely,  to  discover  the  unconscious 
material  and  make  it  conscious,  and  so  make  proper  evaluation  possible. 

It  is  quite  remarkable  that  ‘mental’  therapy,  which  actually  is  a  form 
of  semantic,  non-el  re-education,  is  only  successful  when  it  succeeds  in 
making  the  patient  not  only  ‘rationalize*  his  difficulties  but  also  makes  him 
‘emotionally’  revive — live  through  again,  so  to  say,  and  evaluate  anew — 
his  past  experiences.  This  process  can  be  compared  with  a  glass  of  water 

UN-SANITY  VERSUS  SANITY 

in  which  some  chalky  sediment  lies  on  the  bottom.  In  semantic  dif¬ 
ficulties  the  different  ‘hurts’. ,  may  be  compared  to  the  water  and  the 
sediment.  ‘Rationalization’,  alone,  is  like  throwing  away  the  clean  water 
and  letting  the  sediment  remain.  No  improvement  follows ;  the  semantic 
sediment  of  earlier  evaluation  is  still  there  and  does  its  work.  But  if  we 
stir  up  the  water  and  the  chalk,  then  we  can  throw  out  both  and  a  clear¬ 
ing  up  will  follow.  The  non-el  ‘living  through*  of  the  past  experiences 
is  equivalent  to  this  semantic  stirring-up  of  meanings  before  eliminating 
the  immature  evaluations. 

This  semantic  mechanism  is  well  recognized,  yet  puzzling.  It  shows 
that  it  is  more  difficult  to  influence  the  affective  than  to  affect  the 
‘rationalization*.  One  may  ‘rationalize’  perfectly  well;  yet  his  lower 
centres  will  not  be  affected  sufficiently.  It  is  possible  that  the  confusion 
of  orders  of  abstractions  or  identification  is,  in  the  main,  responsible  for 
it.  With  the  use  of  the  Structural  Differential  and  with  training  in  the 
orders  of  abstractions  and  in  silence  on  the  objective  levels,  we  gain 
seemingly  extremely  powerful  psychophysiological  means  of  an  entirely 
general  character  to  influence  directly  the  affective  responses,  in  which 
we  are  aided  by  the  utilization  of  all  available  nerve  centres.  It  also 
shows  once  more  how  persistent  is  the  working  of  the  organism-as-a- 
whole.  The  harm  was  done  by  organism-as-a-whole  methods  (affecting 
higher  and  lower  centres) ;  the  protective  semantic  agencies  should  em¬ 
ploy  similar  means . 

In  the  older  ‘mental’  therapy  we  tried  to  bring  the  unconscious  or 
buried  material  into  the  conscious,  but  each  psychiatrist  proceeded  by  a 
private  method,  and  according  to  a  special  theory.  Such  procedure  is 
obviously  not  general  enough  for  simple  preventive  training  on  a  large 
scale.  The  present  system  offers  such  general  and  effective  semantic 
psychophysiological  means.  By  making  ourselves  conscious  of  abstract¬ 
ing  we  prevent  the  animalistic  unconsciousness  of  abstracting,  and  so 
prevent  arrested  development  or  regression.  We  bring  into  conscious¬ 
ness  some  of  the  most  fundamental  human  characteristics,  of  which 
animals  are  wnconscious,  and  so  prevent  arrestment  or  regression  to 
lower  levels.  The  method  is  entirely  general  and  simple,  based  on  the 
elimination  of  identification,  introducing  natural  and  so  adaptive  evalua¬ 
tion  which  should  not  stir  up  resistance  in  the  child. 

In  the  freudian  theory  the  famous  Oedipus  complex  purported  to 
explain  the  often  unconscious  hostility  of  the  son  toward  the  father  and 
his  excessive  attachment  to  the  mother.  The  researches  of  the  anthro¬ 
pologist  Malinowski  show  that  in  primitive  matriarchal  societies  the 
biological  father  is  not  recognized  as  such  and  is  only  a  kind  of  friend 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

and  nurse  to  his  son.  The  other  functions  which  the  father  has  in 
patriarchal  societies  are  here  performed  by  the  mother's  brother.  The 
taboos  which  apply  to  the  mother  in  patriarchal  societies  apply  to  the 
sister  in  such  matriarchal  societies. 

The  results  are  quite  interesting.  Malinowski  found  that  seem¬ 
ingly  similar  unconscious  semantic  mechanisms  are  at  work.  But  the 
hostility  is  toward  the  uncle,  and  the  excessive  attachment  is  directed 
toward  the  sister. 

Malinowski  concludes  that  the  freudian  mechanisms  are  thus  proven. 
According  to  the  present  theory  these  facts  are  very  important  and  show 
clearly  that  ‘sex',  as  such,  has  nothing  or  very  little  to  do  with  these 
'complexes',  but  that  the  active  unconscious  agents  appear  as  semantic 
and  doctrinal.  Doctrines  and  their  meanings  to  the  individual,  their 
applications,  identifications . ,  make  the  father  in  one  case,  and  the  uncle 
in  the  other,  the  dreaded  .  ,  member  of  the  family.  Because  of  lack  of 
consciousness  of  abstracting  the  child  reacts  to  such  application  of  doc¬ 
trines  with  some  'complex',  or  semantic  state,  based  on  identification, 
non-mature  evaluation,  involving  non-mature  non-el  meanings,  in  spite 
of  el  theories  and  languages. 

Similarly,  some  spanking  or  other  pain  in  childhood  may  later 
result  in  a  neurosis.  A  successful  analysis  can  usually  trace  neuroses 
back  to  some  such  experiences.  What  did  the  harm  ?  Was  it  the  burning 
physical  feeling?  Obviously  not;  for  any  child  has  had  in  its  childhood 
many  more  painful  experiences,  and  yet  no  semantic  harm  has  followed. 
So  we  must  look  in  another  direction,  and  the  elimination  of  identifica¬ 
tion  or  of  the  confusion  of  order  of  abstractions  at  once  offers  a  solution. 
The  'spanking*  had  many  factors;  some  of  them  were  'physical',  some 
‘mental’.  If  we  consider  among  the  'mental'  factors  the  objectifications 
of  'authority*,  'hell',  'sin',  and  other  terms  of  evaluation,  these  result  in 
fright  and  other  semantic  shocks,  which  ultimately  lead  to  the  neurosis. 
We  know  from  our  own  experience  how  little  affected  we  are  by  an 
accidental  hit.  Such  a  purely  physical  experience  which  does  not  give  a 
xii  semantic  shock  cannot  product  a  neurosis. 

It  is  not  difficult  to  see  that  an  investigation  of  ‘hurts',  ‘emotional 
shocks',  'fear',  'fright',  'surprise'. ,  must  lead  to  a  more  general  enquiry 
into  the  structure  of  'human  knowledge',  meanings,  evaluation,  s.r . , 
which  must  include  the  structure  of  science  and  mathematics. 

In  the  disregard  of  the  stratification  of  human  knowledge,  or  in 
identification  or  the  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions,  we  find  an 
ever-present  and  abundant  semantic  source  of  human  suffering,  which 

UN-SANITY  VERSUS  SANITY 

increases  unnecessarily  the  internal  stimulations  and  so  disturbs  the 
efficient  working  of  the  organism-as-a-whole. 

Psychiatrists  in  purely  pathological  fields  have  also  discovered  differ¬ 
ent  sources  of  human  difficulties.  They  discovered  that  the  ‘unconscious' 
seems  quite  a  dangerous  affair,  and  that  ‘mental*  ills  exhibit  symptoms 
of  an  arrested  or  regressive  process. 

This  present  investigation,  as  well  as  the  psychopathological  ones 
here  referred  to,  although  conducted  on  entirely  different  grounds,  one 
more  general  than  the  other,  has  discovered  very  similar  mechanisms ; 
namely,  the  benefit  in  enlarging  the  field  of  ‘consciousness*,  by  bringing 
into  ‘consciousness'  important  factors  of  the  ‘unconscious*  and  thereby 
counteracting  the  semantic  possibility  for  arrested  development  or 
regression. 

With  such  divergence,  both  in  methods  and  in  material  used,  the 
similarity  of  results  indicates  strongly  the  soundness  of  the  conclusions. 

( ienerality  offers,  also,  a  criterion  of  practical  simplicity  and  workability ; 
and  on  these  grounds  the  more  general  semantic  A  discipline  commends 
itself. 

Because  of  this  generality  the  present  theory  has  not  only  a  simple 
but  also  an  impersonal  character  which  makes  it  available  as  a  preventive 
measure  in  elementary  education.  With  the  older  theories  we  deal  in 
practice  with  personal  responses  to  meanings ;  in  our  case  we  deal  with 
the  s.r  in  general  and  with  their  psychophysiological  mechanism  in  par¬ 
ticular. 

The  present  enquiry  started  with  the  search  for  a  sharp  difference 
between  Fido  and  Smith.  This  was  found  in  the  fact  that  Smith  func¬ 
tions  as  a  ‘time-binder*,  while  Fido  does  not.  Further  investigation  into 
the  mechanism  of  the  time-binding  function  revealed  that  its  most 
important  characteristic  is  found  in  its  peculiar  stratification  into  many 
orders  of  abstractions.  The  realization  of  this  stratification  eliminates 
identification  and  leads  to  the  ‘consciousness  of  abstracting',  thus  ascrib¬ 
ing  a  permanent,  strictly  human  content  to  ‘consciousness*,  and  so  auto¬ 
matically  eliminating  such  animalistic,  and,  therefore,  arresting  or 
regressive,  ‘wwconsciousness*.  It  is  found,  also,  that  in  the  consciousness 
of  abstracting  we  find  a  general  and  simple  psychophysiological  semantic 
method  for  the  elimination  of  the  majority  of  human  difficulties.  In  the 
training  in  this  consciousness  of  abstracting  we  find  a  workable  physio¬ 
logical  tool  with  which  to  integrate  the  functioning  of  the  human  nervous 
system.  We  use  organism-as-a-whole  methods  and  achieve  organism- 
as-a-whole  results.  We  find  in  the  language  of  ‘semantic  reactions',  *non- 
elementalistic  meanings’.,  psychophysiological  means  to  integrate  the 

VII.  the  mechanism  of  time-binding 

‘emotional’  with  the  ‘intellectual’,  which  was  hampered,  to  say  the  least, 
by  the  old  el  languages  and  methods  and  systems.  The  organism  by 
structural  necessity  acts  as-a-whole,  but  the  old  elementalism  with  its 
psychophysiological  effects  prepared  the  semantic  background  for  split 
personalities,  which  a  nan-el  system  helps  to  re-integrate.  We  find  a 
rather  astonishing  result ;  namely,  that  the  structure  of  human  achieve¬ 
ments  corresponds  to  the  principle  of  stratification  with  the  resulting 
consciousness  of  abstracting,  usually  limited  to  the  special  field.  The 
majority  of  individual  and  group  difficulties  are  found,  also,  to  be  due 
to  the  very  general  disregard  of  this  principle. 

By  the  scientific  data  of  1933  it  seems  well  established  that  the 
enlargement  of  the  field  of  'consciousness’  is  extremely  desirable.  With 
this  aim,  a  more  general  enquiry  into  the  character  of  the  ‘unconscious’ 
may  also  be  worth  while.  Let  us  investigate  the  structure  of  science 
(1933),  and  see  if  some  ‘unconscious’  factors  cannot  be  found  there. 
We  find  a  curious  fact,  that  mathematicians,  in  addition  to  their  other 
activities,  make  a  business  of  unravelling  hidden  unconscious  assump¬ 
tions.  Their  enquiries  have  led  to  a  thorough  investigation  of  the  struc¬ 
ture  of  their  language  in  two  directions:  one,  investigation  of  the 
underlying  assumptions ;  the  other,  working  out  the  ‘implications’. 

Let  us  give  a  simple  structural  example  of  this.  Two  assumptions 
are  said  to  be  equivalent  when  each  of  them  can  be  deduced  from  the 
other  without  the  help  of  additional  new  assumptions.  For  instance: 
(a)  The  fifth  postulate  of  Euclid — ‘If  a  straight  line  falling  on  two 
straight  lines  make  the  interior  angles  on  the  same  side  less  than  two 
right  angles,  the  two  straight  lines,  if  produced  indefinitely,  meet  on  that 
side  on  which  are  the  angles  less  than  the  two  right  angles’,  (b)  ‘Two 
straight  lines  parallel  to  a  third  are  parallel  to  each  other’,  (c)  Through 
a  point  outside  a  straight  line  one  and  only  one  parallel  to  it  can  be 
drawn*.  Each  assumption  silently,  unconsciously,  presupposes  the  other, 
so  that  they  can  be  deduced  from  each  other.  They  actually  are  different 
forms  of  the  same  propositional  function. 

Another  case  is  equivalence  relatively  to  a  fundamental  set  of  as¬ 
sumptions  A,  B,  C,  .  .  .  M.  It  might  happen  that,  in  diminishing  the  fun¬ 
damental  set,  two  assumptions  which  were  formerly  equivalent  cease  to 
be  so.  For  instance,  the  following  assumptions  are  mutually  equivalent 
and  also  equivalent  to  the  fifth  postulate  of  Euclid,  (a)  ‘The  internal 
angles,  which  two  parallels  make  with  a  transversal  on  the  same  side,  are 
supplementary.’  (Ptolemy.)  ( b )  ‘Two  parallel  straight  lines  are  equi¬ 
distant.’  (c)  ‘If -a  straight  line  intersects  one  of  two  parallels,  it  also 
intersects  the  other.’  (Proclus.)  (d)  ‘A  triangle  being  given,  another 

UN-SANITY  VKKSUS  SANITY 

triangle  can  be  constructed  similar  to  the  given  one  and  of  any  size  what¬ 
ever/  (Wallis.)  (e)  ‘Through  three  points,  not  lying  on  a  straight  line, 
a  sphere  can  always  be  drawn/  (W.  Bolyai)  , . 

But  the  following  two  assumptions  are  only  equivalent  to  the  E 
fifth  postulate  if  we  retain  the  postulate  of  Archimedes* :  (a)  ‘The  locus 
of  the  points  which  are  equidistant  from  a  straight  line  is  a  straight  line’ ; 
(b)  ‘The  sum  of  the  angles  of  a  triangle  is  equal  to  two  right  angles/ 
(Saccheri.)4 

The  crucial  point  of  this  discussion  is  that  all  that  has  been  said  here 
is  not  obvious  even  to  the  attentive  and  intelligent  reader,  nor  to  many 
mathematicians.  It  took  nearly  two  thousand  years  and  some  of  the 
efforts  of  the  best  scientists  of  the  world  to  discover  these  connections 
and  implications .  The  above  examples  illustrate  a  general  underlying 
structure  of  all  our  languages.  They  have  inherent  interconnection,  un¬ 
derlying  assumptions  and  implications,  the  analysis  of  which,  outside  of 
mathematics,  is  seldom,  if  ever,  carried  far  enough.  Now  these  structural 
assumptions  and  implications  are  inside  of  our  skin  when  we  accept  a 
language — any  language.  If  unravelled,  they  become  conscious ;  if  not, 
they  remain  unconscious.  In  the  present  work  we  have  already  had  an 
opportunity  to  become  acquainted  with  unconscious  implications  which 
are  concealed  in  the  structure  of  any  language.  We  saw  that  we  must 
start  with  undefined  terms,  which  represent  structural  assumptions  and 
postulates,  as  we  have  no  means  to  explain  them  or  define  them  at  a 
given  date.  We  found  that  these  undefined  terms  represented  our  un¬ 
conscious  metaphysics,  and  that  the  way  to  make  this  unconscious 
metaphysics  conscious  was  to  start  explicitly  with  undefined  terms,  pro¬ 
duce  a  system  of  postulates . ,  a  procedure  which  is  completely  fulfilled 
only  in  mathematics. 

It  should  be  noticed  (as  this  is  very  important)  that  the  undefined 
terms,  being,  undefined,  are  overloaded  with  € emotional *  values.  As  the 
higher  nervous  centres  cannot  handle  them,  the  lower  nerve  centres  work 
upon  them  overtime.  If  we  do  not  analyse  our  languages  into  their 
undefined  terms  and  structural  postulates,  our  strongest  ‘emotional’  and 
semantic  components,  which  made  these  languages,  remain  hidden  and 
unconscious. 

♦The  Postulate  of  Archimedes  is  stated  by  Hilbert  thus :  Let  At.  be  any  point 
upon  a  straight  line  between  the  arbitrarily  chosen  points  A  and  B.  Take  the  points 
A a,  A 3,  ...  so  that  Ax  lies  between  A  and  Aa,  A2  between  Ax  and  A3 .  ;  moreover, 
let  the  segments  AAlf  AtA2 ,  A2A3;  ...  be  all  equal.  Then,  among  this  series  of 
points,  there  always  exists  a  certain  point  An,  such  that  B  lies  between  A  and  An. 

This  hypothesis  is  used  by  Saccheri  in  its  intuitive  form ;  namely,  a  segment, 
which  passes  continuously  from  the  length  a  to  the  length  b,  different  from  a,  takes, 
during  its  variation,  every  length  intermediate  between  a  and  b? 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

Here  we  are  face  to  face  for  the  first  ‘time*  with  a  wider,  more  gen¬ 
eral,  and  impersonal  'unconscious',  which  underlies  the  structure  of  any 
language,  and  so  is  operative  in  every  one  who  uses  a  language.  We 
may  call  this  general  form  the  scientific,  or  public,  or  linguistic,  or  seman¬ 
tic,  or  by  preference,  as  a  term,  the  structural  unconscious.  It  embodies 
the  underlying  structural  assumptions  and  implications  which  are  silently 
hidden  behind  our  languages  and  their  structures.  These  assumptions . , 
may  be  called  'unconscious',  because  they  are  totally  unknown  and  un¬ 
suspected ,  unless  uncovered  after  painful  research. 

Any  form  of  representation  has  its  own  structural  assumptions  at  its 
basis,  and  when  we  accept  a  language  we  unconsciously  accept  sets  of 
silent  structural  assumptions  of  which  we  become  semantic  victims.  For  a 
long  while,  the  white  race  has  been  the  victim  of  the  unconscious  assump¬ 
tions  and  metaphysics  which  underlie  the  A,  E ,  and  N  systems.  It  has 
needed  a  structural  revision  of  these  systems,  culminating  in  E,.R,  and, 
finally,  A  systems.  These  non-systems  are  characterized  not  by  the 
introduction  of  new  assumptions,  but  by  making  the  older  unjustified, 
primitive,  unconscious  structural  assumptions  conscious,  and  so  helping 
us  in  eliminating  the  semantically  undesirable  reactions.  We  have  already 
seen  how  fallacies  and  taboos  (1933)  can  be  and  were  manufactured 
unconsciously  by  semantic  processes ;  these  start  with  more  general,  more 
natural,  and  more  fundamental  structural  errors,  such  as  the  primitive 
'identification',  for  instance,  which  are  due  to  pre-human  ways  of  'think¬ 
ing'  and  which  result  in  semantic  difficulties  and  regression  even  today. 

Let  us  assume,  as  an  illustration,  that  the  fifth  postulate  of  Euclid 
is  a  false  assumption,  seriously  detrimental  to  human  life  and  comparable 
to  some  of  the  false  doctrines  that  underlie  the  morbid  symptoms  with 
which  psychiatrists  deal  every  day.  Let  us  assume,  further,  that  a  doctor, 
ignorant  of  the  structure  of  ‘human  knowledge',  s.r ,  and  the  equivalence 
of  assumptions,  succeeds,  after  painful  and  laborious  efforts,  in  eliminat¬ 
ing  from  a  patient  this  special  vicious  assumption.  Yet,  because  of  his 
oversight,  he  pays  no  attention  to  another  assumption  equivalent  to  the 
first,  and  does  not  eliminate  it.  In  such  a  case,  rationalization  about  the 
first  false  doctrine  would  probably  make  the  treatment  a  failure,  as  the 
other  unconscious  and  equivalent  doctrine  would,  in  virtue  of  the  ex¬ 
tremely  formal,  one-,  and  two- valued  character  of  the  unconscious,  per¬ 
form  its  task  and  make  the  treatment  ineffective.  The  tangle  of  equivalent 
structural  assumptions  in  daily  life  is  still  unanalysed.  For  instance,  it 
is  extremely  difficult  to  attempt  to  impart  ‘proper  evaluation'  without 
eliminating  identification , . 

UN-SANITY  VERSUS  SANITY 

The  higher  and  lower  order  abstractions  seem  structurally  and 
neurologically,  as  well  as  functionally,  interconnected  in  a  cyclic  chain, 
and  so  can  never  be  entirely  divided.  A  language — any  language — in¬ 
volves  undefined  terms  which,  with  the  structure  of  the  given  language, 
express  the  silent  and  unconscious  metaphysics  underlying  it.  A  lan¬ 
guage,  for  its  maximum  serviceability,  must,  at  least,  have  the  structure 
of  the  events  it  attempts  to  describe;  and  so  science  must  first  discover 
the  structure  of  events,  for  only  then  can  we  shape  our  languages  and 
give  them  the  necessary  structure.  Any  advance  in  our  knowledge  of 
nature  is  strictly  connected  with  new  languages  of  similar  structure 
which  reflect  the  structure  of  the  world.  This  last  "knowledge’  at  each 
date  represents  again  "modern  metaphysics’.  In  all  such  enquiries  we 
have  to  struggle  with  the  older,  mostly  primitive  structural  metaphysics 
and  unconscious  linguistic  semantic  consequences.  Enquiry  into  these 
subjects  must  throw  new  light  on  the  unconscious  processes,  and  so 
diminish  the  vast  field  of  the  unconscious. 

The  structural  unconscious  seems  to  be  more  general,  more  fun¬ 
damental  than  the  special,  or  individual,  psychiatrical  one,  because 
analysis  shows  that  the  latter  follows  from  the  former.  As  the  reader 
may  recall,  life,  "intelligence’,  and  abstracting  in  different  orders  started 
together.  Without  abstracting,  recognition,  and,  therefore,  selection 
would  not  be  possible.  The  world  of  the  animal,  as  well  as  of  man, 
represents  nothing  else  than  the  structural  results  of  abstracting,  without 
which  life  itself  would  be  totally  impossible.  Man  alone  has  the  power 
of  extending  the  orders  of  abstractions  indefinitely.  When  Smith  has 
produced  an  abstraction  of  some  order,  perhaps  by  making  a  statement, 
he  has  the  potential  capacity  of  analysing  and  contemplating  this  state¬ 
ment,  which  has  become  a  fact  on  record,  and  so  he  can  abstract  to 
a  still  higher  order.,  without  known  limits.  It  is  this  capacity  which 
crowds  the  world  of  Smith  with  endless  "facts’  belonging  to  very 
different  orders  of  abstractions.  The  animal’s  capacity  for  abstracting 
ceases  on  some  level,  and  is  never  extended  without  a  change  in  the 
nervous  structure.  So  the  animal’s  world  is  comparatively  simple,  the 
world  structure  of  man  being,  by  comparison,  indescribably  more  com¬ 
plex.  Man’s  problems  of  adjustment,  therefore,  also  become  more  com¬ 
plex.  Human  medicine  is  much  more  complex  than  veterinary  science, 
although  the  higher  animals  differ  very  little  in  their  gross  anatomical 
structure  from  humans.  The  structural  m.o  facts,  which  resulted  from 
abstracting  in  different  orders,  differ  in  number  as  well  as  in  complexity. 
The  human  capacity  for  expanding  indefinitely  the  orders  of  abstrac¬ 
tions  brings  about  this  peculiar  stratification  of  "human  knowledge’. 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

It  appears  as  a  product  of  evolution  just  as  stratified  as  rocks  appear. 
This  stratification  appears  as  a  crucial,  structural  m.o  fact,  though  gen¬ 
erally  disregarded,  except  partially  in  mathematics  and  psychiatry.  Its 
realization  necessitates  the  elimination  of  the  ‘is*  of  identity  and  results 
in  the  consciousness  of  abstracting,  so  fundamental  for  sanity. 

Section  C.  Infantilism. 

As  has  already  been  mentioned,  the  main  symptoms  of  physical  and 
‘mental’  illnesses  are  few  and  simple.  This  would  suggest  the  possibility 
of  simple  and  more  general  theories  relating  to  the  fundamental  symp¬ 
toms,  The  colloidal  structure  of  protoplasm  accounts  for  this  peculiar 
simplicity  and  for  the  small  number  of  the  fundamental  symptoms.  In 
the  ‘mental’  field  these  fundamental  symptoms  are  accounted  for  by  a 
simple  structural,  functional  principle  of  ‘copying  animals’  in  our 
nervous  processes,  which  must  be  harmful,  and  which  is  characterized 
by  the  lack  of  consciousness  of  abstracting,  implying  colloidal  disturb¬ 
ances.  Psychogalvanic  experiments  show  clearly  that  every  ‘emotion’  or 
‘thought’  is  always  connected  with  some  electrical  currents,  and  that 
electricity  seems  fundamental  for  colloidal  behaviour,  and,  therefore,  for 
physical  symptoms  and  the  behaviour  of  the  organism. 

In  the  colloidal  processes  we  find  the  bridge  between  the  ‘physical' 
and  the  ‘mental’,  and  the  mutual  link  seems  mainly  electricity.  It  is  more 
than  mere  coincidence  that  all  illnesses,  ‘physical’  or  ‘mental’,  have  only 
a  few  fundamental  symptoms ;  and  we  should  no  longer  be  surprised  to 
find  that  physical  ills  result  in  ‘mental’  symptoms,  and  that  ‘mental’  ills 
may  also  involve  ‘physical’  symptoms. 

If  a  simple  symptom  is  completely  general,  it  indicates  that  it  is 
structurally  fundamental,  and  we  shall  be  repaid  if  we  devote  special 
attention  to  it.  As  a  rule,  in  ‘mental’  ills  we  observe  a  striking  appear¬ 
ance  of  symptoms  which  have  a  sinister  parallel  with  the  behaviour  of 
infants.  Arrested  development  or  regression  in  grown-ups  also  exhibits 
these  infantile  characteristics.  In  other  words,  whenever  infantile  char¬ 
acteristics  appear  in  grown-ups  it  indicates  that  the  ‘adult’  has  not  grown 
up  fully  in  some  semantic  respects,  or  has  already  started  on  the  way 
of  regression,  implying  some  colloidal  or  m.o  structural  injury. 

When  we  speak  of  ‘infantilism’  in  ‘adults’,  we  include  symptoms 
which  belong  to  the  period  of  childhood  in  its  organ  erotic  or  autoerotic 
and  narcissistic  stages.  It  should  be  recalled  that  in  children  these 
semantic  phases  are  natural;  they  become  pathological  only  when  the 
individual  does  not  outgrow  them  and  exhibits  them  as  a  grown-up.  The 
term  ‘infantilism’  is  a  rather  sinister  one,  and  should  never  be  applied  to 

UN-SANITY  VERSUS  SANITY 

children.  Children  behave  like  children,  and  that  ends  the  subject.  But 
children  have  fewer  responsibilities,  their  sex  impulses  are  undeveloped . , 
and  so  their  behaviour  cannot  be  equally  dangerous  to  themselves  and 
others.  But  not  so  with  grown-ups.  They  have  responsibilities,  duties, 
often  strong  sex  impulses . ,  which  make  out  of  the  infantile  ‘adult’  an 
individual  dangerous  to  himself  and  others.  The  term  ‘social*  period,  or 
‘socialized’  individual,  is  sometimes  wrongly  interpreted.  The  fact  that 
human  achievements  and  capacities  are  accumulative  and  depend  on 
achievements  of  others  makes  us,  by  necessity,  a  social  time-binding 
class  of  life,  which  again  involves  more  complex  modes  of  adjustment. 
Whether  we  approve  or  disapprove  the  existing  legal  and  police  regula¬ 
tions  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  fact  that  in  a  social  class  of  life  some 
restrictions  are  necessary.  Our  present  commercial  ‘civilization’  can  be 
characterized  as  of  an  infantile  type,  governed  mostly  by  structurally 
primitive  mythologies  and  language  very  often  involving  primitive  s.r. 
One  need  but  read  the  speeches  of  different  merchants,  presidents,  and 
kings  to  be  thoroughly  convinced  of  this.  The  rules  and  regulations  are 
naturally  antiquated,  and  belong  to  the  period  to  which  the  underlying 
metaphysics  and  language  belong.  The  ‘adult’  or  scientific  semantic  stage 
of  civilization  would  be  precisely  the  ‘social’  stage  of  complete  evaluation 
of  our  privileges  and  duties . 

In  speaking  about  infantilism,  it  should  be  remembered  that  the 
child  has  an  advantage  over  the  imbeciles,  idiots,  and  ‘mentally’  ill  who 
have  stopped  development  or  have  regressed  to  the  age  of  the  infant  or 
the  child.  The  ‘normal’  child  profits  by  experience  and  outgrows  the 
semantic  characteristics  that  are  natural  to  a  given  age.  In  cases  of 
arrested  development  or  regression,  the  undesirable  infantile  character¬ 
istics  persist  in  the  grown-ups  and  are  a  source  of  endless  difficulties  and 
suffering  to  them  and  their  associates.  Thus,  in  our  childhood  we  all 
have  had  experiences  similar  to  that  of  the  patient  of  Dr.  Jelliffe,  and 
are  no  worse  off  because  of  them.  But,  if  the  reader  should  imagine 
himself  in  the  position  of  the  patient  with  those  infantile  characteristics, 
he  would  realize  that  an  enormous  amount  of  suffering,  fear,  shame, 
bewilderment . ,  results  for  the  patient.  The  worst  feature  in  such  cases 
is  found  in  the  fact  that  an  infantile  type  usually  cannot  ‘outgrow’  or 
alter  such  characteristics  by  himself,  and  needs  very  wise  and  patient 
outside  help  in  re-training,  or  medical  assistance,  if  he  is  ever  to  over¬ 
come  earlier  inappropriate  s.r .  But  if  we  start  the  education  of  an  infant 
with  appropriate  s.rf  such  a  procedure  must  play  a  most  important  pre¬ 
ventive  evaluational  role. 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

We  should  remember  that  the  nervous  system  of  the  human  child 
is  not  finished  at  birth.  The  extension,  the  growth,  and  the  multiplica¬ 
tion  of  the  appendages  of  the  neurones . ,  go  on  after  birth.  The  nervous 
system  of  an  adult  shows  striking  differences  in  the  length  and  com¬ 
plexity  of  the  nerve  cells  over  that  of  the  infant.  The  researches  of 
Hammarberg  showed,  in  all  the  cases  of  idiocy  he  investigated,  an  arrest 
of  development  in  a  more  or  less  large  part  of  the  cortex,  at  a  stage 
corresponding  to  either  an  embryological  period,  or  to  the  period  of 
early  infancy.  Only  a  small  number  of  cells  had  reached  their  full  de¬ 
velopment  during  the  growth  of  the  cortex.  The  psycho-logical  defects 
were  in  direct  proportion  to  the  defects  of  the  development  of  the  cells, 
and  were  the  greater  the  earlier  the  period  of  arrest  of  development.® 
In  extreme  congenital  imbecility  the  cortex  is  poorly  organized,  is  thin 
and  deficient  in  nerve  cells.  Bolton's  second  layer  of  pyramidal  cells 
matures  last  ;  and  its  development  in  different  mammals  corresponds  to 
the  degree  of  their  ‘intelligence'.  In  humans,  its  degree  of  deficiency 
corresponds  to  the  degree  of  ‘mental'  arrest  or  regression.  In  organic 
‘mental'  diseases  very  diffuse  cortical  lesions,  when  present,  impair  ‘intel¬ 
ligence'.  Affective  disturbances  depend  upon  even  smaller  brain  lesions, 
particularly  when  the  thalamic  regions  are  affected.7  In  general,  lesions 
in  the  basal  ganglia  diminish  the  energy  of  the  impulsive  life  (sleeping 
sickness).  Lesions  at  the  base  of  the  frontal  lobe,  and  some  brain 
tumours,  lead  to  euphoric  excitement,  which  gives  a  feeble,  stupid  expres¬ 
sion,  facetiousness,  and  a  tendency  to  teasing.  Other  lesions  in  the  basal 
ganglia  lead  to  a  labile  affectivity.  All  destructions  of  parts  of  the  brain 
usually  lead  to  irritability  and  moodiness.  In  different  focal  lesions  of 
the  brain  the  disturbances  lead  to  anger  and  rage.8 

Among  other  results  of  organic  brain  diseases  we  find  semantic  dis¬ 
turbances,  absence  of  critical  faculty,  and  a  disturbance  of  judgement; 
complicated  situations  can  no  longer  be  grasped,  the  evaluation  of  rela¬ 
tions  is  impaired , .  In  cases  of  labile  affectivity  the  special  ‘emotion' 
dominates  the  patient  completely.  Trifles  make  him  either  very  happy 
or  desperate.  Because  of  the  decrease  in  association  or  deficiency  in  the 
process  of  relating,  the  patient  often  appears  indifferent,  although  the 
defect  is  not  primarily  in  the  affective  field.  Similar  difficulties  in  asso¬ 
ciation  or  relating  make  many  patients  appear  egotistic  in  their  s.r  and 
behaviour.  Since  the  patients  have  lost  their  insight  in,  and  evaluation 
of,  different  life  situations,  their  actions  appear  un-ethical.  Tenderness, 
consideration,  tact,  aesthetic  sensibility,  sense  of  duty,  sense  of  right, 
feeling  of  shame . ,  may  all  disappear  at  any  moment,  though  they  would 
otherwise  naturally  be  present.  Any  kind  of  impulse  may  be  translated 

UN-SANITY  VERSUS  SANITY 

into  action  without  restraint.9  Hemorrhages  in  the  thalamic  region  often 
result  in  marked  lability  of  affects.  Diffuse  nutritional  disturbances  of 
the  cortex  usually  give  similar  symptoms,  as  in  organic  brain  diseases  ,  .10 

It  should  be  remembered  that  in  the  human  nervous  system  the 
co-ordinated  working  of  the  higher  and  lower  centres  is  a  necessity  for 
the  optimum  working  of  the  whole.  In  cats  and  dogs  deprived  of  the 
association  areas  of  the  cortex,  the  difference  is  not  so  marked.  They 
still  behave  in  a  co-ordinated  way,  provided  the  thalamic  regions  are 
intact.  Even  in  a  child  without  a  cortex,  we  find  facial  grimaces  if  we 
give  him  something  bitter,  but  higher  adjustments  are  impossible.11  The 
general  ‘inhibitory’  and  regulative  action  of  the  higher  centres  increases 
with  the  differentiation  of  the  nervous  system ;  and  in  man  this  becomes 
of  paramount  importance.  This  has  been  shown  empirically.  For  in¬ 
stance,  in  man  and  dogs  strong  negative  action  on  the  flow  of  gastric 
juices  may  be  ‘psychic'  in  origin.  This  negative  action  is  weak  in  the 
guinea  pig,  although  it  is  discovered  on  decerebration.  With  the  tortoise, 
also,  there  is  some  acceleration  of  the  movements  of  the  stomach  after 
decerebration,  but  in  a  frog  we  do  not  find  any  negative  influence 
at  all.12 

The  facts  given  above  were  established  through  anatomical  and 
physiological  structural  examinations.  If  the  functioning  of  the  nervous 
system  is  examined  from  the  point  of  view  of  colloidal  chemistry,  the 
gross  non-surgical  lesions  become  interpretable  as  the  result  of  changes  in 
colloidal  behaviour.  Thus  Doctors  Wilder  D.  Bancroft,  J.  Holmes  Rich¬ 
ter,  H.  Beckett  Lang,  John  A.  Paterson,  Walter  Freeman,  and  others 
demonstrated  that  it  is  possible  to  find  a  correlation  between  the  func¬ 
tional  psychoses  and  the  state  of  dispersion  of  the  nerve  colloids.  For 
instance,  in  dementia  praecox  the  nervous  system  appears  in  a  state  of 
colloidal  over-dispersion ;  and  in  manic  depressive  psychoses,  in  a  state 
of  decreased  dispersion.13  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  in  infants  the 
colloids  appear  more  dispersed  than  in  grown-ups  and  probably  similar 
conditions  will  be  found  in  cases  of  infantilism.  The  above-mentioned 
scientists  have  found,  also,  that  the  colloidal  behaviour  of  the  nervous 
system  can  be  altered  by  special  chemical  treatment  with  drugs,  carbon 
dioxide,  oxygen . ,  with  specific  reactions  on  the  psycho-logical  level.  As 
s.r  involve  electrical  occurrences  fundamental  in  colloidal  behaviour, 
similar  symptoms  on  psycho-logical  levels  may  imply  corresponding  sub- 
microscopic  colloidal  states.  Taking  into  consideration  the  structural 
characteristics  of  colloidal  behaviour  and  the  elaboration  of  technical 
means,  we  may  discover  that  semantic  re-education  must  involve  differ¬ 
ences  in  electrical  potentials . ,  and  result  in  differences  in  colloidal  be- 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

haviour  in  different  regions  of  the  nervous  system.  Experiments  should 
be  made  in  combining  chemical  means,  which  effects  are  not  lasting,  but 
which  might  facilitate  the  semantic  approach,  with  semantic  re-education, 
which  results,  once  achieved,  often  become  lasting.  Colloidal  and  psycho¬ 
galvanic  investigations  of  a  given  patient  before  and  after  the  semantic 
re-education  should  also  be  made. 

Let  me  emphasize  once  more  that  from  the  colloidal  point  of  view 
free  from  identification,  the  ‘body-mind*  problem  ceases  to  be  a  puzzle, 
as  we  have  a  well-established  electrodynamic,  structural  colloidal  back¬ 
ground  which  can  account  perfectly  for  the  experimental  facts  of  ‘mind*. 
The  subtleties  of  the  sub-microscopic  structure  involve  an  endless  array 
of  possibilities.  At  present  we  lack  detailed  knowledge  of  this  structure ; 
for  the  colloidal  developments  are  very  recent,  and  in  this  special  field 
very  little  experimentation  has  been  done. 

If  we  accept  the  non-el  point  of  view,  and  all  known  evidence 
seems  to  demand  it,  we  must  conclude  that  if  different  macroscopic, 
microscopic,  and  sub-microscopic  lesions  of  the  nervous  system  result  in 
quite  definite  psycho-logical  symptoms,  which  on  the  semantic  levels 
appear  as  a  lack  of  evaluation  of  relations;  then,  vice  versa,  the  use  of 
linguistic  systems,  which  systematically  train  the  immature  nervous  sys¬ 
tem  of  the  child  and  of  the  grown-ups  in  delusional  evaluation,  must  result 
in  at  least  colloidal  disturbances  of  the  nervous  system.  These  functional 
colloidal  disturbances  become  superimposed  upon  the  inborn  eventual 
deficiencies  of  the  nervous  system,  and  the  end-results  may  be  quite  out 
of  proportion  to  the  seemingly  slight  induced  discrepancy.  The  actual 
behaviour,  adjustment,  sanity.,  may  be  considerably  impaired. 

Before  birth,  the  child  can  be  considered  as  in  ideal  conditions.  He 
floats  comfortably  in  a  fluid  of  a  temperature  equal  to  his  own.  All  his 
wants  are  satisfied,  as  everything  is  supplied  to  him  by  the  maternal 
body.  At  birth,  the  child  must  begin  to  breathe,  and  a  little  later  he  must 
take  food,  digest , .  External  influences  begin  to  impinge  on  him,  and 
he  must  begin  to  adjust  himself.  Very  soon  the  average  infant  finds  that 
he  can  get  what  he  wants,  within  certain  limits,  by  certain  movements 
or  by  crying.  For  the  infant,  a  cry  or  a  word  becomes  semantic  magic. 
In  Pavlov’s  language,  a  word  governs  a  conditional  reflex.  In  psychiatry, 
a  definite  series  of  such  conditional  s.r  of  animalistic  low  order  of  con¬ 
ditionality  is  called  a  ‘complex*.  In  Pavlov’s  experiments  a  dog  is  shown 
food  and  a  bell  rung  simultaneously.  At  the  sight  of  food,  saliva  and 
gastric  juice  flow.  Associations  soon  relate  the  ringing  of  the  bell  and 
the  food,  and,  later,  simply  the  ringing  of  the  bell  will  produce  the 
flow.  In  another  animal  some  other  signal,  a  whistle,  for  instance,  would 

UN-SANITY  VERSUS  SANITY 

produce  similar  effects.  In  different  people,  through  experience,  associa¬ 
tions,  relations,  meanings,  and  s.r  are  built  around  some  symbol.  Obvi¬ 
ously,  in  grown-up  humans  the  identification  of  the  symbol  with  the 
thing  must  be  pathological.  But  in  infancy  the  confusion  of  orders  of 
abstractions  must  be  considered  as  an  entirely  natural  semantic  period. 
The  infant  'knows*  nothing  about  science  and  events.  Objects  and  'sense 
perceptions’  ‘are’  the  only  'reality*  he  knows  and  cares  about ;  so  he  does 
not  and  cannot  discriminate  between  events  and  objects.  By  necessity, 
he  identifies  unknowingly  two  entirely  different  levels.  As  his  symbol 
usually  means  a  satisfaction  of  his  wants,  naturally  he  identifies  the  sym¬ 
bols  with  the  objects  and  events.  At  this  stage,  also,  he  cannot  know 
that  the  orders  of  his  abstractions  can  be  extended  indefinitely,  or  that 
his  most  important  terms  have  the  multiordinal  character.  It  is  impor¬ 
tant  to  notice  that  objectification,  and,  in  general,  identification  or  con¬ 
fusion  of  orders  of  abstractions,  are  semantically natural  for  the  infant. 
The  more  the  child  comes  in  touch  with  'reality*,  the  more  he  learns,  and 
in  a  'normal*  child  the  ‘pleasure  principle’,  which  was  established  as  a 
method  of  adjustment  on  the  infantile  level,  is  slowly  displaced  by  the 
'reality  principle*,  which  thus  becomes  the  semantic  method  of  adjust¬ 
ment  of  the  complete  adult.  Science  alone  gives  us  full  knowledge  of 
current  ‘reality*.  But  science  represents  a  social  achievement,  and,  there¬ 
fore,  a  complete  adult,  in  growing  up  to  the  social  level,  must  become 
aware  of  the  latest  stages  of  m.o  reality.  These  are  given  by  the  current 
scientific  methods  and  structural  notions  about  this  world,  and  gradually 
become  incorporated  in  the  structure  of  the  language  we  use,  always 
deeply  affecting  our  s.r . 

It  is  important  that  in  the  twentieth  century  we  should  realize  that 
the  work  of  Einstein  and  the  four-dimensional  space-time  continuum 
establishes  a  language  of  different  structure,  closer  to  the  facts  we  know 
in  1933,  and  that  it  gives  us  a  new  semantic  method  of  adjustment  to  a 
new  'reality*  (see  Part  IX). 

The  semantic  stages  of  the  development  of  the  child  must  naturally 
pass  through  the  stages  outlined  above.  When  he  begins  to  differentiate 
himself  from  the  environment,  he  is  self-centred  and  concentrated  on  his 
‘sensations*  (autoerotic).  Later  he  projects  his  own  sensations  on  the 
outside  events;  he  personifies.  This  semantic  trait  is  often  found  in 
incomplete  adults,  when  in  anger  they  break  dishes  or  furniture. 

The  child  is  interested,  first,  in  himself  (autoerotic)  ;  then  in  chil¬ 
dren  like  himself  (homosexual).  Slowly  his  interests  turn  away  to 
persons  less  similar  to  himself,  to  the  opposite  sex,  and  so  he  enters  the 
semantic  period  of  the  race  development. 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

Similar  semantic  processes  are  to  be  seen  in  the  racial  developments 
as  given  by  anthropology,  and  are  reflected  in  the  structure  of  the  lan- 
guages.  In  the  archaic  period  of  one-valued  *pre-logical  thinking’,  which 
is  found  among  primitive  peoples,  the  ‘consciousness  of  abstracting*  is 
practically  nil.  The  effect  produced,  by  something  upon  an  individual 
inside  his  skin  is  projected  outside  his  skin,  thus  acquiring  a  demonic 
semantic  character.  The  ‘idea*  of  an  action  or  object  is  identified  with 
the  action  or  the  object  itself.  Identification  and  confusion  of  orders  of 
abstractions  have  full  sway. 

The  paralogical  stage  is  a  little  more  advanced.  In  it  the  identifica¬ 
tion  is  based  on  similarities ,  and  differences  are  neglected  (not  con¬ 
sciously,  of  course).  Levy-Bruhl  describes  this  primitive  semantic  period 
by  formulating  the  ‘law  of  participation’,  by  which  all  things  which  have 
similar  characteristics  ‘are  the  same'.14  A  primitive  syllogism  runs  some¬ 
what  as  follows :  ‘Certain  Indians  run  fast,  stags  run  fast ;  therefore, 
some  Indians  are  stags’.  This  semantic  process  was  entirely  natural  at  an 
early  stage  and  laid  a  foundation  for  the  building  of  language  and  higher 
order  abstractions.  We  proceeded  by  similarities,  much  too  often  con¬ 
sidered  as  identities ,  with  the  result  that  differences  were  neglected.  But 
in  actual  life,  without  some  primitive  metaphysics,  we  do  not  find  iden¬ 
tities,  and  differences  become  as  important  as  similarities.  The  former 
primitive  emphasis  on  identity,  later  enlarged  to  similarities,  must,  at 
some  stage  of  human  development,  become  semantically  disastrous  and 
the  optimum  adjustment  an  impossibility. 

In  building  a  ^-system,  we  have  to  stress  differences,  build  a  ‘non¬ 
system’  on  ‘non-allness’,  and  reject  identity.  The  older  semantic  inclina¬ 
tions  and  infantile  or  primitive  tendencies  were  a  necessary  step  in 
human  evolution.  For  sanity,  we  must  outgrow  these  infantile  semantic 
fixations.  Similarly,  for  civilization,  we  must  grow  out  from  primitive 
structural  fixations,  primitive  metaphysics,  taboos,  and  other  primitive 
s.r.  These  primitive  habits,  languages,  and  structural  metaphysics  and 
reactions  have  been  extremely  ingrained  in  us  through  the  ages,  and  it 
requires  effort  and  new  semantic  training  to  overcome  them. 

In  the  ‘mentally’  ill  we  find  sinister  and  very  close  parallels  to  the 
behaviour  of  the  primitive  man  and  the  infant,  not  only  in  the  ‘mental’ 
and  ‘emotional’  responses,  but  even  in  physical  behaviour,  postures, 
drawings,  and  other  modes  of  expression.  These  parallels  are  today 
recognized  by  practically  all  scientific  workers  and  are  analysed  in  many 
excellent  volumes. 

We  should  notice  that  in  this  maze  of  observational  material,  one 
general  rule  holds;  namely,  ‘consciousness  of  abstracting’  offers  a  full 

UN-SANITY  VERSUS  SANITY 

semantic  solution .  In  it  we  find  not  only  a  complete  foundation  for  a 
theory  of  sanity,  but  also  the  semantic,  psychophysiological  mechanism 
for  the  passing  from  the  infantile,  or  primitive-man,  level  to  the  higher 
level  of  complete  adulthood  and  civilized  social  man. 

The  following  drawing  is  taken  from  Bleuler’s  Textbook  of  Psychi- 
atry  (p.  402)  and  was  made  by  a  very  ill  patient  (chronic  catatonic) 
who  could  formerly  draw  well;  yet  this  drawing  is  obviously  childish . 
The  literature  of  psy¬ 
chiatry  abounds  in  such 
productions,  and  they 
confirm  fully  the  pro¬ 
cesses  as  described  in 
psychiatry. 

Adult  infantilism 
becomes  usually  a  potent 
wrecker  of  individual 
lives,  and,  when  viewed 
from  a  social,  national, 
or  international  point 
of  view,  accounts,  also, 
for  the  majority  of  our 
semantic  difficulties  in 
the  social,  economic, 
and  political  fields. 

Although  we  treat 
infantile,  arrested,  and 
regressive  symptoms  to¬ 
gether,  it  is  important 
to  realize  that  most  of 
these  characteristics  are 
normal  with  the  primi¬ 
tive  man,  and  the  infant, 
provided  the  child  out¬ 
grows  them.  The  differ-  Fig.  4 

ence  between  arrested 

development  and  regression  seems  somewhat  like  that  between  a  poor 
man  and  one  who  has  lost  his  fortune.  In  the  first  case,  the  functioning 
of  the  nervous  system  is  unsatisfactory  through  some  deficiency ;  in  the 
second,  the  potentialities  for  efficient  working  were  there,  but  some 
semantic  obstacle  originated  the  regression,  or  else  some  degenerative 
neural  process  set  in. 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

In  the  field  of  higher  abstractions  the  train  of  ‘ideas’  of  children, 
imbeciles,  and  idiots  is  restricted.  Uncommon  ‘ideas’  are  left  out,  and 
only  those  which  originated  in  immediate  ‘sense  perception’  are  easily 
grasped.  Until  lately,  even  in  science,  such  an  attitude  was  noticeable, 
as,  for  instance,  in  gross  empiricism,  or  in  the  case  of  the  physicist 
already  mentioned  who  was  willing  to  ‘fight’  to  prove  that  he  ‘saw’  the 
electron , .  He  did  not  realize  that  inferential  entities  are  just  as  good 
abstractions  as  those  he  ‘sees’.  The  attitude  of  the  ‘practical  man’  who 
pooh-poohs  science  and  the  ‘highbrows’  may  serve  also  as  an  example. 

Children,  idiots,  and  imbeciles  cannot  comprehend  anything  com- 
plicated;  they  see  some  elements,  but  miss  the  relative  wholes.  We  have 
elaborated  a  racial  language  of  ‘senses’  and  elementalism.  Similarly  in 
schizophrenics  the  relative  whole  is  disregarded,  while,  on  the  other 
hand,  a  single  semantically  effective  characteristic  is  sufficient  to  connect 
the  most  heterogeneous  abstractions  in  an  unnatural  whole.  Word- 
relations  have  a  predominance  over  actualities  (identification).  Thus, 
a  patient  looks  anxiously  at  a  moving  door  and  exclaims  ‘Da  fressen  mich 
die  Thiiren’*  and  refuses  to  pass  through  the  door-way.  Here  we  see 
the  identification  of  words  with  objects  carried  to  the  limit.  In  general, 
the  s.r  of  the  schizophrenic  seem  such  that  he  identifies  intensely  his 
higher  abstractions  with  the  lower.18 

Much  excellent  material  on  infantilism  can  be  found  in  Dr.  Joseph 
Collins’  The  Doctor  Looks  at  Love  and  Life,  particularly  in  his  chapter 
on  Adult  Infantilism,  from  which  much  of  the  following  material  is 
taken,  and  which  I  acknowledge  gratefully. 

Children  and  idiots  live  in  the  present  only  and  do  not  concern  them¬ 
selves  with  the  past  and  the  future  beyond  their  immediate  gratification. 
Infantile  types  also  want  all  the  "sense*  enjoyment  of  the  moment,  never 
enquiring  about  the  sufferings  of  others  or  of  the  consequences  for 
themselves  in  the  future.  Indeed,  their  attitude  is  often  hostile  toward 
those  who  take  into  consideration  a  larger  field.  ‘Apres  nous  le  deluge' 
represents  their  royal  semantic  motto.  On  national  and  commercial 
grounds,  they  devastate  their  natural  resources,  since  they  are  interested 
only  in  some  immediate  and  selfish  advantage.  They  love  praise  and  hate 
blame,  not  realizing  that  a  critical  attitude  gives  the  foundation  for 
proper  evaluation  and  becomes  a  semantic  characteristic  of  maturity  and 
that,  generally,  it  is  more  beneficial  in  the  long  run.  They  thrive  and 
thrill  on  commendations  and  compliments,  and  shiver  and  shrink  at  dis¬ 
approval.  Such  characteristics  are  found  even  in  whole  nations.  They 

*Animal  -- Thier,  Door  —  Thiir,  so  that  the  unconscious  play  upon  words  gives 
the  meaning;  ‘Doors  devour  me',  for  ‘Animals  devour  me'.  g 

UN-SANITY  VERSUS  SANITY 

are  self-satisfied,  and  keep  aloof  from  others  in  international  affairs,  not 
realizing  that  this  is  impossible,  and  that  the  attempt  is  ultimately  harm¬ 
ful  to  them.  They  assume,  as  an  excuse,  the  superiority  of  their  institu¬ 
tions  . ,  and  the  ‘righteousness’  of  their  own  conduct. 

Children  and  superior  idiots  appreciate  resemblances  more  readily 
than  differences.  Simple  generalizations  are  possible,  but  often  they  are 
hasty  and  faulty.  A  child’s  pride  and  self-respect  are  hurt  if  he  is  con¬ 
sidered  different  from  other  children,  or  is  dressed  differently.  Original¬ 
ity  and  individuality  are  tabooed  among  children.  Because  of  semantic 
undevelopment,  differences  become  a  disturbing  factor  to  them;  they 
want  everything  standardized.  On  national  grounds,  the  adult  infants 
standardize  all  they  can  and  have  even  a  kind  of  hostility  to  anything 
which  has  an  individual  flavour.  For  instance,  those  who  wear  straw 
hats  after  an  arbitrary  date  are  attacked  on  the  streets.  Not  wanting  to 
‘think’,  or  to  bother  about  differences,  they  fancy  that  they  can  regulate 
life  by  legislation  and  they  keep  busy  manufacturing  ‘laws’,  which  are 
very  often  impracticable  and  self-contradictory.  When  they  pass  sev¬ 
eral  thousand  ‘laws’  a  year,  these  become  a  maze  and  a  joke.  The  ulti¬ 
mate  semantic  result  of  such  over-legislation  is  a  complete  lack  of  justice 
or  of  any  respect  for  ‘law’.  Not  being  able  to  ‘think’  for  themselves, 
they  leave  that  bothersome  function  to  politicians,  priests,  newspaper¬ 
men,.  Under  such  conditions  life  is  impossible  without  expensive 

lawyers.  .  . 

Not  having  the  critical  semantic  capacity  for  proper  evaluation,  their 
likes  and  dislikes  are  very  intense.  They  cannot  differentiate  the  essen¬ 
tial  from  the  unimportant.  The  immediate  ‘sense’  perception  or  ‘emo¬ 
tion’  unduly  influences  their  actions.  Impulses  to  copy  others  dominate 
them.  They  are  often  prejudiced.  This  results  in  weak  judgement,  over- 
suggestiveness,  ‘emotional’  outbreaks,  exaggerated  sensibility,  variability 
of  affective  states . ,  and,  finally,  in  an  attitude  toward  life  devoid  of 
proper  evaluation.  Their  moods  are  changeable;  their  attention  readily 
gained  and  as  readily  diverted.  They  become  easily  intimidated  and 
frightened,  and  easily  influenced  by  others. 

The  above  semantic  characteristics  are  sponsored  by  commercialism, 
and  build  up  the  kind  of  methods,  advertisements,  and  business  policies 
which  we  see  about  us.  This  also  introduces  a  semantic  factor  of  disin¬ 
tegration  into  human  relationships,  as  it  leads  to  methods  of  trickery,  to 
‘putting  something  over*  on  the  other  fellow,  and  appeals  to  self-indul¬ 
gence  , .  When  such  commercial  tactics  are  national,  their  sinister  educa¬ 
tional' effect  is  pronounced.  Children,  from  the  age  when  they  begin 
to  read,  are  impressed  by  such  practices  as  normal  and  take  them  as 

518  VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

semantic  standards  for  their  own  further  orientations.  Unfortunately, 
even  psychiatrists  have  not,  as  yet,  analysed  the  semantic  influence  of 

such  advertisements  on  the  building  and  preserving  of  infantile  char- 

acteristics. 

Children  lack  moderation  and  a  semantic  sense  of  proper  evaluation. 
1  olerance  is  not  one  of  their  characteristics.  To  them  persons  and  'ideas’ 
are  evaluated  m  extremes,  either  good,  ‘wonderful’,  or  bad,  ‘terrible’ 
Their  s.r  appear  dogmatic  and  stubborn,  as  in  all  the  unexperienced.’ 
They  talk  too  much  or  are  silent ;  they  praise  too  much  or  blame  too 
much ;  they  work  too  hard  or  play  too  hard,  and  know  no  middle  ground, 
the  whole  life  of  a  nation  may  be  coloured  by  such  semantic  attitudes. 
Nations  become  boastful  of  their  own  possessions  and  achievements,  and 
happily  borrow  and  forget  the  achievements  of  others.  They  pride  them¬ 
selves  on  having  the  largest  airships,  the  largest  cities,  the  highest  build¬ 
ings,  the  longest  bridges , .  They  know  no  moderation  in  food  or  drink  • 
they  eat  or  drink  too  much  or  become  total  ‘prohibitionists’.  They  ex¬ 
hibit  quick  friendships  and  quick  dislikes.  They  are  solemn  in  their 
games,  like  children  who  are  playing  father  and  mother,  and  make  out 
of  games  a  national  event.  The  childish  pleasure  of  defeating  an  adver- 
saij  accounts  for  national  crazes,  like  racing,  boxing,  football,  baseball, 

and  similar  sports,  which  often  overshadow  in  public  attention  all  really 
important  issues.  y 

Qnldren  and  many  idiots  are  incapable  of  any  choice  which  involves 
meaning8  and  evaluation.  When  confronted  with  a  situation  in  which 
they  have  to  choose  between  two  alternatives,  they  have  difficulties,  and 
often  want  both.  Similarly  with  ‘ideas’;  they  often  keep  sets  of  entirely 
self-contradictory  ‘ideas’  Even  scientists  of  an  infantile  type  do  so,  and 
en  publish  manifestos  in  which  they  try  to  justify  such  behaviour  and 
semantic  attitudes.  Merchants  train  salesmen  especially  to  induce  cus¬ 
tomers  with  such  infantile  s.r  to  buy  what  they  do  not  need.  This  atti¬ 
tude  is  often  extended  to  marriage.  Any  man  and  woman  may  marry 
simply  because  they  come  across  each  other;  then,  when  they  meet  some¬ 
body  else,  they  soon  change  the  object  of  their  sentiments. 

..  fh11  C!asses  of  feeble-minded  and  children  show  marked  credulity  • 
they  hke  fany  tales  and  fantastic  stories.  Free  inventions,  by  a  proems 
of  objectification,  are  taken  as  experience.  Children  and  schizophrenics 
pun  and  play  on  words-  They  build  up  languages  of  their  own  Per¬ 
severation  and  stereotypy  in  speech  are  also  found  among  them.  National 
commercialism  utilizes  this  principle  in  advertisements  and  tries  to  run 
a  country  by  verbal  slogans  and  play  on  words. 

UN-SANITY  VERSUS  SANITY 

Many  children  and  feeble-minded  show  distinct  acquisitiveness. 
Like  some  animals,  they  show  a  tendency  for  collection  of  objects,  and 
value  their  collections  highly.  It  is  a  well-known  childish  game  to  claim 
the  best  morsel  of  some  food  because  one  has  put  one’s  hand  on  it  first. 
Acquisitiveness  is  made  a  national  slogan  and  proclaimed  a  highest  aim, 
which,  of  course,  becomes  a  semantic  source  of  endless  wars  and  mis¬ 
eries.  Infantile  legalistic  ‘putting  hands  first’,  on  a  piece  of  paper  as  a 
title  to  land,  or  some  such  similar  form  of  a  ‘claim’,  becomes  a  source  of 
ridiculous  fortunes  for  the  few  and  of  unbearable  life-conditions  for 
the  many. 

Children  are  gregarious  and  afraid  to  be  alone.  Similar  tendencies 
are  carried  on  by  Rotary  and  other  clubs  and  lodges.  Infantile  grown¬ 
ups  are  too  empty  in  their  heads  to  desire  to  be  alone.  Children  seldom 
stick  to  anything  for  long.  They  hunt  for  new  excitements,  and  the  old 
toys  are  often  soon  forgotten.  Similarly,  grown-up  infants  hunt  for  new 
excitements,  for  new  toys,  whether  they  be  a  house  or  an  automobile,  a 
wife  or  a  lover. 

In  children  and  the  feeble-minded,  we  seldom  find  such  feelings  as 
shame,  aesthetic  sentiments,  or  appreciation  of  beauty.  They  like  things 
bizarre,  grotesque,  glittering,  and  enormous,  things  which  attract  and 
hold  their  attention.  Similar  characteristics  are  found  in  incomplete 
adults.  Children  and  the  feeble-minded  are  usually  untidy  and  noisy. 
Visiting  a  public  park,  or  witnessing  a  ‘celebration’,  will  show  an  observer 
clearly  how  infantile  grown-ups  behave. 

Children  like  to  domineer  over  their  younger  brothers  and  sisters 
and  to  play  the  leading  part  in  a  game.  Similar  semantic  characteristics 
are  carried  into  adult  life,  sometimes  taking  the  form  of  sadism.  We 
often  see  infantile  docility  or  resentment,  as  expressed  in  sentimental 
approval  or  bitter  disillusionment,  both  generally  unjustified. 

Self-respect  is  little  developed  in  the  idiot,  but  plays  an  important 
semantic  role  in  the  life  of  imbeciles  and  children.  The  infantile  adult 
also  shows  an  exaggerated  self-respect.  Bus  conductors  and  university 
professors  label  themselves  with  a  title — even  if  it  is  only  Mr.  John 
Smith,  as  if  being  called  simply  ‘John  Smith’  would  be  offensive  to  him. 
An  adult  evaluates  a  man  by  what  he  has  in  his  head  or  character,  but 
the  infantile  type  largely  judges  him  by  the  symbols  (money)  which  he 
has,  or  the  kind  of  hat  or  clothes  he  wears.  Since  commercialism  cannot 
sell  brains,  but  can  sell  trousers  or  a  dress,  it  establishes  semantic 
standards  whereby  a  man  is  evaluated  by  his  clothes  and  hats. 

In  speaking  of  exaggerated  self-regard  based  on  improper  self- 
evaluation,  we  touch  the  problems  of  infantile  self-love  and  self-impor- 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

tance.  Infantile  grown-ups  carry  these  even  further,  and  are  unable  to 
make  dependable  attachments  to  other  persons.  The  love  of  parents 
toward  their  child  is  largely  because  it  is  their  child;  and  infantile  A 
loves  B,  only  because  B  ‘adores’  A  and  gives  up  his  individuality.  The 
moment  something  changes  in  B,  all  the  ‘love’  A  had  disappears.  The 
unbelievable  bitterness  which  appears  in  divorce-court  scenes  shows 
clearly  the  value  of  infantile  ‘love’.  Such  ‘love’  is  often  based  on  purely 
egoistic  grounds.  They  ‘love’  what  they  represent  to  themselves,  what 
they  once  represented,  what  they  would  like  to  represent.  Infantile 
parents  see  all  kinds  of  perfections  in  their  babies,  although  a  sober  out¬ 
sider  does  not  share  these  opinions.  An  infantile  mother  treats  her  child 
1!.k?  a.do11,  plays  anc* is  thrilled  with  it,  but  soon  gets  tired  as  the  respon¬ 
sibilities  become  irksome.  An  infantile  father  sees  in  the  child,  first,  a 
toy,  and,  later,  a  nuisance.  ’  ’ 

Infantile  adults  have  little  regard  for,  or  endurance  of,  life  respon¬ 
sibilities.  They  tire  quickly,  are  easily  discouraged  and  frightened.  They 
are  thus  irresponsible,  unreliable,  and  a  source  of  suffering  for  those 
connected  with,  or  dependent  on,  them.  This  permanent  suspense  for 
others  produces,  perhaps,  one  of  the  most  serious  sources  of  worries  and 
unhappiness.  Since  it  is  persistent,  it  gives  continual,  painful  nervous 
shocks,  the  cumulative  effect  of  which  is  bound  to  be  harmful. 

The  infantile  individual  himself  cannot  fail  to  notice  that  something 
is  wrong,  for  life  makes  him  quickly  aware  of  it.  But,  in  his  self-love, 
exaggerated  self-esteem . ,  he  overlooks  his  own  shortcomings,  and 
blames  everybody  and  everything  but  himself.  In  the  face  of  ‘injustice’, 
he  becomes  discouraged,  timid,  or  bitter  and  pessimistic.  He  is  unable 
to  discharge  his  duties,  and  becomes  a  disappointment  as  a  father,  hus¬ 
band,  friend,  and,  ultimately,  as  a  human  being  and  citizen.  Bitterness, 
disappointment,  and  painful  semantic  shocks  pile  up  on  all  sides  under 
such  conditions. 

One  of  the  important  characteristics  of  infantilism  of  all  degrees 
takes  the  form  of  exhibitionism,  an  impulse  for  showing  off,  even  by 
crude  display  of  himself,  his  body, .  This  tendency  is  very  common,  and 
leads  to  many  results  of  a  very  undesirable  social  character.  Infantile 
men  and  women  are  primarily  in  love  with  themselves  and  care  only  how 
pretty  they  are.  They  spend  large  portions  of  their  income  and  life  on 
dresses  and  grooming,  which,  of  course,  have  no  social  value.  Such 
types  live  in  an  infantile  world  and  are  socially  useless,  often  parasitic 
on  the  social  body.  Often  those  who  support  them  ruin  their  lives  to 
satisfy  these  infantile  semantic  characteristics. 

UN-SANITY  VERSUS  SANITY 

Infantile  exhibitionism  leads,  also,  very  often  to  a  selection  of  a 
career.  Most  diplomats,  politicians,  professional  military  men,  preachers, 
actors,  boxers,  wrestlers,  athletes,  many  lawyers  and  public  speakers, 
to  list  only  the  more  important  professions,  select  their  professions  be¬ 
cause  of  this  infantile  tendency.  We  should  notice  that  in  this  list  we 
find  the  most  important  professions  which,  as  yet,  have  shaped  our  des¬ 
tinies.  Royalty,  hereditary,  potentates,  and  many  plutocrats  live  under 
such  infantile  fairy-tale  conditions  that  they  necessarily  become  seman¬ 
tically  twisted. 

This  pathological  tendency  probably  accounts  for  our  so-called 
civilization  being  at  an  infantile  asocial  level,  based,  as  it  is,  on  selfish¬ 
ness,  ‘sense*  gratification,  might,  brutal  competition,  acquisitiveness,. 
We  should  notice  that  whole  ‘philosophies*,  such  as  theism,  the  older 
ontology,  teleology,  materialism,  solipsism,  the  Anglo-Saxon  philosophy 
of  selfishness,  and  different  military  and  commercial  philosophies,  clearly 
display  these  infantile  characteristics.  Commercialism,  the  ‘law  of  supply 
and  demand*,  as  a  by-product,  also  follows  from  infantile  world-out¬ 
looks.  Those  who  are  interested  in  problems  of  politics,  economics, 
sociology,  war,  and  peace . ,  should  investigate  their  problems  from  this 
semantic  point  of  view.  As  Burrow  well  said,  the  problems  of  war  are 
more  the  problems  of  psychiatry  than  of  diplomacy.16 

Many  women  at  present  are  still  infantile,  very  little  developed  as 
human  beings ;  they  are  themselves  exhibitionists  and  also  sponsor  exhi¬ 
bitionism.  It  should  not  surprise  us  to  find  that  these  characteristics,  the 
lavishing  of  ‘love’  on  shiny  buttons  and  on  regiments  marching  to  their 
destruction,  have  favoured  wars.  During  the  Russian  revolution  of  1905, 
the  czar’s  soldiers  were  on  the  streets.  But  women  did  not  love  them 
then.  Little  children  spat  on  them  from  behind  corners.  The  result  was 
that  very  soon  the  soldiers  refused  to  carry  on  this  unapproved  service . 
I  know  many  cases  connected  with  the  World  War,  where,  in  spite  of 
unspeakable  horrors,  many  regretted  the  ending  of  the  war  because  of  the 
infantile  approval  shown  by  their  women  for  their  ‘glory  and  the 
infantile  thrill  the  soldiers  themselves  experienced  because  of  the  shiny 
buttons,  martial  music,  and  parades.  In  the  old  system,  militarism,  re¬ 
ligionism,  legalism,  and  commercialism  are  strictly  interconnected  by 
similar  s.r.  Eliminate  any  one  of  them  for  good,  and  the  others  would 
become  obsolete  or  would  disintegrate.  Our  infantile  women,  no  doubt, 
have  sponsored  through  the  ages  these  infantile  social  cancers. 

The  future  war  will,  perhaps,  automatically  bring  these  problems  to 
the  foreground.  It  will  be  an  extremely  devastating  (and  less  pictur¬ 
esque)  aerial  war,  in  which  women  and  children  will  not  be  spared. 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

Then,  perhaps,  some  of  these  infantile  women  will  begin  to  face  m.c 
reality,  and  so  will  help  to  start  a  new  era  of  human  adulthood.  Men 
will  always  depend  in  their  standards  on  the  wishes  of  women. 

In  infantile  nations  we  witness,  also,  a  great  deal  of  exhibitionism, 
a  craze  for  athletics,  clothes,  sumptuousness,  noisy  behaviour,  parades, 
uniforms,  ‘military  academies’,  military  drills , .  ‘Serious’,  yet  infantile, 
business  men’  love  to  parade  on  the  streets  dressed  up  like  little  boys  or 
circus  performers,  give  themselves  some  ‘mysterious’  high-sounding  and 
empty  high  titles,  play  with  swords  which  they  do  not  know  how  to 
handle,.  In  international  affairs,  of  course,  a  nation  of  a  more  pro¬ 
nounced  infantile  semantic  tendency  will  seek  to  keep  away  from  adult 
international  associations.  The  attitude  of  the  United  States  towards 
the  League  of  Nations  and  that  of  Great  Britain  towards  the  project' 
of  a  confederated  Europe  suggest  themselves  at  once  in  this  connection. 

Infantilism  has  another  serious  and  detrimental  connection  with 
race  problems ;  namely,  through  the  sex  glands  or  gonads  in  their  effect 
upon  ‘love’  and  other  activities.  We  should  realize  and  emphasize  that 
the  sex  glands  do  not  function  only  as  ‘sex’  glands  in  the  common  mean¬ 
ing  of  the  word,  but  even  more  as  internal  secretion  glands  with  an  enor¬ 
mous  bearing  on  all  life  and  ‘mental’  processes ;  a  A,  non-el  orientation 
should  never  forget  that. 

The  various  consequences  of  castration  are  well  known,  and  need 
not  be  repeated  here.  But  the  interrelation  of  the  gonads  with  the  thymus 
and  with  thyroid  glands  is  of  interest  to  us.  The  term  gonad  means 
reproductive  gland,  which  produces  the  egg  cells  or  the  sperms.  The 
thymus  is  a  term  applied  to  a  light  pink  gland  situated  in  the  superior 
and  anterior  part  of  the  thorax.  It  extends  up  into  the  roots  of  the  neck 
and  comes  close  to  the  thyroid  gland.  The  thyroid  gland  is  a  term 
applied  to  a  deep  red  glandular  mass  consisting  of  two  lobes  which  lie, 
one  on  each  side  of  the  upper  part  of  the  trachea  and  lower  part  of  the 
larynx.  In  women  and  children  the  thymus  is  relatively  larger  than  in 
the  adult  male. 

In  humans  the  thymus  grows  up  to  the  second  year  of  life  and 
then  rapidly  diminishes,  so  that  only  traces  of  it  are  found  at  puberty. 
In  certain  cases  of  arrested  development  or  of  general  weakness  in  young 
people  the  thymus  has  been  found  to  be  persistent.  Castration  at  an  early 
age  leads  to  the  persistence  of  the  thymus  gland.  Normally,  the  gland 
atrophies  before  the  gonads  come  to  maturity  and  begin  to  function.  In 
some  of  the  lower  mammals  the  gland  does  not  disappear  as  early  as  it 
does  in  humans.  The  thymus  of  the  calf  is  popularly  called  the  ‘chest 
sweetbread’.17 

UN-SANITY  VERSUS  SANITY 

Atrophy  of  the  thyroid  in  the  adult  is  usually  followed  by  blunting 
of  ‘mental'  capacity.  Speech  is  slow,  and  cerebration  delayed.  If  the 
secretions  are  lacking  in  childhood  we  have  what  is  known  as  cretinism. 
Excessive  activity  of  the  thyroid  produces  a  condition  known  as  exo¬ 
phthalmic  goitre.  In  many  females  at  each  menstruation  the  thyroid  is 
perceptibly  enlarged.  Extirpation  of  the  thyroid  before  puberty  brings 
about,  among  others,  signs  of  cretinism,  failure  of  development  of  the 
ovaries . ,  so  that  puberty  is  delayed  partially  or  completely.18 

Even  these  few  particulars  are  sufficient  to  make  us  understand 
that  when  we  begin  to  deal  with  ‘infantilism',  ‘arrested  development ,  or 
‘regression',  or  ‘adulthood',  we  deal  with  fundamental  non-el  semantic 
life-problems  which  are  connected  structurally  with  the  organism-as-a- 
whole.  Bleuler  describes  disturbances  of  affectivity  thus :  ‘The  so-called 
psychopaths  are  really  nearly  all  exclusively  or  mainly  thymopaths.  Fur¬ 
thermore,  since  affectivity  dominates  all  other  functions,  it  assumes  a 
prominent  role  in  psychopathology  generally,  even  in  slight  deviations, 
not  only  on  account  of  its  own  morbid  manifestations,  but  even  more 
because  in  disturbances  in  any  sphere,  it  is  the  affective  mechanisms  that 
first  create  the  manifest  symptoms.  What  we  call  psychogenic  is  mostly 
thymogenic.  The  influence  of  the  affects  on  the  associations  produces 
delusions,  systematic  splittings  of  personality,  and  hysteroid  twilight 
states ;  repressed  pain  is  the  source  of  most  neurotic  symptoms,  while 
displacements  and  irradiations  produce  compulsive  ideas,  obsessive  acts, 
and  sirnilar  mechanisms.' 19 

The  thymus  appears  not  only  as  a  childhood  gland,  but  the  adult 
gonads  begin  to  function  when  the  thymus  ceases  to  function.  When 
the  thymus  persists,  we  often  find  arrested  development  and  psycho- 
pathological  disturbances  connected  with  infantilism.  It  should  be  re¬ 
membered  that  in  the  organism  not  all  ‘cause  and  effect'  sequences  appear 
as  one-to-one,  but  mostly  as  many-to-one  relations.  Therefore,  no  stan¬ 
dard  mechanism  can  be  readily  assigned  to  a  semantic  disturbance.  But 
there  are  enough  structural,  functional,  and  colloidal  mechanisms  known 
to  account  for  most  disturbances,  although  the  precise  working  is  not 
known,  1933,  in  most  cases. 

Psychopathology  and  experience  show  that  the  ‘self-love',  ‘self- 
sufficiency'.  ,  of  infantilism  are  usually  accompanied  by  marked  sex  dis¬ 
turbances,  which,  from  a  racial  point  of  view,  are  just  as  important  as 
the  semantic  disturbances. 

Infantile  types  often  have  ‘charming'  qualities.  The  women  ‘are 
sweet’,  ‘nice' ;  the  men  seem  ‘good  mixers'  and  ‘popular'.  The  opposite 
sex  often  likes  these  characteristics.  In  men  a  feeling  of  sympathy  is 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

aroused  for  the  ‘helpless  little  girl*,  or  else  pedophilic  tendencies  are 
released.  (Pedophilia  is  used  as  the  name  of  a  ‘mental*  disturbance  or 
desire  for  relations  with  children,  often  found  among  senile  dementia 
and  imbeciles.)  In  women,  often  a  feeling  of  motherhood  leads  them 
to  like  infantile  males.  The  charm  of  the  child  lies,  to  a  great  extent,  in 
his  narcissism,  his  self-sufficiency,  and  inaccessibility.  Certain  animals, 
such  as  cats  and  larger  beasts  of  prey,  fascinate  us,  as  they  do  not  con¬ 
cern  themselves  with  us  and  are  inaccessible.  But  this  ‘charm*  has 
another  and  very  tragic  side.  Such  infantile  types  cannot  stand  respon¬ 
sibilities  ;  their  affections  are  shallow  and  unreliable ;  they  know  how  to 
take,  but  do  not  know  how  to  give,.  In  life,  such  connections  lead 
invariably  to  great  unhappiness,  and  often  to  disasters.  The  children 
produced  by  such  infantile  types  are  usually  completely  ruined  by  the 
lack  of  parental  understanding  or  lack  of  care.  Instead  of  liking  such 
types,  men  and  women  of  semantic  maturity  should  either  avoid  them 
or  suggest  psychiatrical  consultation. 

Infantile  types  invariably  show  some  sex  disturbances,  which  also 
add  greatly  to  family  and  social  difficulties.  The  men  are  often  impotent ; 
the  women,  frigid.  Onanistic  and  homosexual  habits  or  tendencies  per¬ 
sist,  although  such  an  adult  infant  is  married  and  has  an  opportunity  for 
normal  life.  A  very  important  A,  non-el  fact  should  be  noticed.  Since 
the  organism  works  as-a-whole,  ‘mental*  components  should  be  consid¬ 
ered  in  connection  with  sex  life.  An  infantile  type  appears  still  in  an 
organ  erotic  stage.  He  wants  only  sense  gratification.  From  a  theory  of 
sanity  point  of  view,  prostitution  appears  as  a  substitute  for  onanism. 
In  adult  infants,  we  very  often  find  either  impotence,  frigidity,  onanism, 
homosexualism,  as  simple  forms  of  arrested  development  or  regression, 
or  more  extreme  forms,  like  many  cases  of  prostitution.  Infantiles  not 
only  indulge  in  promiscuity,  but  build  up  fanciful  rationalizations  and 
represent  their  own  infantile  tendencies  by  ‘theories*  as  ‘normal’  con¬ 
duct.  Many  criminals,  professional  ‘vamps*,  and  professed  ‘heart- 
breakers*  belong  to  this  type.  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  many  ‘mental’ 
illnesses  are  connected  with  different  onanistic  rationalizations.  Often 
excessive  cleanliness,  continual  washing  of  hands . ,  appears.  If  a  schizo¬ 
phrenic  onanist  has  a  melancholic  make-up,  he  rationalizes  his  problems 
that  he  is  ‘rotting  because  of  his  sins*.  If  he  has  a  manic  make-up,  he 
feels  that  he  ‘is  a  saviour  of  mankind’.20 

In  all  such  cases  family  life  is  very  unhappy,  and  the  future  of  the 
children  bred  under  such  conditions  is  usually  gloomy.  Children  need 
healthy  family  and  semantic  conditions  to  develop  into  healthy  indi¬ 
viduals. 

UN-SANITY  VERSUS  SANITY 

The  majority  of  professional  criminals  and  prostitutes  have  an 
infantile  make-up.  No  matter  how  cunning,  they  usually  show  little 
foresight.  They  appear  egotistic,  boastful,  exhibitionistic , .  Gangsters 
love  pomp;  their  funerals  are,  as  a  rule,  very  expensive, — they  want, 
even  after  death,  to  ‘show  off’.  Criminals  seldom  become  good  fathers  or 
mothers.  They  treat  each  other  brutally  and  are  generally  promiscuous. 
Ethically,  they  behave  usually  as  ‘moral  imbeciles1,  not  realizing  fully 
what  they  do.  I  am  not  advocating  the  abolishment  of  the  death  penalty 
on  sentimental  grounds,  but  an  enlightened  society  should  abolish 
any  penalty  on  sick  individuals.  The  ‘mentally’  ill  criminal  type  should 
be  either  taken  care  of  or  else  eliminated  with  some  scientific  benefit, 
but  not  as  a  penalty .  Professional  criminals  can  hardly  ever  become 
‘morally  reformed’  or  useful  members  of  society,  unless  the  application 
of  medical  science  can  alter  their  pathological  s.r .  Without  scientific 
attendance,  they  would  practically  always  remain  socially  dangerous  in¬ 
dividuals.  If  we  want  to  grow  out  of  the  present  infantilism,  experi¬ 
mentation  on  humans  should  be  encouraged.  Modern  experimentation 
on  animals  is  very  humane,  and  suffering  is  eliminated.  Criminals  who 
are  condemned  to  death  should  be  given  to  science  for  experimenting. 
They  would  not  suffer.  Ultimately,  they  would  probably  die,  but  the 
benefits  to  the  rest  of  mankind  through  scientific  discoveries  would  be 
very  important.  Under  present  conditions,  we  ‘take  revenge  on’,  ‘pun¬ 
ish’.  ,  mostly  sick  individuals,  with  seriously  brutalizing  semantic  effects 
on  the  rest  of  us.  There  is  not  the  slightest  doubt  that  experimentation 
confined  solely  to  animals,  no  matter  how  useful,  will  not  solve  many 
problems  of  Smith.  Experimentation  on  humans  is  essential,  and  must 
be  permitted.  Most  of  the  notorious  criminals  who  go  to  the  gallows 
appear  at  least  infantile.  How  instructive  it  would  be  to  make  experi¬ 
ments  on  such  individuals  in  respect  to  their  thymus,.  The  list  of 
experiments  which  science  ought  to  make  is  very  long,  but  material  is 
lacking  for  such  experimentation.  Let  me  repeat  that  modern  science 
can  conduct  its  experiments  without  suffering  to  the  individual,  in  spite 
of  the  fact  that  some  of  these  experiments  would  be  dangerous  and 
might  easily  end  in  the  painless  death  of  the  subject.  The  killing  off  of 
criminals  (sick  individuals)  as  a  ‘revenge’  or  ‘punishment’  or  ‘justice* 
is  really  too  antiquated  and  too  barbaric  and  wasteful  for  an  enlightened 
society.  If  society  wants  to  eliminate  them,  society  can  do  it;  but,  at 
least,  let  us  do  it  without  such  brutalizing  morbidity,  and  with  as  great 
benefit  to  knowledge  as  possible. 

The  elimination  of  infantilism  must  be  considered  more  than  a 
personal  issue  with  individuals;  it  becomes  an  international  semantic 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

problem;  and  such  an  international  body  as  the  League  of  Nations  might 
originate  a  new  era  by  starting  a  fundamental  enquiry  into  this  subject. 

Infantilism  in  its  national  aspects  is  hot  equally  distributed.  Some 
countries  are  more  infantile  than  others.  In  some  countries  even  the 
university  students  show  marked  under-development  for  their  age. 

urrow  reports  that  a  questionnaire  among  students  of  a  prominent 
university  in  the  United  States  of  America  shows  a  surprisingly  large 
percentage  of  onanism  and  homosexualism.21 

We  should  notice  that  not  even  all  scientists  are  free  from  infantil¬ 
ism.  Many  of  them  are  childlike  in  that  they  do  not  really  care  for 
science,  or  civilization,  or  society,  but  are  asocial  and  merely  like  to  play 
with  their  toys.  As  an  excuse  (rationalization  of  tendencies  and  ‘emo¬ 
tions  ),  they  usually  profess  ‘science  for  science’  sake’,  not  realizing 
that  a  complete  adult  must  become  a  socialised  individual  and  cannot 
keep  aloof  from  general  human  interests,  and  that  science  represents  a 
public,  time-binding  activity  and  concern,  not  the  private  pleasure  or 
benefit  of  some  one  person. 

Section  D.  Constructive  suggestions . 

As  we  have  already  seen,  a  young  child  cannot  be  ‘conscious  of 
abstracting’,  but  he  can  acquire  it  gradually  with  experience.  Racial, 
ordered  experience  is  called  science.  Every  one  of  us  has  the  tendencies! 
and,  to  some  extent,  the  capacities,  for  developing  science.  The  main  aim 
of  such  racial,  ordered  experience  is  to  save  effort  and  unnecessary 
experiences,  so  that  a  child  may  start  where  the  father  leaves  off  (time- 
binding).  The  problems  of  consciousness  of  abstracting  should  be 
formulated  by  science  and  made  available  for  semantic  training.  This 
would  fulfill  the  main  requirements  of  science,  to  save  experience  and 
effort,  and  to  predict  the  future,  to  help  in  the  mastery  over  external 
and  internal  ‘nature’,  and  so  to  produce  semantic  and  physical  adjustment. 

If  we  teach  and  train  the  children  in  the  consciousness  of  abstract¬ 
ing,  we  save  them  an  enormous  amount  of  the  effort  which  would  be 
necessary  to  acquire  it  eventually  by  themselves,  and  we  also  eliminate 
a  great  deal  of  unnecessary  sufferings  and  disappointments.  There  is  no 
danger  of  taking  ‘the  joy  out  of  life’;  the  opposite  is  true.  With  the 
consciousness  of  abstracting,  the  joy  of  living  is  considerably  increased. 
We  have  no  more  ‘frights’,  bewilderments,  or  similar  undesirable  seman¬ 
tic  experiences.  We  grow  up  to  full  adulthood;  and  when  the  body  is 
matured  for  the  taking  up  of  life  and  its  responsibilities,  we  accomplish 
that,  and  find  joy  in  it,  as  our  ‘mind’  and  ‘emotions’  have  also  matured. 
Such  a  consciousness  of  abstracting  leads  to  an  integrated,  semantically 

UN-SANITY  VERSUS  SANITY 

iMdanced  and  adapted  adult  personality.  Joys,  pleasures,  and  ‘emotions’ 
Are  not  abolished,  as  this  cannot  be  done,  given  the  structure  of  our 
»ervous  system  and  ‘mental’  health,  but  they  are  ‘sublimated’  to  higher 
Adult  human  semantic  levels.  Life  becomes  fuller,  and  the  individual 
ceases  to  act  as  a  nuisance  and  a  danger  to  himself  and  others. 

In  the  racial  aspects,  if  the  development  of  the  individual  became 
normal,  we  should  grow  beyond  infantile  organ  erotic  fixations  and  el 
languages  and  infantile  systems  in  all  fields.  A  ^-system,  in  accordance 
with  science  1933  ( E ,  N  systems),  would  be  the  human  link  supplying 
scientific  standards  of  evaluation  to  the  affairs  of  Smith. 

With  the  older  infantilism  and  the  practically  general  lack  of  full 
consciousness  of  abstracting,  the  fears,  frights,  painful  ‘emotional’ 
shocks  under  which  mankind  lived  were  bound  to  have  a  marked,  lasting, 
and  sinister  semantic  and  neurological  effect  upon  the  race.  The  race 
has  never  had  an  opportunity  to  develop  in  an  adult  way.  What  will  be 
the  results  for  the  race  of  such  a  transformation  it  is  impossible,  at 
present,  to  foresee ;  but  one  thing  is  certain,  that  the  results  are  bound 
to  be  very  far-reaching. 

To  afford  a  better  appreciation  of  what  the  consciousness  of  ab¬ 
stracting  can  accomplish,  two  more  points  should  be  explained.  Most 
young  fish  do  not  know  their  parents,  and,  from  the  beginning,  their 
life  is  independent  of  parental  influences.  The  human  child  is  helpless, 
and,  for  a  comparatively  long  period,  is  under  parental  influence.  His 
s,r  are  consequently  moulded,  ‘mentally’,  ‘emotionally’,  by  the  doctrines, 
taboos,  structure  of  language . ,  of  the  parents , .  When  we  speak  of  a 
human  child,  we  should  never  consider  him  in  a  fictitious  isolation,  which 
has  nothing  to  do  with  m.o  reality.  Both  parents  and  child  should  be 
made  ‘conscious  of  abstracting’.  Only  under  such  semantic  conditions 
can  the  full  benefit  be  reached.  If  parents  are  conscious  of  abstracting, 
and  realize  that  their  child  represents,  also,  an  abstracting  in  higher 
orders  organism,  which  consciously  or  unconsciously  registers  in  one  form 
or  another  all  happenings,  the  majority  of  the  present  unfortunate  con¬ 
ditions,  ‘complexes’. ,  could  not  possibly  arise. 

An  important,  yet  usually  disregarded,  characteristic  should  be  men¬ 
tioned  here.  It  is  known  that  repeated  ‘emotional  shocks’  in  childhood 
do  harm.  As  the  experiments  of  Watson  show,  the  child  is  usually  born 
without  ‘fears’  and  without  ‘frights’.  Now  ‘fears’  and  ‘frights’  are  not 
simply  additive  (a  linear  function)  but  follow  some  other  more  complex 
function  of  higher  degree.  If  we  denote  the  constitutional  potentialities 
of  the  child  by/,  and  the  given  event  by  x,  the  result  of  the  impact  of 
x  on  the  life  of  the  child  would  be  a  reaction  /(at)  *=*  Fx.  This  Fx  desig- 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

nates  what  his  make-up  would  make  out  of,  or  abstract  from,  *.  When 
another  event  y  happens,  the  reaction  of  the  child  is  no  longer  f(y), 
because  this  new  event  is  usually  taken  by  the  child  in  the  light  of  the 
former  experience  f(x)—F1.  Thus,  the  effect  on  the  child  would  be 
different;  namely,  Fi(y)  —  F2.  If  a  new  event  s  should  happen,  the 
child  would  react  in  his  ‘feelings’. ,  as  F,(g)  -Fs>.  We  see,  then,  that 
hurts  and,  in  general,  s.r  are  not  simply  additive  but  may  follow  some 
other  higher  degree  function.  This  process  appears  general,  perhaps 
necessary,  and  yet  it  involves  many  dangers  which  can  be  completely 
eliminated  only  by  the  acquired  consciousness  of  abstracting, 

.  Prat-f’ce>  when  we  train  a  child  in  the  consciousness  of  abstract¬ 
ing,  we  begin  to  check  this  devastating  semantic  process  of  piling  up 
hurts  on  ‘hurts’.  Let  us  assume  that  before  we  begin  to  train  the  child, 
the  child  has  already  had  painful  experiences.  His  memories  are  still 
fresh,  still  fluid ;  he  has  little  difficulty  in  dwelling  on  them.  With  the 
consciousness  of  abstracting,  and  so  proper  evaluation,  dawning  upon 
him,  further  ‘hurts’  would  ‘hurt’  less  and  less  until  the  hurting  process 
would  stop  altogether.  In  case  some  semantic  harm  had  been  done  to  the 
child  before  he  became  conscious  of  abstracting,  the  memories  would  be 
still  fresh  and  he  could  apply  his  newly  acquired  semantic  evaluational 
immunity  to  the  harmful  ‘hurts’.  New  ‘hurts’  in  practice  are  usually 
related  or  similar  to  the  old  ones ;  they  would  ‘revive’  the  older  hurts 
Accordingly,  he  could  not  only  ‘live  through’  the  older  experiences  but  at 
once  revise  them,  and  after  re-evaluation  eliminate  the  harmful  effects. 

Semantic  emotional  pains’  absorb  nervous  energy  and  prevent  a 
full  development  of  our  capacities.  Directly  the  consciousness  of  ab¬ 
stracting  is  acquired,  the  vast  field  of  ‘unconsciousness’  is  diminished, 
and  the  nervous  energy  which  was  engaged  in  fighting  semantic  phan¬ 
toms  is  released.  We  should  expect  keener  and  sustained  attention, 
strengthened  interest,  and  other  creative  manifestations.  Consciousness 
of  abstracting,  as  it  leads  to  proper  evaluation,  not  only  eliminates  many 
unnecessary  sufferings  and  semantic  disturbances,  but,  by  doing  so, 
actually  releases  stores  of  energy  for  useful  and  creative  purposes. 

The  human  brain  has  vast  areas  which,  at  present,  have  no  definitely 
known  functions.  Perhaps,  with  the  older  lack  of  consciousness  of 
abstracting,  the  flow  of  nervous  energy  was  misdirected  or  absorbed  by 
the  older  ways  of  ‘feeling’  and  ‘thinking’  in  the  lower  centres.  Thus,  the 
available  energy  left  was  not  sufficient  to  utilize  the  higher  centres  to  the 
full  extent. 

Personal  semantic  difficulties  always  seem  very  personal,  and  no 
outsider  can  ever  fully  grasp  the  situation.  One  of  the  benefits  of  the 

UN-SANITY  VERSUS  SANITY 

present  method  of  training  in  sanity  consists  in  the  fact  that  we  do  not 
4weil  upon  the  personal  affairs  of  the  individual,  but  that  we  give, 
instead,  a  general  structural  semantic  method ,  by  the  aid  of  which  every 
gone  can  solve  his  problems  by  himself . 

We  have  established  sharp  differences  between  ‘man  and  animal . 
These  differences  must  be  considered  of  higher  order,  as  the  terms 
•man'  and  ‘animal’  are  applied  to  abstractions  of  higher  orders.  We 
iound  that  ‘man’  through  ignorance  and  inappropriate  s.r  can  copy 
tnimals  in  his  nervous  reactions.  Such  copying  appears  either  as  ar- 
fested  development  or  as  regression.  In  dealing  with  the  terms  ‘con¬ 
scious’  and  ‘unconscious’,  we  discovered  a  general  and  human  content 
for  human  ‘consciousness’ ;  namely,  the  ‘consciousness  of  abstracting . 
The  ascribing  of  a  general  content  abolishes  a  vast  field  of  ‘unconscious¬ 
ness’,  and  so  tends  to  prevent  arrested  development,  infantilism,  regres¬ 
sion  . ,  whenever  this  is  possible.  The  problem  of  making  the  structure 
of  language  similar  at  a  given  date  to  the  structure  of  the  events  it 
symbolizes,  is  introduced.  The  conquests  of  science  become  incorporated 
into  daily  life  by  the  use  of  the  new  language.  The  structure  common 
to  both  science  and  language  appears  to  be  the  intimate  bond  between 
science  and  human  life.  The  masses  gain  simple  structural  and  semantic 
means  for  adjustment. 

A  theory  of  sanity  must  draw  attention  to  problems  involving 
•truth’,  ‘falsehood’,  ‘repressions’, .  Since  the  main  usefulness  of  the 
theory  is  to  help  in  attaining  the  most  efficient  working  of  the  nervous 
system  by  the  elimination  of  disturbing  semantic  factors,  attitudes , 
doctrines . ,  we  must  investigate  the  effect  false  (or  repressed)  state¬ 
ments  may  have  on  the  working  of-  the  nervous  system. 

For  instance,  if  we  see  that  A,  B,  and  C  are  given  in  the  order 
A,B,C,  such  lower  abstractions  start  cycles  of  nervous  currents,  which 
correspond  to  the  seen  order.  If  we  see  the  order  A,B,C,  and  Jay  un¬ 
truthfully  that  the  order  appears  as  C,B,A,  this  statement  results,  also, 
from  some  cyclic  nerve  currents.  Obviously,  we  have  some  conflict  and 
disturbance  in  the  working  of  the  system .  If  we  make  a  mistake,  the 
situation  is  different.  Let  us  say  that  many  observers  definitely  estab¬ 
lish  the  given  order  as  A,B,C.  A  new  observer  sees  by  mistake  the  order 
as  C,B,A.  His  nervous  currents  correspond  to  his  error,  and  when  he 
makes  a  truthful  statement  that  he  has  seen  C,B,A,  this  statement  also  is 
connected  with  the  appropriate  nerve  currents  and  there  is  no  conflict  or 
disturbance  between  the  corresponding  nerve  currents.  The  seen  and 
reported  correspond  to  each  other. 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

It  is  easy  to  conclude  that  mistakes  and  deliberate  falsehoods  have 
a  different  mechanism.  A  mistake,  which  leads  to  a  subjectively  true  but 
objectively  false  statement,  has  no  nervously  disturbing  factors.  Delib¬ 
erate  false  statements  about  facts  involve  semantic  conflicts  and  disturb¬ 
ances  in  the  functioning  of  the  nervous  system.  Similarly,  with 
repressed’  material,  permanently  conflicting  nervous  currents  are  pres¬ 
ent.  The  nervous  energy  is  spent  on  conflicts  and  struggles,  while  all  of 
it  is  needed  for  constructive  purposes. 

In  scientific  work  we  have  similar  problems.  We  gather  different 
abstractions  of  lower  orders  and  then  make  higher  abstractions  about 
them  When  these  two  different  orders  of  abstractions  fit  nicely  struc¬ 
turally,  we  are  satisfied  and  enjoy  the  resultant  harmony.  If  they  conflict 
we  feel  restless.  Often  scientists  spend  years,  or  even  a  lifetime,  formu- 
atmg  higher  order  abstractions  which  do  not  conflict  structurally  with 
the  lower  abstractions.  Then  they  feel  satisfied.  Scientists  know  well 
the  feelings  of  ‘mental’  pain  and  discomfort.  Creative  work  is  carried 
out  because  of  such  discomfort.  Those  who  are  not  creative  do  not 
experience  this,  but  they  also  do  not  produce  important  work. 

The  problems  of  structure,  of  correct  symbolism,  of  evaluation  of 
the  production  of  higher  order  abstractions  which  are  structurally  simi¬ 
lar  to  the  lower  order  abstractions . ,  must  have  a  neurological  signifi¬ 
cance  and  should  be  investigated  from  this  point  of  view.  Scientists 
should  try  to  eliminate  these  unnecessary  conflicts.  Those  who  feel  no 
conflicts  may,  nevertheless,  be  so  involved  in  it  that  they  have  no  free 
nervous  energy  left  to  overcome  it.  Some  such  attempt  is  being  made 
empirically  in  semantic  therapy.  The  psychiatrist  tries  to  discover  and 
eliminate  the  semantic  conflict,  thus  freeing  nervous  energy  which  may 
then  be  spent  on  useful  work. 

In  racial  and  national  levels,  systems  of  politics,  economics. ,  which 
are  based  on  falsehoods  and  repression  of  truth,  must  unbalance  the 
working  of  the  nervous  systems  of  the  people.  Since  they  are  the  result 
of  the  infantile  s.r  of  the  race,  they  propagate  the  arrested  or  regressive 
development  in  the  part  of  the  race  whose  s.r  they  influence.  As  usual 
the  vicious  circle  is  working  here  also.  A  ^-system  throws  an  entirely 
new  light  on  the  significance  of  science  in  human  life.  Radios,  with  their 
attendant  possibilities  of  hearing  jazz  or  a  delusional  ‘revivalist’,  and  the 
invention  of  bigger  and  better  means  for  killing  people,  do  not  repre¬ 
sent  the  mam  practical  importance  of  science.  Generalised  science  means 
scientific  method  and  the  discovery  of  the  structure  of  events,  to  which 
the  structure  of  our  language  must  be  adjusted  if  this  daily  tool  of  every- 
body  is  not  to  play  dangerous  semantic  tricks. 

UN-SANITY  VERSUS  SANITY 

A  ‘science  of  man*  must  follow  science  (1933)  in  its  structure 
and  method.  Only  by  accepting  the  current  ‘scientific  metaphysics’  as 
given  by  science  at  a  given  date  is  sanity  possible.  The  passing  from  an 
infantile  ‘civilization*  to  an  adult  civilization  of  fuller  human  life  and 
happiness  will  come  with  the  development  of  a  scientific  civilization 
which  has  scientific  standards  of  evaluation.  But  the  passing  will  not 
be  so  easy.  As  we  have  already  seen,  science  contains  affective  factors, 
and  many  scientists  still  appear  infantile.  In  order  to  enter  upon  an 
adult  civilization,  we  must  first  have  non-infantile  leaders,  who  must 
be  produced  by  appropriate  training.  This  involves  much  research  work 
along  the  lines  sketched  in  the  present  work,  and  the  establishment  of 
chairs  of  general  semantics  and  psychophysiology  in  universities.  Edu¬ 
cational  methods  must  be  radically  revised,  and  experimentation  encour¬ 
aged  in  the  widest  sense. 

In  1933  we  know  positively  that  in  the  physico-chemical  and  col¬ 
loidal  structures  we  find  conditions  of  practically  endless  possibilities 
corresponding  to  the  very  large  numbers  of  semantic  states  and  re¬ 
actions.  Medical  practice  shows  experimentally  that  a  great  many 
physical  symptoms  involving  some  colloidal  states  are  produced  by  se¬ 
mantic  disturbances ;  because,  once  these  disturbances  are  eliminated,  the 
physical  symptoms  vanish.  The  enormous  numbers  of  observed  and  pos¬ 
sible  different  s.r  could  not  be  accounted  for  by  the  older,  still  prevailing, 
el,  A,  and  two-,  or  three-valued  outlook,  and  the  cumbersome,  extremely 
limited,  and  necessarily  slow  chemical  ‘passing  of  different  substances* 
through  the  nervous  system. 

It  is  true  that  every  student  of  medical  science  is  acquainted  with 
colloidal  behaviour,  but  this  knowledge  has  been  neither  emphasized  nor 
consistently  applied,  because  colloidal  behaviour  represents  physico¬ 
chemical  processes  involving  electromagnetic,  high  pressure . ,  manifesta¬ 
tions  which  cannot  be  dealt  with  at  all  by  el,  A  means.  Thus,  a  physician 
who  is  not  trained  in  A  general  semantics,  cannot  ‘think*  in  colloidal  and 
physico-chemical  terms,  which  in  1933  are  the  only  modern  ways  of 
dealing  with  the  organism-as-a-whole.  This  is  much  more  serious  than 
the  layman  or  even  the  physicians  realize,  and  accounts  for  the  fact  that, 
in  spite  of  different  special  achievements  and  different  discoveries,  the 
practice  of  medicine  is  becoming  more  and  more  unsatisfactory.  It  also 
explains  why  the  average  physician  cannot  grasp  the  importance  of 
psychiatry  for  general  medicine,  and  why  some  psychiatrists  indulge  in 
very  unscientific  and  doubtful  metaphysics.  Thus,  a  general  physician 
who  ‘thinks*  uniquely  in  seriously  antiquated  chemical  and  physiological 
terms,  deals  with  a  non-existent,  fictitiously  isolated  A  «ad  el  ‘body*. 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

and  cannot  grasp  the  necessity  for  a  non-el.  A,  and  a  physico-chemical, 
colloidal  outlook,  which  integrates  ‘body’  and  ‘mind’.  The  majority  of 
psychiatrists  in  their  turn,  and  for  similar  reasons,  often  have  a  highly 
metaphysical  outlook,  repulsive  to  the  general  physician.  They  do  not 
seem  to  realize  that  they  have  at  their  disposal  colloidal  and  physiological 
mechanisms  as  well  as  physico-mathematical  formulations  based  on  four¬ 
dimensional  order,  and  that  they,  therefore,  do  not  need  any  doubtful 
metaphysics.  With  A  modem  semantics,  the  only  possible  scientific  out¬ 
look  (1933)  must  be  colloidal,  physico-chemical  and  physico-mathemati¬ 
cal,  in  which  the  long  sought  for  non-el  solution  of  the  ‘body-mind’  is 
found.  The  difficulties  I  am  dealing  with  are  general  and  depend  on 
fundamental  principles,  the  disregard  of  which  introduces  semantic 
blocking  factors,  at  present  imposed  on  the  medical  students,  and  from 
which  only  a  few  exceptional,  scientifically  inclined  individuals  are 
capable  of  breaking  away.  From  the  present  point  of  view  the  older 
reflexology  is  also  unsatisfactory  and  requires  a  A  reformulation. 

The  present  system,  although  far  from  complete,  already  suggests 
many  most  important  structural  issues  which  should  be  verified  empir- 
ically.  Experiments  alone  can  decide  which  verbal  structures  are  similar 
t°  empirical  structures,  and  experimentation  should  be  encouraged  in  the 
widest  sense.  Some  further  theoretical  work  should  also  be  done.  Clini¬ 
cal  literature  describes  many  new  and  unexpected  facts.  These  facts 
should  be  described  anew  in  the  new  language,  to  see  what  relations  sur¬ 
vive  the  transformation  of  forms  of  representation.  Thus,  if  it  is  found 
that  all  mental  ills  in  all  different  formulations  indicate  improper  evalu¬ 
ation,  we  should  be  justified  in  concluding  that  evaluation  represents  an 
invariant  general  characteristic  of  the  activities  of  the  human  organism- 
as-a-whole,  and,  consequently,  must  be  of  extraordinary  importance  for 
adjustment  and  sanity.  When  we  reach  this  conclusion,  we  should  in¬ 
vestigate  the  mechanism  of  evaluation,  starting  with  the  simplest  issues ; 
namely,  investigating  those  factors  which  make  proper  evaluation  im¬ 
possible.  We  should  discover  that  identification  in  all  cases  makes  proper 
evaluation  impossible,  and  should  then  conclude  that  identification  must 
be  entirely  eliminated  before  we  can  go  one  step  further.  In  fact,  once 
we  have  reached  these  rather  obvious  results,  the  rest  of  the  /^-system 
follows.  But  this  would  not  be  enough ;  we  must  verify  the  rnnM.^mns 
empirically,  and  this  suggests  directly  that  a  definite  series  of  experi- 
merits  should  be  undertaken. 

In  hospitals  for  ‘mentally*  ill  two  equally  large  groups  of  accessible 
patients  exhibiting  similar  clinical  symptoms  should  be  selected,  and 
isolated.  A  physician  who  himself  has  undergone  a  A  training  should 

UN-SANITY  VERSUS  SANITY 

attempt  to  re-train  the  $.r  of  one  group.  The  other  group  should  not  be 
re-trained,  but  treated  in  the  average  passive  and  standard  way,— it 
would  be  the  control  group.  One  physician  should  be  in  charge  of  both 
wards  and  keep  a  detailed  record  of  the  cases  and  treatment.  IUs  to  be  ex¬ 
pected  that  at  the  end  of  the  year,  in  the  ward  trained  in  the  A  standards 
of  evaluation,  a  larger  number  of  unexpected  and  spontaneous  recoveries 
would  happen  than  in  the  untrained  ward.  It  would  be  extremely  in¬ 
structive  to  have  more  than  two  groups,  and  to  attempt  a  different 
group  method,  following  some  other  medical  school  based  on  another 
system-function.  The  passive  attitude  toward  the  patients  should  be 
changed,  as  under  the  older  methods  physicians  in  mental  hospitals  are 
more  glorified  keepers  than  medical  men.  This  is  what  theory  suggests. 
Experiments  alone  can  show  if  these  conclusions  are  correct.  In  special 
individual  cases,  the  theory  has  already  been  confirmed,  but  it  should  be 
tried  as  a  group  method,  and,  if  successful,  only  then  would  ‘mental 
hospitals  become  hospitals,  and  not  mere  places  of  detention. 

A  few  words  concerning  psychotherapy  will  not  be  amiss.  In  a 
time-binding  class  of  life,  we  must  take  into  account  the  historical  four¬ 
dimensional  experiences  of  the  race,  which,  even  in  individual  cases, 
have  sound  neurological  foundations,  as  it  is  known  that  the  nervous 
reactions  are  influenced  by  past  experiences.  History  teaches  us  that 
the  work  of  some  men  has  influenced  great  masses  of  mankind  for 
many  years,  and  that  the  works  of  others  have  had  but  little  general, 
lasting  effect.  The  considerations  of  doctrinal  functions  and  system- 
functions  explain  this  fact  quite  simply.  The  older  an  individual  or  a 
race  grows,  the  more  structural  observations  they  gather,  and  the  more 
they  notice  the  structural  dissimilarity  of  their  forms  of  representation 
with  the  first  order  facts  they  encounter.  As  adjustment  is  generally 
useful,  individuals,  as  well  as  groups,  and  particularly  scientists,  always 
attempt  to  discover  more  structural  data  about  the  world  and  themselves. 
This  process  requires,  among  others,  the  comparison  of  the  structure 
of  the  forms  of  representation  with  the  structure  of  the  world  and  our¬ 
selves.  All  so-called  ‘progress’,  ‘civilization’,  and  science  depend  on  this. 

In  this  particular  field,  achievements  are  of  two  kinds : 

1)  Some  individuals  produce  a  new  system-function,  with  a  new 
structure,  more  similar  to  the  world. ,  (see  Chapter  XI).  In  the  great 
majority  of  cases,  the  new  system- function  is  not  formulated  explicitly , 
but  is  hidden  implicitly  behind  some  explicit  particular  and  individual 
interpretation  or  particular  system  of  the  discoverer.  The  production  of 
a  new  system- function  is  usually  a  most  important  event  and  is  indepen¬ 
dent  of  the  special  value  given  to  the  variables  in  this  function  by  the 

S34  VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

originator.  In  such  cases,  the  given  originator  has  many  followers,  and 
there  is  a  possibility  ef  many  doctrines  or  systems  which  have  one  doc¬ 
trinal  function  or  system-function.  The  content  of  the  doctrines  may 
e  changed,  but  they  all  have  one  structure.  The  importance  of  the  new 
doctrine  or  system  was  not  in  its  particular  interpretation,  or  in  the 
assigning  of  a  particular  value  to  the  variables,  but  in  the  underlying 
doctrinal  function  or  system-function,  which  alone  has  explicit  structure 
and  is  given  by  the  postulates  which  establish  the  function. 

,  .  2)  ,S?me  md*v>dua4s  do  not  produce  explicitly  or  implicitly  new 

doctrinal  function  or  system-functions,  with  new  structure,  but  simply 

assign  a  new  and  individual  value  to  the  variables  in  the  on*  doctrinal 

function  °r  system-function  produced  by  others.  These  workers  very 

often  bitterly  defend  the  private  individual  value  they  have  assigned  to 

a  vanaWe,  and  are  often  entirely  innocent  of  the  serious  debt  they  owe 

to  the  originator  of  the  new  function  which  they  utilize.  But  these 

neVer,mafk  a  mllestone  in  the  Progress  of  mankind  and  are 
usually  soon  forgotten. 

Because  of  the  disregard  of  the  considerations  explained  here  the 
proper  evaluation  of  different  doctrines  and  systems  is  very  difficult 

shing.  It  seems  that  it  is  not  enough  to  produce  a  ‘new  theory’  to  have 
made  an  important  contribution  to  knowledge;  but  it  is  essential  to  pro- 
uce  a  new  doctrinal  function  or  system-function,  because  this  only  has 

doulTn  SIgn‘  an“-  This  P°int  of  view>  Perhaps,  solves  the  tremen¬ 
dous  and,  as  yet,  unsolved  difficulties  we  have  in  reducing  doctrines  to 

duc?Cs/oeSfiWH^  desiraUe’  and  ^  -o  hard  to  pro- 

Mderll  a  the  nCti°n  °r  ^“"-function  which 

“  d"rI'eS,  a  ,theor>:’  must  H  of  all  accidental  values  privately 
ascribed  to.the  variables,  and  formulate  only  the  invariant  relations  which 
are  posited  between  the  variables.  The  finding  of  this  function  is  also 
equivalent  to  finding  the  structure  of  a  given  theory. 

We  may  consider  that  the  psychoanalytical  and  psychotherapeutic 
movement  originated  with  the  work  of  Freud.  The  epLLmakffig^Tue 
of  his  work  consists  in  the  fact  that,  underlying  his  special  theory  there 
can  be  discovered  a  new  system-function.  All  other  schools  simnlv 
ascribe  a  different  value  to  the  variables,  but  do  not  produce,  structurally 

- 

UN-SANITY  VERSUS  SANITY 

First,  we  must  discriminate  permanently  between  the  freudian  par¬ 
ticular  system,  which  represents  a  particular  interpretation  of  the 
freudian  system-function  without  specific  interpretations :  say  ‘complex 
x\  on  semantic  levels,  which  corresponds,  let  us  say,  to  ‘cluster  X*  on 
colloidal  levels.  Second,  we  must  realize  that  the  freudian  system-func¬ 
tion  (not  system)  was  scientific  at  the  date  of  its  production,  but  to  be 
scientific  1933  it  must  be  revised  and  reformulated,  taking  into  considera¬ 
tion  the  newer  physico-mathematical,  physico-chemical,  colloidal,  A  . , 
points  of  view.  The  struggle  for  a  special  ‘complex  A*  or  invention  of 
a  new  ‘complex  B ’  is  useless  because  in  1933  the  colloidal,  structural 
‘cluster  X*  which  underlies  the  semantic  ‘complex  x\  which  alone  can 
legitimately  be  considered  in  a  system-function,  includes  all  of  the  com¬ 
plexes’  in  literary  existence,  and  there  are  no  assignable  limits  to  their 
numbers.  If  we  analyse  in  such  oo-valued  terms  as,  for  instance,  clus¬ 
ter  X\  we  evade  an  enormous  amount  of  unnecessary  and  confusing 
metaphysics,  and  become  scientific  in  the  1933  sense.  From  a  modern, 
A  system-function  point  of  view,  which  means,  when  we  recognize  the 
necessity  of  oo-valued  semantics,  structure . ,  necessitating  the  reduction 
of  a  system  to  a  postulate  base,  we  readily  see  that  the  freudian  system- 
function  (not  system)  is  a  necessary  and  natural  passing  step  between 
the  A  and  A  systems. 

The  postulates  which  are  discovered  in  the  freudian  system- function 
can  be  divided  into  two  main  groups : 

1)  The  observations  of  human  behaviour  and,  in  my  language,  of 
s.r,  have  to  be  formulated  in  a  special  language  to  fit  the  more  struc¬ 
turally  fundamental  parts  of  the  system. 

2)  The  fundamental  and  revolutionary  new  postulates  were,  at  the 
date  of  their  introduction,  quite  scientific.  In  1933  these  postulates  have 
to  be  reformulated  and  made  to  comply  to  modern  physico-mathemati- 
cal,  physico-chemical,  and  general  semantic  A  standards. 

A  satisfactory  analysis  of  the  above  problems  would  require  a  spe¬ 
cial  volume ;  therefore,  I  shall  entirely  disregard  No.  1,  and  from  No.  2 
shall  only  suggest  a  few  most  important  and  new  postulates.  These  can 
be  expressed,  roughly,  as  follows:  (a)  The  postulation  of  an  active 
‘dynamic’  unconscious.  This  postulate  departs  widely  from  the  older 
notions,  although  the  word  ‘dynamic’  is  used  in  this  connection  in  the 
vernacular,  but  not  strictly  scientific,  sense.  The  methods  of  translating 
the  dynamic  into  static  and  vice  versa,  are  disregarded,  owing  to  the 
innocence  of  modern  science  and  the  assumption  by  physicians,  in  gen¬ 
eral,  of  the  permanent  validity  of  A  principles,  (b)  Once  the  active 
unconscious  is  postulated,  some  determinism  follows  according  to  the 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

date.  Freud,  at  his  date,  accepted  the  (in  1933  antiquated)  two-valued 
determinism.  Unfortunately,  the  great  majority  of  physicians  and  the 
medical  education  still  follow  the  antiquated  notions,  (c)  As  the  past  is 
taken  into  account  and  man  is  treated  as  a  process  in  which  the  past 
experiences  play  an  important  role,  we  might  say  that  the  outlook  is 
four-dimensional,  but  this  statement  is  not  entirely  justified,  because  the 
notion  of  a  consistent  four-dimensional  orientation  carries  us  much 
further  than  physicians,  who  neglect  physico-mathematical  aspects,  can 
possibly  produce. 

a  ^‘System,  the  fundamental  postulates  of  the  system-function 
which  underlies  all  psychotherapy  have  been  accepted,  although  they  have 
been  vastly  enlarged  to  comply  with  the  known  facts  and  scientific 
requirements  of  1933.  It  is  important  to  investigate  independently,  sys¬ 
tematically,  and  m  detail,  the  corresponding  system-functions  and  to 
find  to  what  extent  they  mutually  intertranslate,  but  such  an  investigation 
cannot  be  carried  out  successfully  if  we  confuse,  through  the  habits  of 
speech,  the  two  different  terminologies. 

It  seems  that  the  older  psychotherapeutic  schools  have  been  formu¬ 
lated  as  systems,  and  that  the  system-function,  which  underlies  them, 
has  not  been  explicitly  stated,  greatly  hampering  future  creative  work. 

The  special  benefit  of  a  generalized  theory  is  in  its  fundamental 
simplicity  and  entirely  general  linguistic  applicability,  which,  for  pre¬ 
vention,  plays  a  decisive  role.  Accidentally,  we  acquire  psychophysio- 
logical  means  to  influence  the  so  difficult  ‘narcissistic*  cases. 

The  present  author  has  attempted  to  indicate  the  most  important 
structural  and  semantic  factors  which  would  facilitate  the  future  workers 
in  the  impending,  necessary  revision  and  co-ordination. 

CHAPTER  XXXI 

CONCLUDING  REMARKS 

Pitiless  indeed  are  the  processes  of  Time  and  Creative  Thought  and 
Logic:  they  respect  the  convenience  of  none  nor  the  love  of  things  held 
sacred;  agony  attends  their  course.  Yet  their  work  is  the  increasing  glory 
of  a  world, — the  production  of  psychic  light, — the  growth  of  knowledge, 
the  advancement  of  understanding, — the  enlargement  of  human  lite,  tne 
emancipation  of  Man.  (264>  cassius  j.  keys 

Yet  the  barbarians,  who  are  not  divided  by  rival  traditions,  fight  all  the 
more  incessantly  for  food  and  space.  Peoples  cannot  love  one  another  un¬ 
less  they  love  the  same  ideas.  <46i)  G*  santayana 

The  individual  whose  brutish  desire  for  personal  profit  is  unrestrained 
by  the  needs  and  rights  of  his  fellows  reverts  to  barbarism.  If  a  bandit  he 
is  outlawed;  if  a  politician  he  is— usually  reelected,  with  resulting  retro¬ 
gression  of  the  entire  social  organization.  <221)  c.  judson  herrick 

...  a  "League  of  Sound  Logic”  is  the  best  “League  of  Nations”  because 
effective  under  the  subtle  inevitable  laws  of  Logical  Fate— Unified  Uoc- 
trines  Will  Unify  Man.  (280)  A*  K* 

A  little  less  worry  over  the  child  and  a  bit  more  concern  about  the  world 
we  make  for  the  child  to  live  in;  an  inclusion  of  the  child  in  a  life  of  which 
the  aim  is  not  merely  to  earn  money  so  as  to  become  independent  of  the 
job;  more  love  for  whole-hearted,  creative  work  and  progress  that  will 
make  possible  what  we  all  can  share  in;  with  these  conditions,  the  adult 
and  the  young  both  will  have  a  better  chance.  adolf  meyer 

The  present  remarks  were  originally  written  for  the  last  chapter  of 
the  whole  volume,  but  a  final  critical  survey  of  the  material  suggested 
the  newly  ordered  sequence  of  the  present  three  main  divisions.  Book  I 
gives  a  general  preparatory  introduction  which  will  help  the  reader  to 
differentiate  between  the  A  and  A  systems,  and  to  evaluate  properly  the 
differences.  Book  II  formulates  the  main  A  principles  which  constitute 
an  organic  interrelated  whole,  to  which  the  present  concluding  remarks 
belong.  Book  III  gives  some  additional  structural  data  about  mathe¬ 
matics  and  physics  which  usually  are  not  treated  from  the  present  point 
of  view,  but  which  furnish  the  essential  structural  material  needed. 

The  writing  of  Book  I,  and  particularly  Book  III,  was  very 
laborious  and  difficult.  I  often  had  the  temptation  to  omit  Book  III 
entirely,  and  to  refer  the  reader  to  other  authors.  After  months  of 
search,  however,  I  found,  to  my  sorrow,  that,  in  spite  of  many  excellent 
volumes,  there  were  no  books  written  from  a  structural  and  semantic 

♦What  Can  the  Psychiatrist  Contribute  to  Character  Education?  Rel.  Educ.  May,  1930. 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

point  of  view.  To  refer  the  reader  to  other  writers  would  necessitate 
the  reading  of  a  fair-sized  library,  because  often  from  a  whole  book  he 
would  need  only  a  few  scattered  paragraphs.  This  would  involve  a  very 
expensive  and  laborious  process  of  hunting,  which  very  few  would 
undertake ;  besides,  it  would  not  give  a  connected  structural  or  semantic 
picture.  I  tried  to  induce  some  specialists  to  write  a  book  on  the  struc¬ 
ture  and  semantic  aspects  of  mathematics,  and  another  similar  book  on 
physics.  I  was  told  that  it  would  be  very  laborious  and  difficult,  if  at 
all  possible,  and  so  I  had  no  other  choice  than  to  try  to  write  it  myself. 

I  earnestly  suggest  the  reading  of  Book  III,  so  that  the  reader  may, 
at  least,  become  acquainted  with  the  existence  of  such  problems.  I  hope 
that  even  specialists  may  find  some  suggestions  helpful,  because  the 
structural  and  semantic  aspects  of  science  and  mathematics  are  usually 
neglected,  the  neglect  of  which  introduces  needless  difficulties  in  the 
teaching.  The  elimination  of  identification  helps  to  solve  many  scientific 
puzzles,  besides  eliminating  semantic  blockages  and  so  helping  creative 
activities. 

The  world  affairs  have  seemingly  come  to  an  impasse  and  probably, 
without  the  help  of  scientists,  mathematicians,  and  psychiatrists  included, 
we  shall  not  be  able  to  solve  our  urgent  problems  soon  enough  to  prevent 
a  complete  collapse.  Now  those  who  are  professionally  engaged  in 
human  affairs,  economists,  sociologists,  politicians,  bankers,  priests  of 
every  kind,  teachers.,  ‘mental*  hygiene  workers,  and  psychiatrists  in¬ 
cluded,  do  not  even  suspect  that  material  and  methods  of  great  general 
semantic  value  can  be  found  in  mathematics  and  the  exact  sciences.  The 
drawing  of  their  attention  to  this  fact,  no  matter  how  clumsily  done  at 
first,  will  stimulate  further  researches,  produce  better  formulations  and 
understanding,  and  ultimately  create  conditions  where  sanity  will  be 
possible. 

Some  of  those  who  have  seen  my  manuscript  or  with  whom  I  have 
discussed  the  problems  seemed  to  dislike  the  term  ‘copying  animals  in 
our  nervous  reactions*  and  also  the  explicit  introduction  of  ‘Fido*.  As 
identification  is  found  among  animals,  primitives,  infants,  and  ‘mentally’ 
ill,  it  could  be  said  that  the  introduction  of  ‘Fido*  was  not  necessary.  I 
have  given  serious  consideration  to  the  eventual  desirability  of  completely 
eliminating  ‘Fido’  from  my  work  and  substituting  the  term  ‘primitive*. ; 
but,  after  mature  deliberation,  I  decided  that  it  will  be  helpful  to  accentu¬ 
ate  the  distinction  between  the  reactions  of  animal  and  man.  The  main 
justifications  of  this  are  as  follows : 

1 )  My  whole  work  and  the  formulation  of  a  ^-system  started 
with  an  attempt  to  produce  a  science  of  man,  this  necessitating  a  mod- 

CONCLUDING  REMARKS 

ern,  scientific  functional,  non-elementalistic,  sharp  definition  of  man. 
Such  a  definition  was  given  in  my  Manhood  of  Humanity  to  the  effect 
that  man  differs  from  the  animals  in  the  capacity  of  each  human  gen¬ 
eration  to  begin  where  the  former  generation  left  off.  This  capacity  I 
Called  the  time-binding  function.  This  definition  cannot  be  denied,  and 
It  fulfills  the  modern  requirements. 

2)  The  present  enquiry  originated  in  the  investigation  of  the 
mechanism  of  time-binding,  and  is  a  further  analysis  of  the  sharp  dif¬ 
ferences  between  the  reactions  of  animals  and  humans,  which  became  the 
psychophysiological  foundation  of  a  ^-system  and  a  theory  of  sanity. 

3)  The  further  the  investigation  advanced,  it  became  increasingly 
evident  that  the  issues  involved  are  extremely  complex,  and  that  in  this 
field,  from  a  structural  and  non-el  point  of  view,  practically  nothing  has 
been  done.  In  general,  all  existing  'logics*  and  'psychologies*  are  struc¬ 
turally  misleading,  since  they  are  still  thoroughly  el  and  pr e-A  or  A ; 
these  conditions  necessitate  the  elimination  of  them,  as  well  as  other 
dependent  disciplines,  to  prevent  their  being  accepted  as  structurally 
fundamental.  It  was  then  desirable,  in  my  pioneering  enterprise,  to  keep 
a  simpler  and  more  obvious  contrast  between  ‘Fido’,  whom  we  nearly  all 
know  quite  well  and  usually  like,  and  ‘Smith*,  whom  no  one  seems  to 
know  properly.  This  method  has  proved  very  useful  to  the  writer  and 
I  am  convinced  that  many  readers  will  find  it  equally  helpful.  I  frankly 
admit  that  if  I  had  not  followed  this  simplified  method,  I  could  not  have 
produced  the  A- system  and  discovered  in  this  psycho-logical  maze  the 
blockages  introduced  into  our  s.r  by  identification,  elementalism,  lack  of 
consciousness  of  abstracting,  improper  evaluation.,  and,  in  general, 
infantilism. 

For  these  three  main  reasons  it  seemed  advisable  to  retain  ‘Fido* 
as  a  most  useful  factor  in  my  analysis,  with  ail  due  apologies  to  ‘Fido*. 

I  also  admit  that  I  did  not  realize  the  difficulties  of  the  task  and 
the  magnitude  of  the  undertaking.  The  last  revision  alone  of  the  manu¬ 
script  required  more  than  a  year.  I  am  all  too  well  aware  to  what  extent 
the  presentation  falls  short  of  my  expectations  and  how  much  better  it 
could  have  been  written  by  some  one  more  gifted,  but  the  following 
rather  unexpected  developments  sustained  my  courage. 

1)  Curiously  enough,  the  principles  involved  are  often  childishly 
simple,  often  ‘generally  known*,  to  the  point  that  on  several  occasions 
some  older  scientists  felt  ‘offended*  that  such  ‘obvious*  principles  should 
be  so  emphasized.  Yet  my  experience,  without  any  exception,  was  that 
no  matter  how  much  these  simple  principles  were  approved  of  verbally, 
in  no  case  were  they  fully  applied  in  practice ,  Slowly  I  understood  that 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

we  cannot  train  mankind  in  identification  by  all  available  means,  which 
must  prevent  adjustment,  and  then  live  by  non-identification.  Thus, 
when  non-identity  is  pointed  out,  even  a  moron  will  ‘^gree’,  or  wonder 
at  the  silliness  of  an  author  who  fusses  about  it;  yet,  because  all  of  us 
were  trained  in  a  linguistic  and  semantic  system  based  on  identity,  that 
infantile  identification  will  unconsciously  play  havoc  with  all  our  s.r  the 
rest  of  our  lives,  unless  this  semantic  blockage  is  counteracted.  Natur¬ 
ally,  the  ‘simpler’  a  principle  appears,  to  which  we  may  pay  lip  service 
but  which  we  never  fully  apply,  the  more  I  became  convinced  that  th<* 
discovery  of  new  methods  for  the  application  of  this  simple  yet  neglected 
principle  must  be  considered  most  important.  Any  reader  may  verify 
by  himself  to  what  extent  identification  introduces  difficulties  in  his  own 
life.  In  fact,  the  main  difficulties  we  have  can  always  be  traced  to  some 
identification  somewhere. 

2)  The  experimental  data  of  Doctor  Philip  S.  Graven  with  the 
‘mentally’  ill  and  those  cases  of  semantic  disturbances  which,  in  the 
orthodox  way,  were  not  supposed  to  be  un-sane,  showed  that  a  change 
from  the  A  standards  of  evaluations  involving  identification  to  the  A 
standards  without  identification  often  either  brought  about  a  complete 
semantic  reconstruction  of  an  individual,  or  semantic,  expedient,  and 
lasting  ‘cures’.  This  fact  again  impressed  me  with  the  genuine  work¬ 
ability  and  so  human  importance  of  a  ^-system.  If  the  old  ‘impossible 
to  change’,  ‘human  nature’  can  be  ‘changed’  by  the  new  simple  psycho- 
physiological  methods,  this  again  suggests  that  this  new  system,  no  mat- 
ter  how  imperfect,  may  be  useful. 

3)  I  was  also  very  much  impressed  by  the  far-reaching  power  of 
the  A  methods.  As  a  rule,  only  mathematicians  and  epistemologists  fully 
appreciate  what  the  power  of  a  method  means.  Thus,  the  differential 
methods  were  invented,  and  later  we  found  that  these  methods  were 
structurally  applicable  to  all  processes.  A  tensor  calculus  was  invented, 
and  we  found  that  it  gave  us  absolute,  invariant  formulations  applicable 
to  all  physics.  Many  other  methodological  innovations  could  be  cited 
and  always  the  generality  of  the  applications  gave  the  value  to  those 
new  formulations.  The  present  A- system  was  formulated  in  a  way  inde¬ 
pendent  of  other  diciplines,  as  it  was  the  direct  result  of  structural 
semantic  researches  free  from  identification.  This  led  to  the  formulation 
of  fundamental  general  principles  which  underlie  all  human  ‘knowledge’, 
such  as  non-identity,  requiring  the  recognition  of  structure  as  the  only 
possible  content  of  ‘knowledge’  and  so  leading  to  the  formulation  of 
‘similarity  of  structure’;  non-elementalism  as  a  general  principle;  the 
general  principle  of  uncertainty;  oo-valued  general  semantics..  It  is 

CONCLUDING  REMARKS 

naturally  very  reassuring  to  find  that  the  newest  most  important  achieve¬ 
ments  of  science  have  followed  these  principles  unconsciously  and  have 
applied  them  before  they  were  explicitly  formulated. 

From  another  point  of  view,  a  ^-system  which  could  claim  to  be 
'modern',  should  formulate  general  principles  that  all  scientists  in  every 
field  could  follow.  This  was  practically  the  case  with  the  -system  until 
Francis  Bacon.  It  is  also  the  case  with  the  present  system  except  that 
different  scientists  have  applied  these  new  principles  without  having 
produced  a  general  formulation .  The  fact  that  these  principles  had  no 
general  formulation  was  a  retarding  factor  even  in  science  and  made 
the  application  of  science  to  human  affairs  impossible.  In  the  following 
examples,  the  different  A  aspects  overlap,  and  I  am  emphasizing  only 
the  most  marked  features.  Thus  Einstein-Minkowski's  space-time, 
Einstein-Mayer’s  new  unified  field  theory,  the  newer  quantum  mechan¬ 
ics,  the  new  physics  of  high  pressure,  piezochemistry . ,  the  tropism 
theory  of  the  late  Jacques  Loeb,  the  physiological  gradients  of  C.  M. 
Child . ,  . ,  exhibit  clearly  the  application  of  non-elementalism.  Heisen¬ 
berg's  restricted  principle  of  uncertainty  is  also  the  result  of  the  appli¬ 
cation  of  non-elementalism,  based  on  the  observation  that  the  ‘observer 
and  the  ‘observed'  cannot  be  sharply  divided.  This  principle  becomes  a 
particular  instance  of  the  general  A  principle  of  uncertainty,  which 
again  is  based  on  the  observation  that  we  deal  actually  with  absolute 
individuals  and  speak  in  more  or  less  general  terms,  with  the  result  that 
all  statements  are  only  probable  in  different  degrees. 

The  absolute  individuality  of  four-dimensional  events,  objects,  situ¬ 
ations,  s.r. ,  necessitates  an  indefinitely  flexible  evaluation  requiring 
oo-valued  A  semantics.  Outside  of  daily  life,  the  best  examples  are 
given  in  science  by  the  newer  developments  in  vitamins,  the  effects  of 
radiant  energy  on  heredity,  but  particularly  by  the  bewildering  possibil¬ 
ities  disclosed  by  the  developments  of  physics,  physics  of  high  pressure, 
piezochemistry,  polymorphism,  colloidal  behaviour,  and  the  application 
of  colloidal  knowledge  to  psychiatry.  The  Polish  school  of  mathema¬ 
ticians  has  produced  the  extension  of  the  traditional  two-valued  A 
‘logic’  to  three-,  and  many- valued  ‘logic';  Chwistek  has  based  a  new 
foundation  of  mathematics  and  a  new  theory  of  aggregates  on  his 
semantic  methods ;  but  even  these  writers  disregarded  the  general  prob¬ 
lems  of  non-elementalism,  non-identity,  and  the  necessity  for  a  full- 
fledged  /^-system  before  their  formulations  can  become  free  from 
paradoxes,  valid,  and  applied  to  life. 

All  these  issues  combined  are  of  particular  interest  to  mankind  in 
general,  and  to  the  medical  profession  in  particular,  because,  obviously, 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

if  mankind  is  to  pass  from  an  infantile  stage  of  its  development  into  an 
era  of  general  sanity,  this  would  require  a  serious  collaboration  of  medi¬ 
cal  science.  Unfortunately,  medical  science  is  one  of  the  most  laborious 
and  difficult  disciplines,  and,  of  late,  in  spite  of  some  specific  advances, 
it  is  rapidly  ceasing  to  be  in  general  a  modern  science.  Any  one  who 
attends  medical  congresses,  scientific  meetings,  or  follows  up  medical 
literature  often  wonders  whether  he  listens  to,  or  reads,  scientific  argu¬ 
ments,  or  sixteenth  century  religious  disputes.  Dr.  F.  G.  Crookshank, 
in  his  chapter  on  The  Importance  of  a  Theory  of  Signs  and  a  Critique 
of  Language  in  the  Study  of  Medicine  in  Ogden  and  Richard's  The 
Meaning  of  Meaning ,  gives  an  excellent  picture  of  the  present  sad  state 
of  affairs ;  but  a  A  analysis  discovers  deeper  foundations  underlying  the 
difficulties  in  medicine,  which  would  have  to  be  remedied  by  the  revision 
of  medical  education.  In  this  connection,  A  issues  become  very  impor¬ 
tant.  Organisms  in  general,  and  humans  in  particular,  represent  col¬ 
loidal  processes  which  involve  tremendous  pressure  because  of  colloidal 
attraction  for  water.  Dr.  Neda  Marinesco1  has  recently  suggested  that 
Ice  VI  constitutes  an  important  factor  in  the  human  organism.  Ice  VI 
represents  a  new  form  of  ice  discovered  by  P.  W.  Bridgman2  who  found 
that  water  in  bulk  and  at  the  temperature  of  the  body  may  be  found  to 
crystallize  by  the  application  of  high  pressure.  It  is  the  notion  of  Dr. 
Marinesco  that  the  forces  of  adsorption  may  be  as  high  as  the  pressure 
used  by  Bridgman,  so  that  in  thin  surface  films  the  arrangement  of  water 
molecules  may  be  much  like  that  found  in  Ice  VI.  It  may  interest  the 
reader  to  know  that,  among  others,  Professor  Bridgman  discovered  that 
aceton  becomes  solidified  at  room  temperature,  albumen  coagulates., 
under  high  pressure. 

Although  physicians  in  their  university  days  are  well  acquainted 
with  colloidal  chemistry,  yet  somehow,  in  practice,  they  have  great 
difficulties  in  ‘thinking'  in  colloidal  terms.  With  the  newest  discoveries 
of  physics  of  high  pressure  and  piezochemistry,  with  their  bewildering 
variety  of  physical  manifestations,  which,  under  different  pressure, 
change  with  every  individual  material,  a  modern  physician  will  have  to 
‘think'  not  only  in  terms  of  colloids,  but  of  colloids  in  combination  with 
the  data  of  high-pressure  physics  and  piezochemistry.  Now  such  ‘think¬ 
ing'  is  humanly  impossible  under  the  traditional  two-,  or  three-valued  A 
disciplines  and  becomes  only  possible  with  oo -valued  A  general  seman¬ 
tics,  One  of  the  immediate  results  of  the  use  of  A  disciplines  is  the 
elimination  of  the  elementalism  of  ‘body'  and  ‘mind’,  ‘intellect'  and  ‘emo¬ 
tions'.  ,  and  the  introduction  of  the  non-el  point  of  view  as  given  in  the 
present  work.  This  requires  every  physician  to  be  acquainted  with 

CONCLUDING  REMARKS 

psychiatry,  which  acquaintance  would  eliminate  many  harmful  cults.  It 
should  be  fully  realized  that  the  older  chemistry  which  dealt  with  differ¬ 
ent  'substances',  having  different  ‘properties',  could  have  been  treated 
by  A  subject-predicate  and  two-,  or  three-valued  means.  But  not  so  in 
1933 ;  the  older  chemistry  is  gone,  and  today  we  deal  only  with  a  special 
branch  of  physics  based  on  structure ;  the  newer  physics  of  high  pressure 
show  clearly  that  many  of  the  older  characteristics  of  'substances'  are 
only  accidental  functions  of  pressure,  temperature,  and  what  not,  which 
vary  in  a  bewildering  way,  requiring  new  semantic  principles,  new 
epistemologies . ;  in  short,  a  new  non-el  and  oo-valued  A -system.  In 
other  words,  whoever  retains  the  A  s.r  is  entirely  unable  to  'think'  scien¬ 
tifically  in  the  modern  sense.  If  we  want  to  have  a  science  of  man  or  a 
1933  science  of  medicine . ,  the  first  step  is  to  revise  thoroughly  the 
A -system. 

,  In  fact,  many  more  interconnections  and  interrelations  could  be 
shown  which  would  make  still  more  obvious  how  a  ^-system  results 
from,  and  leads  to,  modem  scientific  results,  which  can  be  extended  and 
applied  to  all  human  concerns  only  after  a  general  formulation  as  a 
system . 

4)  If  the  difference  between  the  animal  and  man  consists  in  the 
capacity  of  the  latter  to  start  where  the  former  generation  left  off,  obvi¬ 
ously  humans,  to  be  humans,  should  exercise  this  capacity  to  the  fullest 
extent.  If  we  fail  to  do  this,  we  again  'copy  animals  in  our  nervous 
reactions',  which  copying  is  the  very  thing  we  should  struggle  against. 
This  ‘where  the  former  generation  left  off'  would  not  only  include  all 
science,  but  also  epistemology  and  the  'wisdom*  which  through  painful 
experiences  each  former  generation  has  accumulated . ,  which,  in  prin¬ 
ciple ,  should  be  given  to  every  child.  Under  the  A  conditions  of  our 
present  education . ,  systems,  and  evaluational  systems,  this  is  completely 
impossible  and  may  sound  visionary.  Thus,  to  acquire  scientific  knowl¬ 
edge  in  all  fields,  one  would  have  to  spend  a  lifetime  devoted  to  science, 
entirely  free  from  financial  worries . ,  and  even  then  he  would  only  be 
able  to  acquire  a  small  part  of  it.  Before  any  older  epistemological  in¬ 
sight  could  be  imparted,  one  should  not  only  have  special  gifts,  inter¬ 
ests.,  but  should  also  have  an  enormous  amount  of  knowledge  before 
such  an  education  could  be  attempted.  Similarly  with  'wisdom*.  The 
older  and  the  younger  generations,  by  colloidal  necessity,  cannot  fully 
understand  each  other  and,  to  a  large  extent,  have  mutual  mistrust, 
which,  as  yet,  is  an  entirely  normal  A  s.r , . 

In  a  non-elt  ^-system  this  whole  situation  becomes  radically 
changed.  The  impossible  is  made  possible;  I  may  say  more,  it  is  made 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

simple  and  easy,  and  becomes  a  necessary  and  unavoidable  factor  in  the 
life  of  any  child.  A  non-el,  ^-system  is  based  on  the  complete  elimination 
of  identification,  from  which  it  directly  follows  that  the  only  link  between 
the  un-speakable  objective  levels  and  the  verbal  levels  is  found  in  struc- 
ture-  Structure,  then,  becomes  the  only  possible  content  of  all  knowl¬ 
edge  . ,  and  all  scientific  technicalities,  admittedly  laborious  and  difficult, 
become  only  a  necessary  tool  in  the  search  for  structure,  with  little,  if 
any,  intrinsic  value,  and  are  unnecessary  for  ‘knowledge’  as  soon  as  in 
a  given  case  the  structure  is  discovered.  This  structure  is  always  simple 
and  can  be  given  to  children. 

It  is  meaningless  and  utterly  useless  to  argue  whether  or  not  the 
world  is  simple’;  as  the  world  is  not  our  understanding  of  it;  but  as 
our  understanding’  happens  to  be  structural,  our  nervous  system, 
through  its  abstracting  capacities,  makes  it  simple,  once  its  structural 
content  is  discovered.  As  the  search  for  structure  involves  similarity  of 
linguistic  and  empirical  structures,  we  readily  understand  that  any  Ian¬ 
s'13^  which  we  cannot  evade  teaching  our  children,  has  structure  and 
involves  structural  assumptions.  In  the  structural  revision  of  our  lan¬ 
guage  and  the  teaching  of  a  few  structurally  appropriate  terms,  entirely 
abandoning  a  few  structurally  misleading  ones,  we  directly  impart  all 
up-to-a-date  fundamental  knowlege  to  any  child.  We  train  him  auto¬ 
matically  in  the  appropriate  linguistic  structure,  which  builds  up  in  him 
appropriate  s.r.  Mankind  at  large  does  not  need  scientific  technicalities 
to  absorb  and  thereby  obtain  semantic  benefits  from  the  structural  results 
of  science.  These  results  are  the  only  ones  which  really  matter,  and 
which  can  be  given  in  an  extremely  simple  way,  automatically  abolishing 
the  primitive  metaphysics,  structural  assumptions,  and  infantile  s.r. 

By  abolishing  the  structurally  false  to  facts  one-valued  identification, 
we  automatically  train  in  oo-valued  differentiation  leading  toward  con¬ 
sciousness  of  abstracting,  which  results  in  all  the  wisdom  that  epistem¬ 
ology  and  private  experience  can  give  us,  being  structurally  a  total  result 
of  racial  experience.  As  structure  is  based  on  relations  and  order, 
structural  training,  when  done  consciously,  becomes  a  physiological 
method,  working  simply  and  automatically. 

In  the  ^-system  these  semantic  mechanisms  were  not  consciously 
recognized,  although  they  worked  fatalistically  with  us.  We  were  impart¬ 
ing  primitive  psychophysiological  reactions  to  our  children,  who  had  to 
spend  a  lifetime  to  learn  by  very  painful  experience  that  something  was 
wrong  somewhere.  Now  we  understand  that  the  origin  of  the  difficulty 
was  in  the  lack  of  scientific  investigations  which  would  have  analysed, 
non-elementalistically,  the  structural  aspects  of  language  and  cnrmected 

CONCLUDING  REMARKS 

/.r.  All  of  which,  let  me  repeat,  works  automatically,  as  experience  and 
experiments  abundantly  show.  Thus,  an  analysis  of  the  mechanism  of 
time-binding  depends  on  the  discovery  of  a  sharp  non-el  difference  be¬ 
tween  ‘Fido’  and  ‘Smith',  and  the  formulation  of  means  to  make  the 
time-binding  characteristics  of  man  fully  effective  with  all  except  heavily 
pathological  individuals. 

By  abolishing  identification  we  generalize  differentiation  and  so 
impart  consciousness  of  abstracting,  an  indispensable  factor  in  proper 
evaluation,  and  an  absolute  condition  for  adaptive  and  so  survival  be¬ 
haviour.  Thus  a  ^-system  becomes  a  general  theory  of  sanity  and  the 
general  theory  of  time-binding,  from  which  general  semantics  follow. 

5)  One  of  the  most  important  features  of  the  present  ^-system 
consists  of  its  non-el  structural  character.  We  may  analyse  problems  in 
a  scientific  ‘intellectual’  way ;  yet  this  analysis,  because  non-el ,  structural, 
and  semantic,  appeals  to,  and  affects,  our  ‘feelings',  ‘intuitions'. ,  involving 
psychophysiological  factors  based  on  order.  Thus,  the  structurally  neces¬ 
sary  translations  of  one  level  of  abstractions  into  the  others  and  vice 
versa,  is  enormously  facilitated,  while  in  el  systems  these  translations 
were  hampered  by  unavoidable  semantic  blockages.  Accordingly,  ‘intel¬ 
lect’,  ‘emotions',  ‘body’,  and  ‘mind*. ,  are  not  divided.  The  organism  is 
affected  as-a-whole,  because  structurally  correct  non-el  means  are  em¬ 
ployed,  making  many  benefits  of  the  system  accessible  to  children, 
morons,  and,  perhaps,  even  superior  idiots.  The  last  results  are  to  be 
foreseen,  although  they  have  not,  as  yet,  been  verified  empirically. 

6)  But  the  most  workable  feature  of  the  system  consists  in  the  fact 
that,  being  based  on  such  fundamental  principles  as  non-identification, 
non-elementalism . ,  it  has  an  organic  unity.  The  main  issues  are  all 
strictly  interrelated  and  apply  to  ‘body',  ‘mind’,  ‘emotions'. ,  in  a  non-el 
way,  all  working  automatically,  no  matter  from  what  angle  we  approach 
the  training. 

Thus,  if  we  start  with  order,  we  are  led  to  relations  and  structure; 
these  establish  differentiation  and  stratification,  eliminating  identification 
and  ‘allness’,  which  result  in  consciousness  of  abstracting,  necessitating 
oo-valued  general  semantics,  indispensable  to  proper  evaluation  and  ad¬ 
justment.  If  we  start  with  non-identity,  we  are  led  to  order,  relations, 
structure,  differentiation,  stratification,  non-allness,  consciousness  of 
abstracting,  oo-valued  semantics,  proper  evaluation,  and  adjustment.  If 
we  start  with  differentiation  or  stratification,  we  are  led  to  order,  rela¬ 
tions,  structure,  non-identification,  non-allness,  consciousness  of  abstract¬ 
ing,  and  proper  evaluation. 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

It  should  be  noticed  that  consciousness  of  abstracting  and  proper 
evaluation  are  complex  end-results  which  cannot  be  imparted  directly, 
but  which  become  automatically  lasting  semantic  states  only  after  we 
have  eliminated  one-valued  identification,  or  introduced  order,  oo-valued 
differentiation,  stratification , .  The  non-el  benefit  of  the  system  consists 
in  engaging  the  organism-as-a- whole.  Thus,  four-dimensional  order 
plays  the  role  of  a  potent  physiological  factor  in  the  process  and  becomes 
the  foundation  for  psychophysiology.  Non-identity  is  a  term  applied  on 
the  verbal  levels,  which,  on  visual  and  intuitive  levels,  involves  differen¬ 
tiation,  ordering,  and  stratification.  This  system  thus  involves  all  neces¬ 
sary  nerve  centres  and  operates  in  a  non-el  way,  as  reactions  on  one  level 
are  easily  and  organically  translated  into  the  terms  of  other  levels, 
making  psychophysiology  possible. 

7)  Finally,  it  is  significant  that  many  publications  in  the  last  ten 
years  have  shown  efforts  in  a  similar  direction,  which  have  received 
scientific  and  public  approval.  As  I  am  more  interested  in  creative  work, 
rather  than  critical,  I  shall  not  analyse  these  strivings  except  to  make 
one  general  remark  that,  because  they  are  not  based  on  order,  structure, 
non-el  s.rt  the  complete  elimination  of  identification . ,  they  are  valuable 
and  useful  to  the  selected  few,  but  under  no  conditions  could  a  psycho¬ 
physiology  or  a  theory  of  sanity  be  based  on  these  works  which  could 
be  applicable  in  general  elementary  linguistic  and  semantic  education. 
If  I  am  not  mistaken,  in  this  respect  the  present  work  differs  radically 
from  the  others  with  which  I  am  acquainted. 

From  a  non-el  point  of  view  we  can  never  disregard  the  effect  the 
‘body’  or  ‘emotions'  have  on  the  ‘mind',  and  vice  versa  the  effect  that  the 
‘mind'  has  on  the  ‘emotions'  and  the  ‘body', .  Identification  and  all  its 
consequences  involve  seriously  disturbing  semantic  factors  with  corre¬ 
sponding  colloidal  disturbances,  and  it  seems  that,  as  yet,  the  human 
race,  outside  of  very  exceptional  cases,  has  never  been  free  from  these 
disturbances.  What  effect  the  elimination  of  such  disturbances  will  have 
on  the  human  race  it  is  impossible  to  foretell  at  this  stage,  beyond  ex¬ 
pressing  the  expectation  that  the  consequences  must  be  highly  beneficial. 

We  have  already  become  acquainted  with  the  terms  ‘conditional'  and 
‘unconditional'  reactions.  In  the  example  of  the  patient  and  the  paper 
roses,  we  have  seen  that  the  pathological  symptoms  were  ‘unconditional'. 
They  were  compulsory,  as  in  the  case  of  the  dogs  mentioned  in  Part  VI. 
In  a  healthy  individual  they  would  have  been  fully  conditional  reactions, 
under  semantic  control.  The  above  terminology  may  be  extended  so  as 
to  apply  to  all  ‘mental’  ills,  for  here  that  which  in  the  ‘normal’  person 
is  a  fully  conditional  reaction  becomes  unconditional,  or  a  reaction  of 

CONCLUDING  REMARKS 

lower  order  conditionality  (compulsory)  beyond  conscious  control.  Here 
we  differ  from  animals  and  hospital  cases.  When  our  conditional  reac¬ 
tions  are  not  fully  regulated  by  proper  s.r  and  become  unconditional,  we 
copy  animals,  and  so  are  in  a  state  of  arrested  development  or  of 
regression. 

The  general  therapeutic  and  preventive  measures  are  clearly  indi¬ 
cated  by  such  considerations.  Conditional  reactions  in  man  should  be¬ 
come  fully  conditional  and  not  fixed  as  unconditional,  or  conditional  of 
lower  orders.  In  other  words,  instead  of  ‘fixation’,  we  should  have 
means  and  methods  to  preserve  and  foster  semantic  dexibility.  This  last 
is  accomplished  by  acquiring  the  semantic  reactions  connected  with  the 
consciousness  of  abstracting .  I  recommend  this  last  point  to  the  atten¬ 
tion  of  specialists,  as  it  is  impossible  in  the  present  work  to  go  further 
into  details.  Flexibility  is  an  important  semantic  characteristic  of  healthy 
youth.  Fixation  is  a  semantic  characteristic  of  old  age.  With  the  col¬ 
loidal  background,  the  imparting  of  permanent  semantic  flexibility  which 
every  one  acquires  who  becomes  conscious  of  abstracting  might  prove 
to  be  a  crucial  neuro-physico-chemical  colloidal  factor  of,  at  present, 
unrealized  power.  The  colloidal  behaviour  of  our  ‘bodies  is  dependent 
on  electromagnetic . ,  manifestations,  which,  in  their  turn,  are  connected 
with  ‘mental’  states  of  every  description.  If  the  colloidal  ageing,  which 
brings  on  old  age,  ‘physical’  and  ‘mental’  symptoms,  and,  ultimately, 
death,  is  connected  with  such  ‘mental’  fixity,  we  may  expect  some  rather 
startling  results  if  we  impart  a  permanent  semantic  flexibility.  The 
‘ageing’  involves  electrical  changes  in  the  colloidal  background,  which 
must  be  connected  with  the  older  semantic  states.  The  new  fluid  seman¬ 
tic  states  should  have  different  electrical  influences,  which,  in  their  turn, 
would  bring  about  a  difference  in  the  colloidal  behaviour  on  which  our 
‘physical’  states  depend. 

From  a  A  point  of  view,  a  new  era  of  human  development  seems 
possible,  in  which,  by  mere  structural  analysis  and  a  linguistic  revision, 
we  will  discover  disregarded  semantic  mechanisms  operating  in  all  of 
us,  which  can  be  easily  influenced  and  controlled ;  and  we  will  discover, 
also,  that  at  least  a  great  deal  of  prevention  can  be  accomplished. 

It  seems,  also,  that  we  will  discover  more  about  the  dependence  of 
‘human  nature’  on  the  structure  of  our  languages,  doctrines,  institu¬ 
tions  . ,  and  will  conclude  that  for  adjustment,  stability . ,  we  must  adjust 
these  man-made  and  man-invented  semantic  and  other  conditions  in  com- 
formity  with  that  newly  discovered  ‘human  nature’.  This,  of  course, 
would  require  a  thorough  scientific  1933,  physico-mathematical,  epistemo¬ 
logical,  structural,  and  semantic  revision  of  all  existing  human  interests, 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

inclinations,  institutions . ,  to  be  made  by  those  specialized  in  a  ‘science 
of  man’.  If  such  a  revision  is  produced  soon  enough,  it  will,  perhaps, 
help  to  adjust  peacefully  the  standards  of  evaluation  and  prevent  the 
repetition  of  bloody  protests  of  unenlightened  blind  forces  against 
equally  blind  forces  of  existing  powers  and  reactions. 

The  forces  of  life,  humanity,  and  time-binding  are  at  odds ;  in  mod¬ 
em  slang,  a  ‘show-down'  is  imminent;  it  will  happen ,  and  no  one  can 
prevent  it.  To  a  A  understanding  the  only  problem  of  importance  is 
whether  this  ‘show-down'  will  be  scientific,  enlightened,  orderly,  and 
peaceful,  with  minimum  suffering;  or  whether  it  will  take  a  blind, 
chaotic,  silly,  bloody,  and  wasteful  turn  with  maximum  suffering. 

The  problems  of  structure,  language,  and  ‘consciousness  of  abstract¬ 
ing'  play  a  crucial  semantic  role.  To  be  modern,  one  must  accept  modern 
metaphysics  and  a  structurally  revised  modern  language.  As  yet,  these 
semantic  problems  have  been  completely  disregarded  as  far  as  general 
education  is  concerned.  This  is  probably  due  to  the  fact  that  in  an  infan¬ 
tile  and  commercial  civilization  we  encourage  engineering  and  applied 
sciences,  medicine,  biology.,  to  increase  private  profits.,  and  preserve 
or  increase  the  ranks  of  buyers.  But  we  do  not  encourage  to  an  equal 
extent  branches  of  science  like  mathematics,  mathematical  philosophy, 
linguistic,  structural,  and  semantic  researches . ,  which  would  not  directly 
increase  profits  or  the  numbers  of  customers,  but  which  would,  never¬ 
theless,  discover  structural  means  for  more  happiness  for  all. 

Accidentally — and  this  is  recommended  to  the  attention  of  econo¬ 
mists — the  classical  law  of  ‘supply  and  demand'  is  structurally  and 
semantically  an  animalistic  law ,  which  in  an  adult  human  civilization 
must  be  reformulated.  In  fact,  an  adult  human  civilization  cannot  be 
produced  at  all  if  we  preserve  such  fundamental  animalistic  ‘laws’.  In 
the  animal  world  the  numbers  of  individuals  cannot  increase  beyond  what 
the  given  conditions  allow.  The  animals  do  not  produce  artificially. 

Not  so  with  our  human  world.  We  produce  artificially  because  we 
are  time-binders,  and  all  of  us  stand  on  the  shoulders  of  others  and  on 
the  labours  of  the  dead.  We  can  over-populate  this  globe  as  we  have  done. 
Our  numbers  are  not  controlled  by  unaided  nature,  but  can  be  increased 
considerably.  In  the  animal  world  the  numbers  are  regulated  by  the 
supply  of  food . ,  and  not  by  conditions  imposed  by  the  animals  on  that 
food  supply.  The  animal  law  of  ‘supply  and  demand’  is  strict.  In  a 
human  class  of  life,  which  does  produce  artificially,  production  should 
satisfy  the  wants  of  all,  or  their  number  should  be  controlled  until  the 
wants  can  be  filled.  The  application  of  animalistic  laws  to  ourselves 
makes  conditions  very  complicated,  and  detrimental  to  most,  if  not  all 

CONCLUDING  REMARKS 

S49 

of  us.  It  is  also  easily  understood  why  it  should  be  so.  Ignorant  and  A 
handling  of  powerful  symbols  has  proved  to  be  dangerous  when  we  do 
not  realize  the  overwhelming  semantic  role  and  the  importance  of  sym¬ 
bols  in  a  symbolic  class  of  life. 

Another  interesting  application  of  the  consciousness  of  abstracting  is 
given  in  our  attitude  toward  money,  bonds,  titles  to  property , .  Money 
represents  a  symbol  for  all  human  time-binding  characteristics.  Animals 
do  not  have  it.  No  doubt  bees  produce  honey,  but  these  products  of  the 
bees  do  not  constitute  wealth  until  man  puts  his  hands  on  them.  Money 
is  not  edible  or  habitable.  It  is  worthless  if  the  other  fellow  refuses  to 
take  it.  The  tn.o  reality  behind  the  symbol  is  found  in  human  agreement . 
The  value  behind  the  symbol  is  doctrinal .  Fido  does  not  discriminate 
between  the  different  orders  of  abstractions.  If  we  copy  him,  we  wor¬ 
ship  the  symbol  alone.  ‘In  gold  we  trust*  becomes  the  motto,  with  all  its 
identifications  and  destructive  consequences.  Smith  should  not  identify 
the  m.o  reality  behind  the  symbol  with  the  symbol.  It  is  amusing,  when 
not  tragic,  to  see  how  the  so-called  ‘practical  man*  deals  mostly  with 
fictitious  values,  for  which  he  is  willing  to  live  and  die.  When  he  has 
the  upper  hand  and  ignorantly  plays  with  symbols,  disregarding  the  m.o 
realities  behind  them,  of  course,  he  drives  civilization  to  disasters.  His¬ 
tory  is  full  of  examples  of  this. 

We  see  the  utter  folly  of  racing  to  accumulate  symbols,  worthless 
in  themselves,  while  destroying  the  ‘mental*  and  ‘moral*  values  which  are 
behind  the  symbols.  For  it  is  useless  to  ‘own’  a  semantically  unbalanced 
world.  Such  ownership  is  a  fiction,  no  matter  how  stable  it  may  look 
on  paper.  Commercialism,  as  a  creed,  is  a  folly  of  this  type.  Some  day 
even  economists,  bankers,  and  merchants  will  understand  that  such 
‘impractical*  works  as  this  present  one  on  structure,  s.r . ,  lead  to  the 
revision  of  standards  of  evaluation  and  are  directly  helping  the  stabiliza¬ 
tion  of  an  economic  system.  Meanwhile,  in  their  ignorance,  they  do  their 
best  to  keep  the  economic  system  unscientific,  and,  therefore,  unbal¬ 
anced.  History  shows  clearly  how  the  rulers  have  generally  made  life 
unbearable  for  the  rest  of  mankind,  and  what  bloody  results  have  fol¬ 
lowed.  Since  the  World  War  certain  conditions  are  becoming  increas- 
ingly  more  difficult,  and  the  infantile  and  animalistic  systems  drive  us 
fatalistically  toward  further  catastrophes.  Whether  these  disasters  will 
occur,  the  unknown  future  shall  decide;  but  out  of  this  unknown,  one 
fact  remains  a  certainty ;  namely,  that  this  will  depend  on  whether  or  not 
science  can  take  hold  of  human  affairs ;  I  hope  it  can,  but  the  blind 
forces  of  identification  are  so  strong  and  powerful  that  perhaps  such 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

hopes  are  premature.  Perhaps  a  new  race  can  accomplish  it  after  this 
one  is  extinct,  with  the  exception  of  a  few  remnants  in  museums. 

The  problems  of  determinism  and  indeterminism  are  not  purely 
‘academic’  but  influence,  to  a  large  extent,  our  theories  and  behaviour, 
and  so  are  fundamental  for  adjustment.  Historically,  science  has  utilized 
determinism  of  the  two-,  and  three-valued  variety,  which  has  lately,  in 
the  case  of  the  newer  quantum  mechanics,  proved  insufficient.  The  lack 
of  the  formulation  of  oo-valued  semantics,  necessary  for  oo-valued 
determinism,  seemed  to  indicate  that  even  science  tends  to  drift  toward 
indeterminism,  a  tendency  which  was  rather  baffling  and  disturbing  to 
many  scientists. 

Different  ‘ethics’  and  ‘morals’  have  fought  determinism  throughout 
all  our  past  on  the  ground  that  in  a  deterministic  world  all  ‘morals’  and 
‘ethics’  would  be  impossible.  If  a  man  is  compelled  to  do  something, 
then,  we  are  told,  he  is  not  responsible.  They  state  that  the  result  would 
be  undesirable  licence,  forgetting  that  determinism  implies  quite  the 
opposite  of  licence. 

We  have  already  become  acquainted  with  infantile  self-love  and 
self-importance.  These  infantile  characteristics  have  not  only  shaped 
our  semantic  attitudes,  but  also  our  ‘scientific’  theories.  Smith  and  this 
little  earth  were  in  many  ways  postulated  as  the  centre  of  the  universe. 
Scientific  discoveries  showed  that  such  statements  did  not  cover  the  facts 
at  hand,  and  Smith  was  displaced  from  this  primitive  and  infantile 
self-centred  position.  The  Polish  astronomer  Copernicus  was  the  first 
to  give  this  rude  shock.  The  little  earth  was  no  longer  the  ‘centre  of  the 
universe’.  Next  came  Darwin  with  another  shock  to  such  infantile  pride. 
Smith  was  no  longer  a  ‘special  creation’,  but  belonged  to  the  general 
series  of  living  forms,  none  of  which  were  ‘special  creations’.  Finally, 
Freud  developed  the  notion  that  even  in  semantic  processes,  determinism 
prevails.  All  our  actions,  psycho-logical  and  semantic  states . ,  have  very 
definite  conscious  and  unconscious  psychophysiological  ‘causes’  whkh 
activate  us. 

An  infantile  society  had  difficulties  in  abandoning  their  pleasing 
delusions,  and  these  three  men  were  duly  persecuted,  criticized,  and  bit¬ 
terly  attacked  and  hated  by  many. 

The  present  situation  may  appear  baffling  because  science  discovers 
facts  which  would  seem  to  lead  to  an  ‘undesirable’  indeterminism  in 
science,  and  to  a  determinism  in  ‘mental’  processes.  The  reader,  by  now, 
I  hope,  realizes  that  both  ‘undesirable’  results  are  only  undesirable  be¬ 
cause  of  identification  and  the  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions,  which 
resulted  in  the  ascribing  of  undue  generality  and  uniqueness  to  the  A 

CONCLUDING  REMARKS 

S51 

two  and  three-valued  ‘logic*.  But  once  we  realize  that  in  a  A,  co-valued, 
more  general  system,  the  two-,  and  three-valued  aspects  are  only  par¬ 
ticular  instances,  which  apply  to  some  instances  but  not  to  others,  all 
our  difficulties  vanish.  From  a  A  structural  point  of  view  we  also  under¬ 
stand  that  oo-valued  determinism  becomes  a  necessity  of  our  s,r  in  the 
search  and  comparison  of  structures. 

The  result  seems  to  be  that  the  problem  of  determinism  or  inde¬ 
terminism  is  not  primarily  a  problem  of  the  outside  world,  but  simply 
one  of  our  s.r  and  ignorance  versus  ‘knowledge*.  Abandoning  elemental- 
ism  and  identification,  we  stop  arguing  *is  the  world  deterministic  or 
not*.;  but,  by  analysis,  we  find  which  semantics  better  fit,  structurally, 
the  facts  and  our  abstracting  capacities.  The  results  we  reach  are  not 
entirely  new,  but  the  semantic  conflict  is  eliminated. 

Science  employs  determinism  because  of  the  structure  and  function 
of  our  nervous  system.  We  cannot  do  otherwise  than  preserve  oo-valued 
determinism  and  step  by  step  supply  the  missing  links  in  our  structural 
adjustments  of  language  to  the  structure  of  empirical  data. 

Let  us  again  repeat  that  the  older  problems  of  ‘determinism*  in 
general  were  the  results  of  elementalism  and  identification  and  of  a  com¬ 
plete  misunderstanding  of  the  role  of  structure.  Once  these  undesirable 
afflictions  are  eliminated,  the  artificial  problems  which  they  create  are 
also  eliminated.  Structural  considerations  show  clearly  that  determin¬ 
ism  is  a  neurological  necessity.  If  empirical  facts  lead  to  linguistic 
indeterminism,  it  is  an  unmistakable  sign  that  the  language  used  is  not 
similar  in  structure  to  the  structure  of  the  world  around  us,  and  that  we 
should  simply  produce  a  language  of  different  structure.  Such  determin¬ 
ism  is  a  vital  condition  in  the  search  for  structure ,  and  cannot  be 
abandoned . 

Shall  we,  then,  preserve  the  deterministic  attitude  in  our  ‘mental* 
processes?  Are  the  objections  on  ‘moral*  and  ‘ethical’  grounds  serious 
enough  to  induce  us  to  reinstate  in  our  semantic  attitudes  the  older 
structurally  misleading  ‘indeterminism*  ? 

Let  us,  first,  recall  the  facts.  In  our  old  el  and  infantile  attitudes 
with  identification  we  analysed  a  child  or  an  adult  in  isolation.  Determin¬ 
ism  was  applied  to  such  a  fictitious  non-existent  individual,  and  the  old 
objectified  and  el  speculations  followed.  If  any  one  is  inclined  to  chal¬ 
lenge  the  above  statement,  let  him  perform  an  experiment  and  imme¬ 
diately  after  birth  isolate  a  child  ‘completely*.  He  will  find  that  this 
cannot  be  done  with  a  human  baby  without  destroying  the  child.  There¬ 
fore,  the  old  speculations  deal  with  structurally  fictitious  conditions.  The 
facts  are  that  a  baby  is,  from  the  first,  subjected  to  a  treatment  based 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

on  the  semantics,  structure  of  language,  doctrines,  understanding, 
knowledge,  attitudes,  metaphysics . ,  of  his  parents  or  their  substitutes, 
which  shape  his  semantic  reactions. 

If  we  abandon  the  problem  of  the  two-valued  ‘determinism’  in  con¬ 
nection  with  such  a  fictitious,  isolated  individual,  and  apply  oo-valued 
eterminism  to  an  actual,  non-isolated  individual,  we  see  at  once  that 
t  e  whole  situation  is  different.  If  parents  and  society  accept  oo-valued 
determinism,  they  realize  their  own  responsibilities  toward  the  individual, 
and  understand  that  the  actions  of  parents,  society. ,  are,  to  a  large 
extent,  responsible  for  the  future  development  of  the  child  on  quite 
deterministic  psychophysiological  grounds.  If  an  individual  behaves  in 
a  way  detrimental  to  others  and  to  himself,  and  an  enlightened  society 
deades  to  do  this  or  that  with  him,  that  is  a  different  proposition.  The 
mam  point  is  that,  if  we  were  to  accept  an  indeterministic  attitude,  a  great 
deal  of  harm  would  be  done  by  parents,  teachers,  preachers,  and  society 
in  general ;  harm  which  could  be  prevented.  This  is,  to  a  large  extent, 
unrealized,  and  in  the  old  way  no  one  was  supposed  to  be  responsible 
except  the  poor  victim  of  ‘free  will’.  Under  such  A  conditions,  we 
sponsor  bitterness,  cruelty. ,  under  the  labels  of  ‘sin’,  ‘justice’,  ‘revenge’ 
punishment’,  or  whatever  it  may  be.  On  deterministic  grounds  when 
society  and  educators  realize  fully  their  own  responsibilities,  we  should 
ame  the  individual  less,  and  should  more  and  more  investigate  struc¬ 
ture,  language,  our  systems,  metaphysics,  education,  conditions  of  liv¬ 
ing,.  Instead  of  a  holy  frenzy  for  ‘justice’,  ‘punishment’,  ‘revenge’ 
we  would  try  to  improve  conditions  of  life  and  education,  so  that  a  new¬ 
born  individual  would  not  be  handicapped  from  the  day  of  his  birth. 

Since  the  organism  operates  as-a-whole  and  no  one  is  free  from 
higher  order  abstractions  and  structural  assumptions,  we  see  that  the 
keeping  of  savage-made  metaphysics  must  involve  us  individually  and 
collectively  m  an  arrested  or  regressive  development.  From  the  organ- 
ism-as-a-whole  point  of  view  structural  ignorance  must  result  in  some 
semantic  defectiveness. 

The  objection  that  there  are  cases  of  great  ‘mental’  brilliancy  accom¬ 
panied  by  very  vicious  tendencies  is  easily  answered  by  the  fact  that  the 
problem  is  formulated  in  an  el  way.  ‘Mental’  brilliancy  does  not  tell  the 
whole  story  of  the  organism-as-a-whole.  One  may  be  ‘mentally’  brilliant, 
yet  infantile  or  a  ‘moral  imbecile’.  In  life,  we  deal  with  the  whole 
non-isolated  individual,  who  may  be  pathological  in  a  great  many  ways. 

If  it  is  objected  that  science  is  so  complicated  that  it  would  be  impossible 
to  impart  such  knowledge  to  the  masses,  the  answer  is  that,  as  this 
enquiry  shows,  science  involves  some  structural  metaphysics  and  seman- 

CONCLUDING  REMARKS 

tic  components  which,  once  discovered,  are  childishly  simple,  and  can 
be  given  in  elementary  education. 

Science  represents  the  highest  structural  abstractions  that  have  been 
produced  at  each  date.  It  is  a  supreme  abstraction  from  all  the  experi¬ 
ences  of  countless  individuals  and  generations.  Since  the  lower  centres 
produce  the  raw  material  from  which  the  higher  abstractions  are  made, 
and  these  higher  abstractions  again  influence  the  working  of  the  lower 
centres,  obviously  some  means  can  be  devised  to  put  back  into  the  nervous 
circuits  the  beneficial  effects  of  those  highest  abstractions. 

The  above  statement  may  appear  visionary,  and  many  are  likely  to 
gay,  ‘It  cannot  be  done*.  Now,  the  main  contention  of  the  present  theory, 
verified  empirically,  is  that  it  can  be  done  in  an  extremely  simple  way, 
provided  we  study  the  neglected  non-el  aspects  of  mathematics  and 
icience;  namely,  their  structural  and  semantic  aspects.  Such  study  has 
helped  us  to  discover  in  a  ^-system  the  means  for  affecting  lower  centres 
by  the  products  of  the  higher  centres  of  the  best  men  we  had.  We  have 
already  discovered  that  all  advances  in  science  and  mathematics  supply 
us  with  an  unbelievable  amount  of  purely  psycho-logical  and  semantic 
data  of  extreme  simplicity,  which,  without  any  technicalities,  can  be 
imparted  to  the  masses  in  elementary  structural  education.  Such  educa¬ 
tion  allows  us  to  give  very  simply  to  children  the  ‘cultural  results  ,  or  to 
impart  the  s.rt  which  are  the  aim  of  university  training,  in  a  relatively 
short  period  and  without  any  technicalities.  These  benefits,  under  an  A 
education,  are  too  rarely  acquired  even  by  university  graduates,  and 
impossible  to  impart  to  the  masses,  who  are  left  helpless  with  archaic, 
delusional  structural  assumptions. 

From  one  point  of  view  the  A  issues  are  childishly  simple  and  ob¬ 
vious,  but  from  another,  because  of  the  power  of  old  established  habits 
and  s.r ,  are  quite  difficult  for  the  grown-ups  to  apply.  It  seems  evident 
that  an  infant  must  be  under  the  influence  of  the  standards  of  evaluation 
of  those  who  take  care  of  him,  automatically  connected  with  the  struc¬ 
ture  of  the  language  he  is  taught.  Under  such_unavoidable  conditions, 
it  is  obvious  that  to  give  the  full  benefit  of  a  ^-system  in  the  training 
of  children,  parents  and  teachers  should,  themselves,  have  entirely  ab¬ 
sorbed  these  new  standards. 

A  A  civilization  will  require  a  unification  of  all  existing  human 
disciplines  on  the  base  of  exact  sciences.  This  unification  will  require  all 
scientists,  mathematicians,  physicists,  and  psychiatrists  included,  to  be¬ 
come  acquainted  and  fully  to  practice  A  standards  of  evaluation.  A  A 
revision  would  have  an  international  and  interracial  application,  requir¬ 
ing  a  very  thorough  revision  of  all  doctrines,  a  better  acquaintance  of 

SS4  VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

Bpecwhste  in  one  field  with  the  accomplishments  in  other  fields,  and  an 
up-to-date  epistemology.  If  we  try  to  disregard  epistemology  con¬ 
sciously,  we  delude  ourselves,  as  we  cannot  eliminate  some  epistemology 
as  a  foundation  for  our  methods  of  evaluation,  and,  therefore,  uncon¬ 
sciously  retain  some  primitive  epistemology  which  through  inappropriate 
standards  of  evaluation,  introduces  semantic  blockages. 

Mach  said  long  ago:  ‘Not  every  physicist  is  an  epistemologist,  and 
not  every  one  must  or  can  be.  Special  investigation  claims  a  whole  man 
so  also  does  the  theory  of  knowledge.’  The  influence  of  Mach  on  modern 
science  is  well  known;  men  such  as  the  late  Jacques  Loeb,  Einstein,  the 
younger  quantum  pioneers.,  were  deeply  influenced  by  the  writings  of 
Mach,  because  Mach  was  a  deep  student  of  epistemology.  But  in  a  A 
society  his  statement  must  be  slightly  reworded;  namely:  ‘Not  every 
individual  knows  or  realizes  the  importance  of,  or  seemingly  consciously 
cares  for,  epistemology  ;  yet  every  one  unconsciously  has  one  and  actsanc 
rves  by  it.  Each  individual  has  his  own  special  problems,  the  solution  of 
which  always  claims  the  whole  man,  and  no  man  is  complete,  unless  he 
consciously  realizes  the  permanent  presence  in  his  life  of  some  standards 
of  evaluation.  Every  one  has  thus  some  epistemology.  There  is  no  way 
o  parting  with  it,— nor  with  air,  nor  with  water,— and  live.  The  only 
problem  is  whether  his  standards  of  evaluation  are  polluted  with  primi- 
tive  remains  of  bygone  ages,  in  a  variety  of  ways ;  or  sanified  by  science 
and  modern  epistemology.' 

The  present  work  shows  how  any  system  involves  a  special  epistem 
olop  which  we  accept  unconsciously,  once  we  accept  the  system.  To 
evaluate  a  system  is  practically  equivalent  to  formulating  its  epistemology, 
his  is  strictly  connected  with  linguistic  and  structural  investigations. 

o  centralize  and  co-ordinate  the  A  efforts,  an  International  Non- 
anstotehan Library  has  been  originated,  which  field  embraces,  ultimately 
all  known  doctrines  and  human  interests,  the  first  publication  being  the 
present  handbook.  To  facilitate  the  application  of  A  disciplines  and  to 
simulate  further  researches,  an  International  Non-aristotelian  Society 
has  been  incorporated  with  headquarters  in  New  York  City  and  branches 
to  be  established  in  all  cities  of  the  world  which  have  educational  insti¬ 
tutions  The  main  aims  of  the  Society  are  scientific  and  educational  for 
the  study,  by  means  of  papers  and  lectures  followed  by  discussions  of 
the  A  aspects  necessary  for  a  revision  and,  therefore,  a  co-ordination 
of  all  existing  sciences  and  concerns  of  man.  As  the  aspects  of  science 
which  are  of  interest  to  the  Society  would  be  structural  and  semantic 
from  the  point  of  view  of  a  general  theory  of  values,  the  lectures  would’ 
be  of  a  general  non-technical  character  on  the  level  of  intelligent  laymen. 

CONCLUDING  REMARKS 

Science  would  not  be  ‘popularized'  but  analysed  from  a  fundamental 
A  epistemological  point  of  view,  compelling  the  speakers  and  authors  of 
papers  to  analyse  the  deeper  non-el ,  structural,  and  semantic  foundations 
of  experience,  as  well  as  of  theories.  The  layman  would  benefit  because 
he  would  be  given  a  structural  education  readily  understood,  without 
being  led  astray  by  the  older  A  ‘popularization’.  Later,  if  economically 
feasible,  it  is  intended  to  issue  a  monthly  International  Non-aristotelian 
Review ,  and  also  to  organize  International  Non-aristotelian  Congresses . 

The  ^-system  was  the  result  of  the  s.r  of  the  white  race  of  more  than 
two  thousand  years  ago ;  it  built  up  the  doctrines,  institutions  . ,  appropri¬ 
ate  to  this  system.  In  those  days,  knowledge  was  very  scanty ;  the  intercon¬ 
nection  of  different  peoples,  vague ;  the  means  of  communications,  very 
primitive , .  It  may  be  considered  that  science,  and  particularly  mathe¬ 
matics,  began  a  A  revolution  by  explicitly  searching  for  structure  and 
adjusting  the  structure  of  the  scientific  languages,  which  we  usually  call 
‘terminology’,  ‘theories’, .  Modern  conditions  of  life  are,  to  a  large  extent, 
affected  by  A  science  but  exploited  by  the  thoroughly  A  doctrines  of  the 
commercialists,  militarists,  politicians,  priests,  lawyers.,  which  results 
in  a  bewildering  chaos,  resulting  in  needless,  great,  and  imposed  suffer¬ 
ing  for  the  great  masses  of  mankind,  as  exemplified  by  such  cataclysms 
as  wars,  revolutions,  unemployment,  different  economic  crises , . 

A  disciplines,  or  science  as  such ,  are  thoroughly  beneficial  to  man¬ 
kind  at  large;  but  an  A  exploitation  and  use  of  these  A  products  are, 
and  must  be,  a  source  of  endless  sufferings  to  the  enormous  majority  of 
mankind,  leading  automatically  to  every  kind  of  break-down.  It  is  im¬ 
possible  to  give  a  fuller  analysis  of  this  complex  interrelation,  as  this 
would  require  a  separate  volume ;  I  shall,  therefore,  tabulate  only  a  few 
overlapping  suggestions. 

Non-aristotelian,  Scientific,  Adult 
Standards  of  Evaluation 

Aristotelian,  Infantile  Standards  of 
Evaluation  of  Commercialism, 
Militarism  , . 

Biological  Sciences . 

Particularly  medicine  has  discovered 
means  of  how  to  keep  or  restore 
health,  how  to  eliminate  suffering, 
how  to  save  and  to  prolong  life . ;  but 
medicine  also  gives  means  whereby 
we  may  prevent  the  overpopulation  of 
this  globe  and  so  teaches  us  how  to 
avoid  great  sufferings  through  over¬ 
crowding,  which  results  in  bitter 
struggle  for  food,  shelter,  employ¬ 
ment.,  in  turn,  leading  to  wars, 
revolutions,  unemployment , . 

Commercialized  medicine  unavailable  to 
great  masses  of  poor  people.  Commer¬ 
cialism,  militarism,  infantile  dreams 
of  ‘world  empires'  sponsor  unintelli¬ 
gent  breeding  in  vast  numbers  which 
runs  up  the  prices  of  land  and  houses, 
lowers  the  price  of  labour,  and  sup¬ 
plies  cannon-fodder, .  The  intelligent 
control  of  numbers  of  population  is 
prevented  by  jailing  and  otherwise 
persecuting  scientific  workers,  which 
persecution  affects  only  the  poor  and 
uneducated.  _ 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

Non-aristotelian,  Scientific,  Adult 
Standards  of  Evaluation 

Aristotelian,  Infantile  Standards  of 
Evaluation  of  Commercialism, 
Militarism  , 

Chemistry. 

Antiseptics,  fundamental  for  medicine 
and  the  control  of  the  increase  or  de¬ 
crease  in  the  population. 

Drugs,  fundamental  for  medicine. 

High  explosives,  necessary  for  agricul¬ 
ture,  mining , . 

Production  of  food  products.  Alcohol, 
wine,  beer,. 

Poisonous  gas,  necessary  for  the  elimi¬ 
nation  of  insects. 

Sponsoring  of  overpopulation  by  forci¬ 
bly  withholding  knowledge  from  the 
masses. 

Use  of  drugs  in  war  to  allow  a  soldier 
to  suffer  twice.  Commercialized  drug 
pedlars. 

High  explosives  used  for  killing  in  the 
struggle  for  ultimately  futile  'world 
empires’. 

Food  destroyed  to  keep  up  prices.  Com¬ 
mercialization  of  drinking.  The  saloon, 
crimes,  ‘prohibitions’,  the  financing  of 
gangsters,  corruption  of  government 
and  justice , . 

Poisonous  gas  in  wars. 

Linguistics. 

Law,  as  expressing  some  standards  of 
evaluation. 

Newspapers,  magazines,,  giving  most 
powerful  educational  means. 

Other  public  prints,  giving  necessary  or 
useful  informations. 

Religions  represent  primitive  structural 
rationalizations,  or  primitive  ‘science’; 
intended,  also,  as  guides  for  conduct 
and  adjustment,  under  the  structural 
assumptions  of  the  epoch  of  their 
primitive  origin. 

Interpretations  by  commercialized  law¬ 
yers  to  evade  law,  and  the  influencing 
of  the  wording  of  the  law  so  as  to 
make  evasion  possible.  Lobbyists. 

Commercialized  newspapers . ,  controlled 
by  profits  and  advertisements,  supply¬ 
ing  stultifying,  controlled  material, 
stimulating  the  morbid  potentialities 
of  the  mob,  to  increase  circulation , . 

Commercialized  advertisements.  Schizo¬ 
phrenic  pi  Ay  on  words,  the  promoting 
of  infantilism , . 

Commercialized  religions.  Religions  hav¬ 
ing  outlived  their  usefulness,  often 
become  priestcraft  as  a  source  of  in¬ 
come  and  control.  The  sponsoring  of 
primitive  and  delusional  standards  of 
evaluation  often  for  private  gains. 
The  imposition  of  primitive  standards 
of  evaluation  involves  pathological 
factors. 

Physics  and  Related  Sciences . 
Aeroplanes,  as  means  of  communication 
and  scientific  exploring. 

Automobiles,  as  means  of  transportation 
and  pleasure. 

Militarized  aeroplanes,  as  means  of  de¬ 
struction  and  murder. 

Militarized  automobiles,  as  means  of  de¬ 
struction  and  suffering. 

CONCLUDING  REMARKS 

Non-aristotelian,  Scientific,  Adult 
Standards  of  Evaluation 

Aristotelian,  Infantile  Standards  of 
Evaluation  of  Commercialism, 
Militarism  , . 

Physics  and  Related  Sciences  (continued). 

Machinery  and  tools,  as  means  to  elimi¬ 
nate  avoidable  efforts  and  to  benefit 
fully  through  natural  resources;  to 
give  greater  comfort  and  sanitary  con¬ 
ditions;  to  allow  greater  leisure  for 
cultural  pursuits , . 

Moving  pictures,  as  powerful  educational 
means. 

Radio,  as  powerful  means  of  communi¬ 
cation  and  education. 

Railroads,  as  means  of  public  transpor¬ 
tation. 

Tractors,  as  means  of  transportation  and 
sources  of  power  in  agriculture. 

Commercialized  machines,  as  means  tor 
larger  individual  profits  and  suffering 
for  the  increasing  numbers  of  unem¬ 
ployed  and  starving  masses.  Mass  pro¬ 
duction  of  guns,  ammunitions . ,  for 
mass  extermination  and  destruction, 
and  larger  profits  for  the  manufac¬ 
turers  and  investors. 

Commercialized  moving  pictures,  stimu¬ 
lating  and  satisfying  the  erotic  and 
morbid  crowds,  and  for  private  propa¬ 
ganda. 

Commercialized  radio,  advertisements, 
private  propaganda,  often  stimulating 
morbid  inclinations  of  the  mob. 

Commercialized  railroads,  as  means  for 
private  gains  and  the  control  by  a  few 
of  large  areas  and  many  people. 

Tractors,  as  tanks  and  means  of  de¬ 
struction  and  murder  in  wars. 

Public  Servants . 

Judges,  as  guardians  of  some  standards 
of  evaluation. 

Lawyers,  as  assistants  in  the  adminis¬ 
tration  of  justice. 

Police,  as  an  executive,  regulating, 
safety-force. 

Commercialized  politicians,  as  judges, 
corruption,  lack  of  justice , . 

Commercialization  and  corruption  of  the 
legal  profession.  Means  to  evade  or 
pervert  justice. 

Commercialization  of  police  by  politi¬ 
cians,  corruption,  combinations  with 
the  underworld,. 

Sports ,  as  means  for  preserving  and  Commercialization  of  sports,  elimination 
building  up  health,  co-ordinated  orien-  of  benefits.  Gambling.  Lowering  of 
tation,  fair  play,  and  in  a  lesser  degree  educational  standards  , . 
as  recreation. 

From  a  A  point  of  view,  which  eliminates  primitive  s.r,  it  becomes 
obvious  that  mankind  represents  an  interdependent  time-binding  class  of 
life,  and  any  group  of  people  who  possess  physical  means  for  destruction 
and  still  preserve  infantile  standards  of  evaluation  become  a  menace  to 
the  culture  of  the  whole  race.  Under  such  conditions  we  must  have 
agencies  for  an  international  exchange  and  evaluation  of  our  standards, 
as  well  as  methods  which  would  help  us  in  adjusting  these  standards. 

At  present,  we  must  admit  that  with  the  modem,  rapid,  and  inter¬ 
national  advancement  of  science  we  have  fairly  well-established  interna- 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

tional  A  standards  of  scientific  values.  International  Scientific  Congresses 
are  not  only  necessary  for  the  advancement  of  science,  but  they  also 
explicitly  prove  science  to  be  entirely  international. 

.  ^test,  most  important  A  institution  is  found  in  the  League  of 
Nations,  which  embraces  practically  the  whole  civilized  world,  with  the 
exception  of  a  very  few  nations  who  display  infantile  and  A  aloofness, 
using  different  self-deceptive  excuses,  and,  to  a  large  extent,  handicap¬ 
ping  the  power  and  usefulness  of  the  League. 

As  we  have  learned  lately,  not  only  human  achievements,  but  also 
human  disasters,  are  mostly,  interrelated  and  international,  and  are  be¬ 
coming  more  so  every  year.  Obviously,  with  A  narrowness,  selfishness, 
shortsightedness,  infantilism,  commercialism,  militarism,  nationalism., 
rampant,  mankind,  to  prevent  further  major  A  disasters,  would  have  to 
produce  a  special  international  body  which  would  co-ordinate  various 
structural  achievements,  strivings.,  formulate  and  inform  the  great 

masses  of  mankind  of  the  modern  scientific  A,  adult  standards  of 
evaluation. 

At  present,  we  already  have  the  necessary  agencies;  but,  as  yet, 
they  are  inefficient  and  non-co-ordinated.  These  are  to  be  found  in  Inter¬ 
national  Scientific  Congresses,  and  the  League  of  Nations.  The  weak 
spots  of  these  organizations  are  found  in  the  fact  that  the  Scientific 
Congresses  are  too  cumbersome,  expensive,  non-co-ordinated  and  only 
periodic.  The  League  of  Nations,  although  a  A  body  in  structure,  is 
mostly  made  up  of  men  who  do  not  know  any  other  standards  of  evalua¬ 
tion  than  A,  and  so  they  often  lack  the  means  to  present  a  scientific,  or 
A  argument,  and  usually  do  not  realize  the  tremendous  power  they 
would  have  in  a  ^-system.  In  human  affairs,  for  instance,  there  cannot 
e  a  neutral  and  innocent  absentee.  One  such  absentee  with  guns  and 
battleships  becomes  a  powerful  blocking  and  so,  ultimately,  disrupting 
actor  for  the  rest  of  civilization.  Such  an  absentee  is  not,  then,  guilty 
by  omission;  but,  from  a  A  point  of  view,  becomes  guilty  by  commission. 
The  League,  when  definitely  and  fully  allied  with  international  science, 
will  some  day  have  the  pluck  to  make  such  a  declaration  and  act  accord- 
mgiy.  A  consciously  A  League  of  Nations  will  not  limit  itself  to  the 
thankless  and  very  pften  useless  task  of  adjusting  inevitable  clashes  of 
A  standards  of  evaluation,  but  will,  with  the  full  co-operation  of  scien¬ 
tists,  undertake  the  much  more  important,  constructive,  and  unique  duty 
of  a  guardian  and  leader  of  human  culture.  Such  a  League  would  be¬ 
come  a  scientific,  professional,  international,  co-ordinating,  cultural, 
time-binding  advisory  organization  for  all  nations.  National  A  govern- 

CONCLUDING  REMARKS 

merits,  instead  of  only  instructing  their  A  representatives,  would  first 
consult  with  the  new  A  specialists. 

Many  politicians  and  their  followers  often  become  all  but  hysterical 
at  the  mention  of  the  League  of  Nations,  which,  in  some  mysterious  way, 
they  associate  with  a  ‘super-state*  or  ‘control*, .  Let  me  say,  at  once,  that 
a  symbolic,  or  human  class  of  life,  is  very  largely  controlled  by  ignorant, 
hidden,  often  pathological.,  factors  beyond  public  control,  of  which  the 
majority  are  entirely  innocent.  In  the  human  symbolic  class  of  life  no 
one  is  entirely  free,  but  all  our  lives  are  entangled  in  an  interdependence 
of  human  relations.  The  dependence  on  those  powers  which  are  now 
hidden,  and  beyond  public  control,  constitutes  a  grave  danger  to  ail.  Not 
•  so  with  a  scientific,  enlightened  public  opinion  with  adult  standards  of 
evaluation  as  formulated  by  a  future  co-ordination  of  science  and  the 
League  of  Nations.  Such  great  majority-opinions  will  remain  opinions, 
or  statements  of  standards  of  evaluation,  which  any  one  member  of  the 
League  may  accept  or  reject;  but,  then,  it  would  be  necessary  for  him 
to  state  publicly  his  standards  of  evaluation  and  to  decide  consciously 
to  act  with  or  against,  or  to  enlighten  further  the  opinion  of  the  human 
race.  There  is,  of  course,  no  question  of  ‘super-states*  or  ‘control*  except 
the  unified  demand  for  a  conscious  and  explicit  stand  on  any  important 
subject  by  any  nation.  Public  opinion  will  do  the  rest,  once  it  is  con¬ 
voked  to  act. 

I  am  not  a  pacifist  in  the  accepted  sense.  In  an  animalistic,  infantile, 
or  A  society,  this  would  be  not  only  impossible  but  downright  silly. 
Quite  the  contrary,  I  am  disgusted  with  the  infantile  standards  under 
which  wars  are  conducted.  Thus,  our  rulers  and  war  lords,  sponsored 
by  commercialism,  like  little  boys  make  a  sort  of  game  out  of  wars,  and 
thus  help  to  preserve  them  as  an  institution.  In  a  consistent  society,  wars 
should  be  as  ruthless  as  possible  to  all  If  any  one  wants  a  war,  he 
should  consistently  take  all  the  consequences.  But  this  would  not  suit 
our  infantile  rulers ;  they  know  that  when  little  boys  play  at  war,  and  one 
group  becomes  too  rough,  the  other  group  refuses  to  play,  and  so  the 
play  at  war  ends.®  All  these  perverted  ‘humanitarianisms*  only  sponsor 
wars  because,  in  an  unlimited  modem  warfare,  the  people  would  soon 
come  to  their  senses  and  would  refuse  to  suffer  for  the  benefit  of  the 
very  few.  So  I  am  far  from  being  an  A  pacifist. 

But  why  our  destinies  should  be  dependent  on  the  accidental  and 
primitive  structure  of  the  language  we  use . ,  is  beyond  my  comprehen¬ 
sion.  I  grant  that  if  we  accept  such  and  such  postulates,  two-valued,  el, 
structurally  f alse-to-fact  A  ‘logics’,  ‘psychologies’. ,  all  the  old,  too  famil- 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

iar  consequences  follow,  which  we,  in  our  ignorance,  have  forced  upon 
human  life. 

But  if  we  put  all  systems  and  all  ‘logics’. ,  on  new  A  foundations, 
which  are  structurally  closer  to  the  facts  of  life  (1933),  all  the  older 
conclusions  may  even  be  reversed.  The  problem  now  before  m.nUnH 
is  whether  or  not  the  new  ^-system  is  more  similar  in  structure  to  the 
world  and  our  nervous  system  than  the  old.  On  the  answer  to  this 
question,  the  future  of  civilization  depends. 

From  the  present  point  of  view,  we  should  establish  with  the 
League  of  Nations  a  permanent  A  or  scientific  department,  composed  of 
a  few  of  the  best  scholars  from  all  countries,  who  would  keep  in  touch, 
not  only  with  the  developments  of  their  specialties,  but  would  also 
co-ordinate  them  on  general  structural  and  epistemological  foundations. 
This  department  would  be  the  international  authority  on  modern  revised 
and  co-ordinated  standards  of  evaluation,  which  would  be  published  in 
special  proceedings.  The  present  discrepancy  and  lack  of  co-ordination 
between  different  branches  of  knowledge  becomes  genuinely  alarming 
and  detrimental  to  mankind,  because  in  1933  it  is  humanly  impossible  for 
a  single  individual  to  attempt  such  a  co-ordination.  Members  of  this 
group  would  be  selected  by  the  universities  of  each  country.  In  their 
researches,  joint  studies,  and  results,  mankind  at  large  would  find  the 
most  reliable  scientific  and  A  opinions  produced  at  each  date,  and  would 
have  some  definite  and  conscious  standards  of  evaluation  by  which  to 
orient  themselves. 

The  modern  ‘voting*  has  some  benefits  in  local  affairs,  but  when  its 
very  limited  validity  is  not  understood,  it  becomes  a  serious  danger  to 
mankind.  Thus,  when  we  are  ill,  or  when  we  want  a  bridge  built,  we 
ask  specialists  for  their  scientific  co-operation ;  we  would  hardly  depend 
on  ignorant  voters.  Similarly,  in  a  A  scientific  civilization,  the  major 
problems  of  mankind  would  be  analysed  by  scientific  specialists,  recom¬ 
mendations  offered  to  be  accepted  or  rejected,  as  the  case  may  be ;  but  the 
ignorant  voter  would  have  at  his  disposal  an  unbiased,  impersonal,  and 
responsible  opinion  of  international  scientific  specialists  to  compare  with 
the  equivocations  of  some  local  ignorant  politician. 

To  facilitate  such  future  A  activities,  the  International  Non-aristo- 
telian  Society  has  been  established.  It  is  hoped  that  soon  the  scientific, 
educational,  ‘mental’  hygiene.,  workers  will  begin  to  unite  on  a  local 
and  national  A  basis.  Later,  International  Congresses  will  unite  the 
local  societies,  which  ultimately  will  be  embodied  as  a  permanent  insti¬ 
tution,  most  probably  in  the  League  of  Nations. 

CONCLUDING  REMARKS 

In  the  process  of  formulating  the  above  system  a  curious  observa¬ 
tion  has  been  forced  upon  me;  namely,  that  statements  which  are,  for 
instance,  quite  legitimate  for  the  English  language,  even  though  they 
probably  apply  in  general  to  all  Indo-european  languages,  do  not  apply 
in  a  similar  degree. 

I  am  intimately  acquainted  with  six  languages,  two  Slavic,  two 
Latin,  and  two  Teutonic,  and  also  with  the  psycho-logical  trends  of 
these  groups.  I  have  been  led  to  suspect  strongly  that  the  finer  differ¬ 
ences  in  the  structure  of  these  languages  and  their  use  are  connected  with 
the  semantics  of  these  national  groups.  An  enquiry  into  this  problem, 
in  my  opinion,  presents  great  semantic  possibilities  and  might  be  the 
foundation  for  the  understanding  of  international  psycho-logical  differ¬ 
ences.  Once  formulated,  this  would  lead  us  to  a  better  mutual 
understanding,  particularly  if  a  A  semantic  revision  of  these  different 
languages  is  undertaken.  To  the  best  of  my  knowledge,  this  field  of 
enquiry  is  entirely  new  and  very  promising. 

It  must  be  obvious  to  the  reader  that  such  a  vast  program  is  beyond 
the  power  of  a  single  man  to  carry  out,  and  the  present  author  hopes  for 
public  interest  in  this  enterprise. 

If  the  /^-system  has  accomplished  nothing  more  than  to  draw  the 
attention  of  mankind  to  some  disregarded  problems ;  if  it  has  done  noth¬ 
ing  more  than  point  the  way,  not  to  panaceas,  but  to  suggestions  toward 
an  expedient,  constructive,  and  unified  scientific  program  whereby  future 
disasters  may  be  avoided  or  lessened — the  writer  will  be  satisfied. 

BOOK  III 

ADDITIONAL  STRUCTURAL  DATA 
ABOUT  LANGUAGES  AND 
THE  EMPIRICAL  WORLD 

The  every-day  language  reeks  with  philosophies  ...  It  shatters  at  every 
touch  of  advancing  knowledge.  At  its  heart  lies  paradox. 

The  language  of  mathematics,  on  the  contrary,  stands  and  grows  in 
firmness.  It  gives  service  to  men  beyond  all  other  language.  (25) 

ARTHUR  F.  BENTLEY 

Nothing  is  more  interesting  to  the  true  theorist  than  a  fact  which  di¬ 
rectly  contradicts  a  theory  generally  accepted  up  to  that  time,  for  this  is 
his  particular  work.  (4is>  M*  planck 

It  is  not  surprising  that  our  language  should  be  incapable  of  describing 
the  processes  occurring  within  the  atoms,  for,  as  has  been  remarked,  it  was 
invented  to  describe  tne  experiences  of  daily  life,  and  these  consist  only  of 
processes  involving  exceedingly  large  numbers  of  atoms.  Furthermore,  it 
is  very  difficult  to  modify  our  language  so  that  it  will  be  able  to  describe 
these  atomic  processes,  for  words  can  only  describe  things  of  which  we 
ran  form  mental  pictures,  and  this  ability,  too,  is  a  result  of  daily  experi¬ 
ence.  12151  W.  HEISENBERG 

PREFATORY  REMARKS 

In  re  mathematics  ars  proponendi  quaestionem  pluris  facienda  est  quam 
SOlvendi.  (74)  GEORG  CANTOR 

We  cannot  describe  substance;  we  can  only  give  a  name  to  it.  Any  at¬ 
tempt  to  do  more  than  give  a  name  leads  at  once  to  an  attribution  of  struc¬ 
ture.  But  structure  can  be  described  to  some  extent;  and  when  reduced  to 
ultimate  terms  it  appears  to  resolve  itself  into  a  complex  of  relations  .  .  . 
A  law  of  nature  resolves  itself  into  a  constant  relation,  .  .  .  ,  of  the  two 
world-conditions  to  which  the  different  classes  of  observed  quantities  form¬ 
ing  the  two  sides  of  the  equation  are  traceable.  Such  a  constant  relation 
independent  of  measure-code  is  only  to  be  expressed  by  a  tensor  equation. 
(148)  A.  S.  EDDINGTON 

We  have  found  reason  to  believe  that  this  creative  action  of  the  mind 
follows  closely  the  mathematical  process  of  Hamiltonian  differentiation  of 
an  invariant.  (i4S)  a.  s.  eddington 

The  only  justification  for  our  concepts  and  system  of  concepts  is  that 
they  serve  to  represent  the  complex  of  our  experiences;  beyond  this  they 
have  no  legitimacy.  I  am  convinced  that  the  philosophers  have  had  a  harm¬ 
ful  effect  upon  the  progress  of  scientific  thinking  in  removing  certain  funda¬ 
mental  concepts  from  the  domain  of  empiricism,  where  they  are  under  our 
control,  to  the  intangible  heights  of  the  a  priori .  <1S2>  a.  einstein 

In  writing  the  following  semantic  survey  of  a  rather  wide  field  of  mathe¬ 
matics  and  physics,  I  was  confronted  with  a  difficult  task  of  selecting  source- 
books.  Any  mathematical  treatise  involves  conscious  and  many  unconscious 
notions  concerning  ‘infinity’,  the  nature  of  numbers,  mathematics,  ‘proof’, 
'rigour'.  ,  which  underlie  the  definitions  of  further  fundamental  terms,  such  as 
'continuity',  ‘limits', .  It  seems  that  when  We  discover  a  universally  constant 
empirical  relation,  such  as  ‘non-identity’,  and  apply  it;  then  all  other  assumptions 
have  to  be  revised,  from  this  new  point  of  view,  irrespective  of  what  startling 
consequences  may  follow. 

At  present,  neither  the  laymen  nor  the  majority  of  scientists  realize  that 
human  mathematical  behaviour  has  many  aspects  which  should  never  be 
identified.  Thus,  (1)  to  be  somehow  aware  that  ‘one  and  one  combine  in  some 
way  into  two’,  is  a  notion  which  is  common  even  among  children,  ‘mentally’ 
deficients,  and  most  primitive  peoples.  (2)  The  mathematical  ‘1+1-2’  already 
represents  a  very  advanced  stage  (in  theory,  and  in  method  .  ,)  of  development, 
although  in  practice  both  of  these  s.r  may  lead  to  one  result.  It  should  be 
noticed  that  the  above  (1)  represents  an  individual  s.r,  as  it  is  not  a  general 
formulation;  and  (2)  represents  and  involves  a  generalized  s.r.  Does  that 
exhaust  the  problem  of  ‘1+1=2’?  It  does  not  seem  to.  Thus,  (3),  in  the 
Prindpia  Mathematica  of  Whitehead  and  Russell  which  deals  with  the  meanings 
and  foundations  of  mathematics,  written  in  a  special  shorthand,  abbreviating 
statements  perhaps  tenfold,  it  takes  more  than  350  large  ‘shorthand’  pages  to 
arrive  at  the  notion  of  ‘number  one*. 

ADDITIONAL  STRUCTURAL  DATA 

It  becomes  obvious  that  we  should  not  identify  the  manipulation  of 
mathematical  symbols  with  the  semantic  aspects  of  mathematics.  History  and 
investigations  show  that  both  aspects  are  necessary  and  important,  although 
of  the  two,  the  semantic  discoveries  are  strictly  connected  with  the  revolu¬ 
tionary  advances  in  science,  and  have  invariably  marked  a  new  period  of  human 
development.  In  Chapter  XXXIX,  the  reader  will  find  a  very  impressive 
example  of  this  general  fact.  Thus,  what  is  known  as  the  ‘Lorentz  transforma¬ 
tion  ,  looks  like  the  ‘Einstein  transformation*.  When  manipulated  numerically 
both  give  equal  numerical  results,  yet  the  meanings,  and  the  semantic  aspects, 
are  different.  Although  Lorentz  produced  the  ‘Lorentz  transformation*  he  did 
not,  and  could  not  have  produced  the  revolutionary  Einstein  theory. 

It  is  well  known  that  when  it  comes  to  the  manipulation  of  symbols 
mathematicians  agree,  but  when  it  comes  to  the  semantic  aspects  or  meanings  .  , 
they  are  admittedly  hopelessly  at  variance.  In  a  prevailingly  A  world  we  have 
had  no  satisfactory  theory  of  ‘infinity’,  or  a  A  definition  of  numbers  and 
mathematics.  This  necessarily  resulted  in  the  fact  that  the  semantic  aspects 
of  practically  all  important  mathematical  works  by  different  authors  often 
involve  individual  semantic  presuppositions ,  or  orientations  concerning  funda¬ 
mentals.  My  presentation  intends  to  be  primarily  semantic  and  elementary, 
and  is  only  remotely  concerned  with  the  manipulation  of  symbols.  A  ^-system, 
which  rejects  ‘identity’,  differs  very  widely  from  A  attitudes,  and  introduces 
distinct  A  requirements.  I  had,  therefore,  to  select  from  many  works,  with 
their  individual  presuppositions,  those  which  were  less  in  conflict  with  A 
principles  than  the  others. 

A  survey  of  important  mathematical  treatises  shows  that  although  the 
majority  of  modern  mathematicians  explicitly  abjure  the  ‘infinitesimal’,  yet, 
in  some  presentations,  this  notion  persists.  In  my  presentation  I  reject  the 
‘infinitesimal’  explicitly  and  implicitly,  although  the  formulae  are  not  altered. 
Modern  calculus  is  based  officially  on  the  theory  of  limits,  but  as  the  theory 
of  limits  involves  the  unclarified  theory  of  ‘infinity’.  ,  nothing  would  be  gained 
semantically  and  for  my  purpose,  had  I  stressed  these  formal  possibilities  of 
the  calculus.  Quite  the  opposite,  if  I  had  done  so,  I  would  have  failed  to  stress 
the  most  fundamental  A  principle  and  task  of  establishing  the  similarity  of 
structure  between  languages  and  the  un-speakable  levels  and  happenings  as  the 
first  and  crucial  consequence  of  the  elimination  of  identity.  For  these  weighty 
reasons,  in  my  presentation,  I  followed  some  older  textbooks,  particularly 
Osgood  s,  which,  from  a  A  point  of  view,  are  sounder  than  the  newer,  largely 
A  rationalizations  and  apologetics. 

However,  it  should  be  realized  that  practically  all  outstanding  and  creative 
mathematicians  have  had,  and  still  have,  A  attitudes,  yet,  these  private  bene¬ 
ficial  attitudes,  not  being  formulated  in  a  ^-system,  could  not  become  conscious , 
simple,  workable,  public,  and  educational  assets.  We  can  be  simple  about  this 
point.  With  the  elimination  of  identity,  structure  becomes  the  only  possible 
content  of  ‘knowledge’ — and  structure  of  the  un-speakable  levels  has  to  be 
discovered .  Discovery  depends  on  the  finding  of  new,  and  therefore  different 

PREFATORY  REMARKS 

5 67 

characteristics.  In  the  formulation  of  the  last  sentence,  we  cannot  make  the 
*  training  in  discovery*  an  educational  discipline .  The  opposite  is  true  in  a 
j| -system,  based  on  non-identity,  as  we  can  train  simply  and  effectively  in  non- 
identity,  which  ultimately  leads  to  differentiation,  and  so  discovery. 

Because  of  the  elementary,  and  purely  semantic  character  of  the  following 
pages,  I  have  often  restrained  myself  from  giving  technical,  supposedly  Vigorous’, 
and  often  A  rationalizations,  which  we  occasionally  call  definitions.  In  a 
semantic  and  A  treatment,  at  this  pioneering  stage,  stressing  old  definitions 
would  be  seriously  confusing;  and  I  wished  to  avoid  such  witty  wittgensteinian 
‘definitions’  as  fA  point  in  space  is  a  place  for  an  argument*.  In  a  number  of 
Instances,  and  for  my  purpose,  I  often  avoided  unsatisfactory  formal  definitions, 
preferring  to  depend  upon  the  ordinary  meanings  of  words. 

For  the  reader  who  wishes  to  acquaint  himself  with  an  elementary  theory 
of  limits  and  corresponding  sets  of  definitions,  I  would  suggest  the  book  of  the 
late  Professor  J.  G.  Leathern,  Elements  of  the  Mathematical  Theory  of  Limits 
(London  and  Chicago,  1925).  This  theory  is  based  on  Pascal’s  Calcolo  Infini - 
tesimale,  Borel’s  Theorie  des  fonctions,  and  Godefroy’s  Theorie  des  s'eries. 
Leathern’s  book  has  been  printed  under  the  supervision  of  Professor  H.  F. 
Baker,  F.R.S.,  of  the  University  of  Cambridge,  and  Professor  E.  T.  Whittaker, 
F.R.S.,  of  Edinburgh.  I  give  these  names  for  professional  mathematicians,  to 
indicate  the  semantic  trend  which  underlies  this  particular  treatment  of  limits 
and  which  does  not  greatly  conflict  with  a  A  outlook.  This  outlook  may  be 
summarized  in  part,  in  the  words  of  Borel  somewhat  as  follows:  To  the  evolution 
of  physics  should  correspond  an  evolution  of  mathematics,  which,  without 
abandoning  the  classical  and  well-tried  theories,  should  develop  however,^  with 
the  results  of  experiments  in  view*.  This  statement  implies  vaguely  the  simi¬ 
larity  of  structure’.  ,  and  so  requires  as  a  modus  operandi  the  rejection  of  identity. 

There  seems  to  be  little  doubt  that  a  complete  and  radical  revision  of  the 
semantic  aspects  of  human  mathematical  behaviour  is  pending.  Such  a  revision 
appears  to  be  laborious  and  difficult,  and  should  be  undertaken  from  the  point 
of  view  of  the  theory  of  the  unique  and  specific  relations,  called  numbers.  I 
doubt  if  a  single  man  could  accomplish  this  revision.  Such  an  undertaking  will 
probably  be  the  result  of  group  activities,  and  may,  in  the  beginning,  be  unified 
by  the  formulation  of  one  fundamental  A  principle  of  non-identity,  the  disregard 
of  which,  from  science  down  to  ‘mental*  ills,  can  be  found  at  the  bottom  of 
practically  all  avoidable  human  difficulties. 

The  problems  are  very  complicated  and  extremely  difficult,  and  need  to 
be  treated  from  many  angles.  At  present,  we  have  many  scientific  societies, 
grouped  by  their  specialties;  but  we  do  not  have  a  scientific  society  composed 
of  many  different  specialists  whose  work  could  be  unified  by  some  common  and 
general  principle.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  principle  of  identity  ,  or 
‘absolute  sameness  in  all  aspects’,  is  invariably  false  to  facts.  The  main  problem 
is  to  trace  this  semantic  disturbance  of  improper  evaluation  in  all  fields  of  science 
and  life,  and  this  requires  a  new  co-ordinating  scientific  body  of  many  specialists, 
with  branches  in  all  universities.  Each  group  would  meet,  say  monthly,  to 

ADDITIONAL  STRUCTURAL  DATA 

discuss  their  problems,  and  give  mutual  technical  assistance  in  tracing  this  first 
general  semantic  disturbance .  Such  meetings  would  stimulate  enormously 
scientific  productivity.  In  fact,  without  such  a  co-ordinating  body,  the  present 
enormous  technical  developments  in  each  branch  of  science  preclude  the  revision 
of  general  principles,  on  which,  in  the  last  analysis,  all  other  of  our  activities 
greatly  depend.  The  first  task  then,  is  to  find  a  co-ordinating  principle,  and 
present  it  to  the  scientific  world. 

Psychiatry,  and  common  experience,  teach  us,  that  in  heavy  cases  of 
dementia  praecox  we  find  the  most  highly  developed  'identification'.  A  con¬ 
siderations  suggest  that  any  identification,  no  matter  how  slight,  represents  a 
dementia  praecox  factor  in  our  semantic  reactions.  The  rest  is  only  a  question 
of  degrees  of  this  maladjustment.  From  this  point  of  view,  we  will  find  dementia 
praecox  factors  even  in  mathematics.  In  physics,  only  since  Einstein  has  this 
factor  of  un-sanity  been  eliminated,  and  this  elimination  has  already  produced 
an  ever-growing  crop  of  'geniuses',  which  merely  means,  that  some  inhibitions 
of  mis-evaluation  have  been  eliminated  from  these  younger  men,  and  that  they 
are  humanly  more  'normal'  than  the  others. 

In  mathematics,  from  a  A  point  of  view,  we  must  first  of  all  not  identify 
different  aspects  of  our  mathematical  behaviour,  nor  try  to  cover  up  these 
identifications  of  endless  aspects  by  the  one  very  old  term  'mathematics'.  This 
word,  ‘mathematics',  in  its  accepted  sense  covers  a  non-existing  fiction.  What 
does  exist,  and  the  only  thing  we  actually  deal  with,  is  human  mathematical 
behaviour ,  human  s.r,  and  the  results  of  human  mathematical  behaviour  and  s.r. 
A  treatise,  say,  on  a  new  quantum  mechanics,  has  no  value  to  a  monkey  or  a 
corpse,  and  only  human  mathematical  behaviour  and  s.r,  have  any  actual  non-el 
existence,  and  is  the  only  thing  which  actually  matters.  So  we  see  that  'mathe¬ 
matics*  covers  a  non-existent  fiction  if  elementalistically  separated  from  human 
mathematical  behaviour  and  s.r .  I  use  the  term  'mathematics*  in  the  non-el 
sense,  and  attempt  to  signalize  some  of  the  difficulties  non-elementalism  involves 
at  this  transitory  stage. 

From  a  A*  non-identity,  structural,  non-el  point  of  view,  human  mathe¬ 
matical  behaviour  must  be  treated  uniquely  as  a  physico-mathematical  discipline, 
and  postulational  methods  to  be  used  exclusively  as  a  most  valuable  checking 
method.  To  base  mathematical  behaviour  and  s.r  on  postulational  methods 
exclusively,  is  to  introduce  dementia  praecox  factors  into  science,  which  only 
induces  the  spread  of  semantic  maladjustment  in  life. 

Our  main  task  in  producing  a  A  revision  of  mathematical  s.r,  is  in  the 
elimination  of  identification  from  our  s.r  about  'infinity'  and  in  the  formulation 
of  a  A  definition  of  numbers  in  terms  of  relations.  This  would  enable  us  to 
rebuild  human  mathematical  s.r  from  a  theory  of  numbers  point  of  view,  as  a 
physico-mathematical  discipline.  The  intrinsic,  or  internal  theory  of  surfaces, 
and  the  tensor,  or  absolute  calculus,  are  methodologically  our  most  secure 
epistemological  guides. 

I  would  suggest  that  mathematical  and  scientific  readers  who  are  interested 
in  a  ^4  revision  should,  at  first,  in  their  special  fields,  sketch  in  technical  papers, 

PREFATORY  REMARKS 

presented  before  the  local  International  Non-aristotelian  Societies,  A  pitfalls 
*nd  A  problems  and  outlooks.  Only  after  this  is  done,  shall  we  be  able  to  begin 
A  co-ordination  of  their  findings,  and  thereby  initiate  a  revised  and  unified  A 
science,  mathematics,  and  perhaps  ultimately  a  saner  scientific  civilization . 

The  scientific  achievements  dealt  with  in  Book  III,  are  developing  so 
rapidly,  and  the  technical  points  of  view  alter  so  often,  that  on  a  static  printed 
page  it  is  impossible  to  do  them  justice.  The  writer  has  spared  no  efforts  to 
keep  informed  of  these  scientific  developments  until  two  weeks  before  the 
appearance  of  this  book;  yet  because  these  new  developments  do  not  represent 
new  and  fundamental  semantic  factors,  I  deliberately  do  not  include  them  here. 
In  some  instances,  a  given  author  may  seem  to  change  his  opinions,  but,  from 
a  A  point  °f  view,  it  sometimes  appears  that  the  original  notions  were  more 
justified,  and  so  I  preserved  them  without  change. 

The  following  pages  are  written  exclusively  from  a  semantic  point  of  view, 
an  undertaking  which  is  far  more  difficult  than  dealing  with  a  restricted  technical 
physico-mathematical  problem,  because  it  involves  second  order  observations, 
of  the  first  order  observations,  of  the  first  order  observer,  and  of  the  relations 
between  them  ,  .  When  it  came  to  a  final  revision  of  the  manuscript,  and  reading 
of  the  proofs,  I  found  that  dealing  with  so  many  varied  fields,  languages,  and 
symbolisms  at  one  period,  was  no  small  task,  and  I  only  hope  that  I  have  not 
over-looked  too  many  errors  or  misprints. 

If  we  must  have  slogans,  a  A  motto  readily  suggests  itself  ‘Scientists  of 
the  world  unite’.  Perhaps  this  motto  may  prove  more  constructive  and  workable 
than  the  familiar  A  elementalislic  slogans  which  have  mostly  led  to  the  dis¬ 
membering  of  human  society.  Protests  against  any  misrule  should  not  be 
confused  with  the  proclaiming  of  disrupting  general  principles .  Let  me  repeat 
once  more,  that  the  most  lowly  manual  worker  is  useful  only  because  of  his 
human  nervous  system,  which  produced  all  science,  and  which  differentiates 
him  from  an  animal,  and  not  primarily  for  his  hands  alone;  otherwise  we  would 
breed  apes  to  do  the  world’s  work. 

In  the  explanations  of  some  geometrical  notions,  and  some  parts  of  the 
theory  of  Einstein,  I  have  followed  often  very  closely  the  Einstein's  Theory  of 
Relativity  by  Max  Born,  which  is  easily  the  best  elementary  exposition  I  have 
read,  and  also  the  books  of  Eddington.  In  the  quantum  field  I  have  followed 
mostly  the  books  by  Biggs,  Birtwistle,  Bocher,  Haas,  and  Sommerfeld,  and  I 
wish  to  acknowledge  my  indebtedness  to  the  above  authors. 

I  am  also  under  heavy  obligations  to  Professors  E.  T.  Bell,  P.  W.  Bridgman, 
B.  F.  Dostal,  R.  J.  Kennedy,  and  G.  Y.  Rainich,  who  were  so  kind  as  to  read 
the  MS.  and/or  proofs,  and  whose  criticism  and  suggestions  were  invaluable 
to  me.  However,  I  assume  entire  responsibility  for  the  following  pages,  especially 
since  I  have  not  always  followed  the  suggestions  made. 

PART  vm 

ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  MATHEMATICS 

Being  myself  a  remarkably  stupid  fellow,  I  have  had  to  unteach  myself 
the  difficulties,  and  now  beg  to  present  to  my  fellow  fools  the  parts  that 
are  not  hard.  Master  these  thoroughly,  and  the  rest  will  follow.  What 
one  fool  can  do,  another  can.  (5io)  silvanus  p.  Thompson 

Besides  the  theory  of  surfaces  is  the  model  on  which  all  the  higher  theories 
are  built  and  must  be  built,  and  it  is  well  to  master  it  completely  before 
attempting  generalizations.  (425)  G-  Y-  RAINICH 

To  find  such  relations  Einstein  has  applied  a  mathematical  method  of 
great  power — the  calculus  of  tensors — with  extraordinary  success.  The 
calculus  threshes  out  the  laws  of  nature,  separating  the  observer's  eccen¬ 
tricities  from  what  is  independent  of  him,  with  the  superb  efficiency  of  a 
modern  harvester.  <2i>  E-  T*  BELL 

CHAPTER  XXXII 

ON  THE  SEMANTICS  OF  THE  DIFFERENTIAL  CALCULUS 

The  principle  of  gaining  knowledge  of  the  external  world  from 
the  behaviour  of  its  infinitesimal  parts  is  the  mainspring  of  the  theory 
of  knowledge  in  infinitesimal  physics  as  in  Riemann’s  geometry,  and,  in¬ 
deed,  the  mainspring  of  all  the  eminent  work  of  Riemann,  m  particular, 
that  dealing  with  the  theory  of  complex  function.  (547)  Hermann  weyl 

The  conception  of  tensors  is  possible  owing  to  the  circumstance  that  the 
transition  from  one  co-ordinate  system  to  another  expresses  itself  as  a 
linear  transformation  in  the  differentials.  One  here  uses  the  exceedingly 
fruitful  mathematical  device  of  making  a  problem  “linear”  by  reverting 
to  infinitely  small  quantities.  (547)  Hermann  weyl 

Section  A.  Introductory. 

In  the  first  draft  of  this  book  written  in  1928,  the  following  pages  preceded 
Part  VII.  In  a  final  revision  in  1932,  it  seemed  advisable  to  transfer  pages 
which  to  laymen  look  ‘mathematical’,  to  the  end  of  the  volume,  because  the 
majority  of  even  intelligent  readers  have  a  sort  of  ‘inferiority  complex’  about 
anything  ‘mathematical’. 

The  patient  reader  knows  by  now,  I  hope,  that  on  neurological  grounds, 
he  must  for  the  sake  of  sanity,  be  able  to  translate  the  dynamic  into  the  static, 
and  the  static  into  the  dynamic;  and  also  that  he  must  know  at  least  about 
the  modern  structure  of  ‘space’,  ‘time’,  ‘matter*.  These  conditions  seem 
essential  for  sanity,  and  so  I  had  no  choice  but  to  give  the  minimum  of  a 
structural  and  semantic  outline,  and  to  acquaint  the  reader  with  the  existence 
of  modem  scientific  problems  and  vocabularies.  It  is  not  my  aim  to  teach 
the  reader  mathematics  or  modern  physics.  I  must  limit  myself  to  structural 
and  semantic  issues,  for  there  are  excellent  elementary  books  which  will  give 
him  the  necessary  informations. 

The  following  pages  should  in  no  way  intimidate  the  intelligent  reader. 
Elementary  structural  statements  and  definitions  are  given  in  simple  language, 
followed  by  illustrations  to  render  their  meanings  more  understandable.  The 
pages  are  less  technical  than  they  look,  as  each  example  is  carried  through 
in  the  most  elementary  way  in  all  of  its  details,  so  as  to  make  easy  reading. 
A  real  difficulty  for  some  readers  may  come  from  the  semantic  blockage  created 
by  the  use  of  apparently  strange,  and,  to  them,  unknown  terms,  or  from  a 
feeling  of  fright  or  abhorrence  of  anything  mathematical,  due  to  deplorably 
faulty  introduction  to  some  branch  of  mathematics  at  the  hands  of  some 
teacher  innocent  of  the  broader  epistemological  aspects  of  science.  I  am 
acquainted  with  scientists  of  very  considerable  mathematical  gifts,  who  have 
had  to  overcome  this  phobia  of  mathematics.  Once  the  word  ‘mathematics* 
was  mentioned  to  them,  they  became  ‘mentally*  paralysed.  An  ‘emotional’ 
fright  seized  them  and  it  took  some  months  to  overcome  this  undesirable 
childish  s.r,  I  use  the  subject  of  mathematics  as  an  illustration  of  this  difficulty, 
because  I  want  to  contrast  the  comparative  simplicity  of  mathematical  notions 

574  VIII.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  MATHEMATICS 

with  the  complexity  of  human  problems  and  language.  For  when  we  have 
understood  the  simplest  notions,  which  happen  to  be  mathematical,  then  only 
shall  we  be  able  better  to  understand  our  human  problems,  which  are  in 
comparison  so  difficult  and  so  confused. 

Any  reader  who  has  a  distaste  for  mathematics  will  benefit  most  if  he 
overcomes  his  semantic  phobia  and  struggles  through  these  pages,  even  several 
times.  As  a  result  of  so.  doing  he  will  find  it  simple  although  not  always  easy. 
It  is  always  semantically  useful  to  overcome  ones  phobias;  it  liberates  one  from 
unjustified  fears,  feelings  of  inferiority ,  .  The  main  point  of  this  whole  dis¬ 
cussion  is  to  evoke  the  semantic  components  of  a  living  Smith,  when  he 
habitually  uses  the  method  which  will  be  explained  herewith.  This  method  is 
so  simple  and  so  fundamental  that  in  the  form  given  by  a  ^-system  and  further 
simplified  according  to  the  gifts  of  the  teacher,  it  will  some  day  be  introduced 
into  elementary  schools  without  technicalities,  as  a  preventive  semantic  method 
against  'insanity’,  un-sanity  and  other  nervous  and  semantic  difficulties,  and 
as  a  foundation  for  a  training  in  sanity  and  adjustment. 

Section  B.  On  the  Differential  Calculus . 

1.  GENERAL  CONSIDERATIONS 

As  we  have  already  seen,  the  structural  notion  of  a  function  is  strictly 
connected  with  that  of  the  variable.  The  variable  on  one  level  does  not  Vary’; 
it  is  a  selection  by  Smith  of  a  definite  value  from  a  given  set.  As  these  processes 
are  going  on  inside  of  the  skin  of  Smith  he  might  experience  on  a  different 
level  a  feeling  of  ‘change’.  The  method  of  dealing  with  such  problems  is  given 
by  the  mathematical  differential  and  integral  calculus. 

The  beginnings  of  methods  dealing  with  ‘change’  are  to  be  found  even 
among  the  ancients.  Galileo,  Roberval,  Napier,  Barrow,  and  others  were 
interested  in  ‘fluxional’  methods,  before  Newton  and  Leibnitz.1  The  epoch- 
making  discoveries  of  the  last  two  mathematicians  consisted  not  only  in 
perfecting  the  knowledge  they  had  and  in  inventing  new  methods,  but  also— 
and  this  is  perhaps  the  most  important— they  formulated  a  general  theory  of 
these  structural  methods  and  invented  a  new  notation  suitable  for  their  purpose. 
The  definite  abandonment  of  the  old  tentative  methods  of  integration  in  favour 
of  methods  in  which  integration  is  regarded  as  the  inverse  of  differentiation 
was  especially  the  work  of  Newton.  Leibnitz’  main  work  was  in  the  field  of 
precise  formulation  of  simple  rules  for  differentiation  in  special  cases  and  the 
introduction  of  a  very  useful  notation. 

It  is  not  an  exaggeration  to  say  that  the  calculus  is  one  of  the  most  inspiring, 
creative,  structural  methods  in  mathematics.  There  is  little  doubt  that  the 
analysis  of  the  foundations  of  mathematics,  and  their  revision,  was  suggested 
by  a  study  of  the  methods  of  the  calculus.  It  is  structurally  and  semantically 
the  ‘ logic ’  of  sanity  and,  as  such,  can  be  given  ultimately  without  technicalities 
by  the  present  ^-system  and  semantic  training,  with  the  aid  of  the  Structural 
Differential. 

SEMANTICS  OF  THE  DIFFERENTIAL  CALCULUS  575 

The  application  of  the  differential  calculus  to  geometry  produced  differential 
geometry.  This  prepared  the  way  for  the  notions  of  Einstein  and  Minkowski. 

The  whole  of  modern  physics  becomes  possible  through  the  calculus,  and 
It  will  probably  be  correct  to  say  that  the  achievements  of  the  future  also  will 
be  dependent  on  it. 

The  present  work  is  also  to  a  large  extent  inspired  by  it,  and  develops 
simple  non-technical  methods  by  which  the  psycho-logical  structural  s.r 
necessitated  by  the  calculus  can  be  given  to  the  masses  in  elementary  education 
without  any  technical  knowledge  of  it.  This  statement  does  not  include 
teachers,  who  should  be  acquainted  with  at  least  the  rudiments  of  the  calculus.2 

It  is  true  that  in  the  beginning  we  did  not  suspect  that  the  semantics  of 
the  calculus  are  indispensable  in  education  for  sanity.  It  is  the  only  structural 
method  which  can  reconcile  the  as  yet  irreconcilable  higher  and  lower  order 
abstractions.  Without  such  a  reconciliation,  at  our  present  level  of  develop¬ 
ment,  sanity  is  a  matter  of  good  luck  quite  beyond  our  conscious  or  educational 
control. 

Let  us  recall  the  rough  definition  of  a  function:  y  is  said  to  be  a  function 
of  x  if,  when  x  is  given,  y  is  determined.  In  symbols  we  write  y  ~f(x)  which 
we  read  *y  is  equal  to  a  function  of  x’  or  ly  is  equal  to  /  of  x\  If  y  is  a  function 
of  x ,  or  y  =f(x),  then  x  is  called  the  independent  variable,  being  the  one  to 
which  we  arbitrarily  assign  any  value  we  choose  out  of  a  given  set  of  values. 
The  y  is  called  the  dependent  variable  as  its  value  depends  on  the  value  we 
assign  to  x. 

A  function  may  have  more  than  one  independent  variable;  in  which  case 
we  have  a  function  of  several  variables.  It  happens  frequently  that  to  one 
value  of  the  independent  variable  there  may  correspond  several  values  of  the 
dependent  variable.  Then  y  is  said  to  be  a  multiple-valued  function  of  x. 

Roughly  speaking,  a  function  is  said  to  be  continuous  if  a  small  increment 
in  the  variable  gives  rise  to  a  small  increment  of  the  function. 

A  theory  of  functions  can  be  developed  without  any  references  to  graphs 
and  geometrical  notions  of  co-ordinates  and  lengths;  but  in  practice  (and  in 
this  work),  it  is  extremely  useful  to  introduce  these  geometrical  notions,  as 
they  help  intuition.  A  modern  definition  of  an  analytic  function  is  technical 
and  unnecessary  for  our  purpose.  Suffice  it  to  say  that  it  is  connected  with 
derivatives  and  power  series,  which  means  structure. 

Geometry  is  a  very  remarkable  science.  It  may  be  treated  as  pure  mathe¬ 
matics,  or  it  may  be  treated  as  physics.  It  may  therefore  be  used  as  a  link 
between  the  two  or.  as  a  link  between  the  higher  and  lower  order  of  abstractions. 
This  fact  is  of  tremendous  psycho-logical  and  semantic  importance.  It  is  not 
by  pure  ‘chance’  that  the  most  important  writers  on  mathematical  philosophy, 
authors  who  have  generalized  their  knowledge  of  mathematics  to  include 
human  results,  were  mostly  geometers. 

Indeed,  Whitehead,  in  his  Universal  Algebra  (p.  32),  says,  and  justly  so, 
that  a  treatise  on  universal  algebra  is  also  a  treatise  on  certain  generalized 
notions  of  ‘space*.  ‘Space’  should  be  understood  as  ‘fulness’,  ‘fulness  of  some- 

576  VIII.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  MATHEMATICS 

thing’,  a  plenum.  Naturally  coherent  speech,  like  universal  algebra,  must  be 
coherent  speech  about  something.  ‘Generalized  space’  becomes  generalized 
plenum,  and  so  it  belongs  to  two  realms.  One  is  contentless  and  formal,  hence 
genera  hzed  algebra;  the  other,  in  that  it  refers  to  a  generalized  plenum,  becomes 
generalized  geometry,  or  generalized  physics. 

.  n'la‘n  importance,  perhaps,  of  geometry  is  in  the  fact  that  it  can  be 

interpreted  both  ways.  One  way  appears  as  pure  mathematics,  and  therefore 
as  the  study  of  sets  of  numbers  representing  co-ordinates.  The  other  the 
form  of  an  interpretation,  in  which  its  terms  imply  a  connection  with  the 
empirical  entities  of  our  world.  Obviously  if  speech  is  not  the  things  spoken 
about,  we  must  have  a  special  discipline  which  will  translate  the  coherent 
anguage  of  pure  mathematics,  which  is  contentless  by  definition,  into  another 
way  of  speaking  which  uses  a  different  vocabulary  capable  of  both  interpretations. 

Again,  the  different  orders  of  abstractions,  which  our  nervous  structure 
produces,  are  perfectly  reflected  in  the  very  structure  and  methods  of  mathe¬ 
matics.  The  possibility  of  the  use  of  the  ‘intuitions’  of  lower  order  abstractions 
is  extremely  useful  in  pure  mathematics.  This  fact  makes  geometry  also  unique. 
It  allows  us  to  apply  to  the  development  of  geometry  both  orders  of  abstrac¬ 
tions  the  intuitions’,  ‘feelings’,  of  the  lower  order  of  abstractions,  and  the 
static,  quantum’  jumpmethodsof  pure  analysis.  Thisisalso  why  theeinsteinian 
physics  becomes  four-dimensional  geometry;  which,  because  it  can  be  treated 
on  both  levels  of  abstraction,  gives  tremendously  powerful  and  important 
psycho-logieal  means  for  sanity  and  nervous  co-ordination  of  the  individual. 

ince  Einstein,  many  far-sighted  scientists  have  said  that  although  they  do 
not  know  in  what  respect  the  Einstein  theory  will  affect  our  lives,  yet  they  feel 
that  it  will  have  a  tremendous  influence.  I  venture  to  suggest  that  the  bearing 
of  the  Einstein  theory  and  its  development  on  the  problems  of  sanity,  as 
explained  in  this  work,  is  a  new  and  unexpected  semantic  result  of  the  application 
of  modern  science  to  our  lives.  As  the  Einstein  theory  could  have  been  formu¬ 
lated  more  than  two  hundred  years  ago  when  the  finite  velocity  of  light  was 
discovered,  so  the  present  theory  is  also  several  hundred  years  overdue.  The 
only  consolation  we  have  left  is  that  it  is  better  late  than  never. 

The  scope  of  this  work  allows  us  to  go  but  a  little  beyond  these  simple 
remarks,  and  permits  only  a  very  brief  explanation  of  the  most  fundamental 
and  elementary  beginnings  of  the  calculus.  In  this  presentation  I  shall  appeal 
very  °ften  to  “tuition  (lower  order  abstractions),  as  this  will  help  the  reader. 

The  notion  of  differentiation  of  a  continuous  function  is  the  process  for 
measuring  the  rate  of  growth;  that  is  to  say,  the  evaluation  of  the  increment 
of  the  function  as  compared  with  the  growth  or  increment  of  the  variable. 
We  may  describe  this  process  as  follows:  If  y  is  a  function  of  *,  it  is  helpful  not 
to  consider  x  as  having  one  or  another  special  value  but  as  flowing  or  growing 
just  as  we  feel  ‘time’  or  follow  the  ripples  made  by  a  stone  thrown  into  a  pond’ 

The  function  y  varies  with  *,  sometimes  increasing,  sometimes  decreasing. 
We  have  already  defined  the  variable  as  any  value  selected  from  a  given  range 
Let  us  consider  our  *  as  given  in  the  interval  between  1  and  S.  We  are  now 

SEMANTICS  OF  THE  DIFFERENTIAL  CALCULUS  577 

interested  in  all  values  which  our  #  may  take  between  these  two  values,  or,  as 
we  say,  in  this  interval.  Obviously,  we  can  select  a  few  values,  or,  in  other 
words,  take  big  steps;  as,  for  instance,  assigning  to  *  the  successive  values 
#1-1,  #2-2,  #8-3,  #4-4,  #6-5.  In  such  a  case  we  would  have  few  values 
and  the  difference  between  two  successive  values  would  be  rather  large,  for 
instance,  #3-x2  =  L  But  such  large  differences  are  not  of  much  interest  to  us 
here.  We  may,  if  we  choose,  select  smaller  differences;  in  other  words,  assign 
more  values  to  our  variable  in  the  given  range. 

Let  us  take,  for  instance,  for  our  x  the  series  of  values:  1,  Ij,  2,  2\ ,  3, 
3},  4,  4§,  5.  Here  we  see  that  the  difference  between  two  successive  values 
is  smaller  than  1,  it  is  $.  So  we  already  have  nine,  instead  of  the  former  five, 
values  which  We  may  assign  to  our  x.  Thus  we  have  selected  smaller  steps  by 
which  to  proceed.  Let  us  select  still  smaller  steps;  for  instance,  J.  Our  exten- 
sional  manifold  of  values  for  #  in  the  interval  between  1  and  5  would  then  be: 
1,  11,  If.  2,  2i  2£,  2f ,  3,  3j,  3j,  3j,  4,  4j,  4$,  4$ ,  5.  We  see  that  in  the 
interval  between  1  and  5,  we  have  already  17  values  which  we  may  assign  to 
our  variable,  but  we  have  followed  the  ‘growth’  of  our  #  by  smaller  steps; 
namely,  by  steps  of  J.  If  we  choose  to  diminish  the  steps  to  we  would  have 
for  our  extensional  manifold  of  values:  1,  1.1,  ...»  1.9,  2,  2.1,  .  .  .  ,  2.9,  3, 
3.1,  .  .  .  ,  3.9,  4,  4.1,  ...»  4.9,  5:  in  all,  41  values  for  #,  any  two  succeeding 
values  differing  by  n>-  If  we  select  still  smaller  steps— let  us  say,  iro—we  have 
401  values  for  #  and  the  difference  between  two  successive  values  is  still  smaller; 
namely,  ife.  This  process  may  be  carried  on  until  we  have  as  many  numbers 
between  1  and  5  as  we  choose,  since  we  may  make  the  difference  between  suc¬ 
cessive  numbers  in  the  sequence  as  small  as  we  please.  In  the  limit,  between 
any  two  numbers,  let  us  say,  1  and  2,  or  any  two  fractions,  there  are  infinite 
numbers  of  other  numbers  or  fractions.  It  is  obvious  that  in  a  given  interval, 
let  us  say,  between  1  and  5,  we  can  have  an  indefinitely  large  number  of  inter¬ 
mediary  numbers  arranged  in  an  increasing  progression,  such  that  the  difference 
between  two  successive  numbers  can  be  made  smaller  than  any  assigned  value, 
which  is  itself  greater  than  zero. 

The  above  may  be  made  clearer  by  r  *  _ _ i  A 

a  geometrical  illustration.  Let  us  take 

a  segment  of  a  line  of  definite  length,  / _ _ £ - £i- - 

let  us  say  2  inches.  Let  us  designate 

the  ends  by  numbers  1  and  3.  In  figure  /  *  H  Jl _ £ — — H — it — ic 

(A)  we  divide  the  segment  into  2  equal 

parts  of  one  inch  each,  and  see  that  to  /  $  r  ,  2  -^  ■  ■  ■ 

reach  3  starting  with  1  we  have  to  pro-  "  2 

ceed  by  two  large  jumps  from  1  to  2, 

and  from  2  to  3.  In  figure  (B)  we  have  more  steps  in  the  interval  and  therefore 
the  steps  are  smaller.  In  figures  (C)  and  (D)  the  steps  are  still  smaller  and  their 
number  greater.  If  the  number  of  steps  is  very  large,  the  steps  are  very  small. 
In  the  limit,  if  the  numbers  of  steps  become  infinite,  the  length  of  the  steps  tends 

578  VIII.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  MATHEMATICS 

toward  zero  and  the  aggregate  of  such  points  of  division  represents  (in  the 

rough  only)  a  continuous  line. 

.  **  *s  *mP°rtant  that  the  reader  should  become  thoroughly  acquainted 
with  the  above  simple  considerations  as  they  will  be  very  useful  in  any  line  of 
endeavour.  ^  Here  we  already  have  learned  how,  somehow,  to  translate  dis¬ 
continuous  jumps  into  'continuous’  smooth  entities.  Because  of  the  structure 
of  our  nervous  system  we  'feel’  'continuity’,  yet  we  can  analyse  it  into  a  smaller 
or  larger  number  of  definite  jumps,  according  to  our  needs.  The  secret  of  this 
process  lies  in  assigning  an  increasing  number  of  jumps,  which  as  they  become 
vanishingly  small,  or  tend  to  zero,  as  we  say,  cease  to  be  felt  as  jumps  and 
are  felt  as  a  ‘continuous’  motion,  or  change,  or  growth  or  anything  of  this  sort. 

An  excellent  example  is  given  by  the  motion  pictures.  When  we  look  at 
them  we  see  a  very  good  representation  of  life  with  all  its  continuity  of 
transitions  between  joy  and  sorrow.  If  we  look  at  an  arrested  film  we  find  a 
definite  number  of  static  pictures,  each  differing  from  the  next  by  a  measurable 
difference  or  jump,  and  the  joy  or  sorrow  which  moved  us  so  in  the  play  of  the 
actors  on  the  moving  film,  becomes  a  static  manifold  of  static  pictures  each 
differing  measurably  from  its  neighbour  by  a  slightly  more  or  less  accentuated 
grimace.  If  we  increase  the  number  of  pictures  in  a  unit  of  'time'  by  using  a 
faster  camera  and  then  release  this  film  at  the  ordinary  speed,  we  get  what  is 
called  slow  motion  pictures  with  which  we  are  all  familiar.  In  them  we  notice 
a  much  greater  smoothness  of  movements  which  in  life  are  jerky,  as,  for  instance, 
the  movements  of  a  running  horse.  They  appear  smooth  and  non-jerky,  the 
horse  looks  as  if  it  were  swimming.  Indeed  we  do  swim  no  less  than  fishes, 
except  that  our  medium;  namely,  air,  is  less  dense  than  water,  and  so  our 
movements  have  to  be  more  energetic  to  overcome  gravitation.  The  above 
example  is  indeed  the  best  analogy  in  existence  of  the  working  of  our  nervous 
system  and  of  the  difference  between  orders  of  abstractions.  Let  us  imagine 
that  some  one  wants  to  study  some  event  as  presented  by  the  moving  picture 
camera.  What  would  he  do?  He  would  first  see  the  picture,  in  its  moving, 
dynamic  form,  and  later  he  would  arrest  the  movement  and  devote  himself 
to  the  contemplation  of  the  static  extensional  manifold,  or  series,  of  the  static 
pictures  of  the  film.  It  should  be  noticed  that  the  differences  between  the 
static  pictures  are  finite,  definite  and  measurable. 

The  power  of  analysis  which  we  humans  possess  in  our  higher  order 
abstractions  is  due  precisely  to  the  fact  that  they  are  static  and  so  we  can  take 
our  ‘time’  to  investigate,  analyse  ,  .  The  lower  order  abstractions,  such  as 
our  lookmg  at  the  moving  picture,  are  shifting  and  non-permanent  and  thus 
evade  any  serious  analysis.  On  the  level  of  looking  at  the  moving  film,  we  get 
a  general  feeling  of  the  events,  with  a  very  imperfect  memory  of  what  we  have 
seen,  coloured  to  a  large  extent  by  our  moods  and  other  ‘emotional’  or  organic 
states.  We  are  on  the  shifting  level  of  lower  order  abstractions,  'feelings’, 
motions  ,  and  'emotions’.  The  first  lower  centres  do  the  best  they  can  in  a 
given  case  but  the  value  of  their  results  is  highly  doubtful,  as  they  are  not 
especially  reliable.  Now  the  higher  order  abstractions  are  produced  by  the 

SEMANTICS  OF  THE  DIFFERENTIAL  CALCULUS  579 

higher  centres,  further  removed,  and  not  in  direct  contact  with  the  world  around 
US.  With  the  finite  velocity  of  nerve  currents  it  takes  ‘time’  for  impulses  to 
reach  these  centres,  as  the  cortical  pathways  offer  higher  neural  resistances 
than  the  other  pathways.8  So  there  has  to  be  a  survival  mechanism  in  the 
production  of  nervous  means  for  arresting  the  stream  of  events  and  producing 
static  pictures  of  permanent  character,  which  may  allow  us  to  investigate, 
verify,  analyse  ,  .  It  must  be  noticed  that  because  of  this  higher  neural  resistance 
of  higher  centres  and  the  static  character  of  the  higher  abstractions,  these 
abstractions  are  less  distorted  by  affective  moods.  For,  since  the  higher  abstrac¬ 
tions  persist,  if  we  care  to  remember  them,  and  the  moods  vary,  we  can  con¬ 
template  the  abstractions  under  different  moods  and  so  come  to  some  average 
outlook  on  a  given  problem.  It  is  true  that  we  seldom  do  this,  but  we  may  do 
it,  and  this  is  of  importance  to  us. 

As  one  of  the  aims  of  the  calculus  is  to  study  relative  rates  of  change 
we  will  consider  a  series  of  successive  values  of  our  variable  which  differ  by 
little  from  each  other.  If  we  have  y=f{x)  we  can  consider  the  change  in  *  for 
a  short  interval,  let  us  say,  from  Xq  to  Xi,  so  that  we  assign  to  our  x  two  values, 
x  =Xq  and  x  =xi.  The  corresponding  values  of  our  function  or  y  will  be  y0  =/(* o) 
and  yi  ~/(x0.  In  general,  small  changes  in  y  will  be  almost  proportional  to  the 
corresponding  changes  in  x ,  provided  f(x)  is  ‘continuous  . 

Denoting  the  smalt  increment  of  x  byAx,  so  that  xi -x0  = Ax  or  xi  =  x0+Ax, 
function  y  receives  the  increment  yi~yo-Ay  or  yi=yo-bAy.  Since  yi=/(xi) 

from  both  sides 

by  Ax  we  have 

(1) 

and  xi==xo+Ax  we  have: 

y0  +A y  =/(x0  +Ax) ;  if  we  subtract 

y0  «/(* o)  we  would  have 

Ay  =/(x0  +  Ax)  -f(x o) ;  dividing  both  sides 
Ay  /(x0+Ax)-/(x0) 

Ax  Ax 

The  above  ratio  represents  the  ratio  of  the  increment  of  the  function  to  the 
increment  of  the  variable.  In  the  limit  when  the  increment  in  the  variable 
becomes  vanishingly  small  or  when  Ax  tends  toward  zero,  and  our  function  is 

continuous,  the  limit  of  this  ratio  gives  us  the  law  of  change  or  growth  of 

our  function. 

The  limit  which  the  ratio  (1)  approaches  when  Ax  approaches  0, 

lim  —  —  um  /(*o+A*)-/(*o)  (2) 

A*-*0  Ax  Ax->0  Ax 

is  called  the  derivative  of  y  with  respect  to  x  and  is  denoted  by  D*y,  which 
we  read  ‘D*  of  y\  in  symbols, 

lim  —~Dxy  (3) 

Al-*0  A  v 

Let  us  illustrate  this  by  a  simple  numerical  example.  Take  the  equation 
y=x2  and  assume  that  x  =  100,  whence  y  =**  10,000.  Suppose  the  increment  of  x, 
namely,  Ax  *  1/10.  Then  x+Ax  =  100.1  and  (x+Ax)2  =  100.1  X  100.1  =  10020.01. 
The  last  1  is  1  /100  and  only  one  millionth  part  of  the  10,000,  and  so,  we  can 

580  VIII.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  MATHEMATICS 

neglect  it  and  consider  y  +A y  =  10,020 ;  whence  A y  -  20  and  A y /Ax  -  20 /0. 1  -  200. 
In  the  general  case,  i(  y=x?  and  instead  of  *  we  take  a  slightly  larger  value, 
x+Ax,  then  our  function  y  also  becomes  slightly  larger;  thus, 
y  +Ay  =  (x  +Ax)  2=x2  +2xAx + (A*) 2 
If  we  subtract  y = x2  from  the  last  expression  we  have 

Ay=2xAx+{AxY,  dividing  by  Ax,  we  have 
Ay/ Ax  =  2x  +Ax. 

In  the  limit  as  Ax  approaches  zero,  the  value  of  the  above  ratio,  or  the  rate  of 
change  of  our  function,  would  be  2x,  as  Ax  would  disappear.  If  our  *  =  100,  the 
above  ratio  would  be  200,  as  determined  above  in  the  case  of  the  numerical 
example.  Another  way  of  symbolizing  the  derivative  is  D,y~dy/dx,  but  this 
requires  a  short  explanation. 

In  Chapter  XV  we  have  already  discussed  the  problem  of  the  ‘infinitesimal1 
and  we  have  seen  that  ‘infinitesimal'  is  a  misnomer  and  that  there  is  no  such 
thing  at  all.  Yet  this  word  is  very  often  uncritically  used  by  mathematicians 
and  is  therefore  often  confusing.  By  an  ‘infinitesimal'  mathematicians  mean  a 
varmble  which  approaches  zero  as  a  limit.  The  condition  that  it  should  be  a 
variable  is  essential.  It  would  probably  be  better  to  call  an  ‘infinitesimal’  an 
indefinitely  small  quantity  or  ‘indefinitesimal’,  and  that  is  what  the  reader 
should  understand  when  he  sees  anywhere  the  word  ‘infinitesimal’  or  ‘infinitely 
small  quantity’. 

These  indefinitely  small  quantities  are  in  general  neither  equal,  nor  even 
of  one  order.  Some  by  comparison  are  indefinitely  smaller  than  others,  and 
hence  are  said  to  be  ‘of  higher  order’.  Usually  several  quantities  are  considered 
which  approach  zero  simultaneously.  In  such  a  case  one  of  them  is  chosen  as 
the  principal  indefinitely  small  quantity.  Let  us  recall  that  if  we  take  any 
number,  for  example,  1,  and  divide  it  by  2  we  have  1  /2.  If  we  divide  1  by  4 
we  have  1/4  which  is  smaller  than  1/2  ;  if  we  divide  1  by  10  we  have  1  /10  which 
is  still  smaller.  If  we  carry  this  process  on  indefinitely,  taking  larger  and  larger 
denominators,  the  results  are  fractions  of  smaller  and  smaller  values.  In  the 
limit,  as  the  value  of  the  denominator  becomes  indefinitely  large  the  value 
of  the  fraction  approaches  zero.  This  simple  consideration  will  help  us  in  the 
classification  of  indefinitely  small  quantities. 

Let  us  take  a  as  the  principal  indefinitely  small  quantity  and  b  another 
indefinitely  small  quantity.  If  the  ratio  b/a  approaches  zero  with  a  we  say 
that  b  is  an  indefinitely  small  quantity  of  higher  order  with  respect  to  a.  In 
other  words,  although  a  approaches  zero  in  the  limit  yet  it  is  infinitely  larger 
than  b  and  so  the  ratio  b/a  also  approaches  zero. 

If  the  ratio  b/a  approaches  a  limit  k  different  from  zero  as  a  approaches 
zero,  then  b  is  said  to  be  of  the  ‘same  order'  as  a  and  b/a=k  +  t  where  €  is  in¬ 
definitely  small  with  respect  to  a.  In  such  a  case  b  =a  (£  +  «)  =ka  +acf  and  ka  is 
called  the  principal  part  of  b.  The  term  at  is  obviously  of  a  higher  order  than  a. 

We  may  say  in  general  that  if  we  have  a  power  of  a,  for  instance  a\  such 
that  the  ratio  b/an  approaches  a  limit  different  from  zero,  b  is  called  an 
'infinitesimal'  (indefinitesimal)  of  order  n  with  respect  to  a. 

SEMANTICS  OF  THE  DIFFERENTIAL  CALCULUS  581 

Let  us  give  a  numerical  illustration.  We  know  that  there  are  60  minutes 
in  one  hour,  24  hours  in  a  day,  or  that  there  are  1440  minutes  in  a  day,  and  by 
multiplying  1440  by  7,  that  there  are  10,080  minutes  in  a  week.  Our  forefathers 
called  this  1/10,080  part  of  a  week  a  ‘minute’  because  of  its  minuteness.  It  is 
obvious  that  a  minute  is  very  small  as  compared  with  a  week.  But  if  we  sub¬ 
divide  a  minute  into  60  equal  parts  we  have  a  still  smaller  quantity,  a  quantity 
of  second  order  smallness  and  so  we  called  it  a  second.  Indeed  there  are  3600 
seconds  in  one  hour,  86,400  seconds  in  a  day  and  604,800  seconds  in  a  week. 
If  we  decide  that  for  some  purpose  a  minute  is  as  short  a  period  of  ‘time’  as  we 
need  to  consider,  then  the  second,  1/60  of  a  minute,  is  relatively  so  small  that 
it  could  be  neglected.  In  a  calculation  where  1  / 100  of  some  unit  is  the  smallest 
value  which  needs  to  be  considered,  we  may  define  this  1/100  as  of  first  order 

smallness.  Then  1/100  of  1/100,  or  1/10,000,  of  that  unit,  which  is  relatively 
of  second  order  smallness,  is  entirely  negligible.  The  fractions  whose  smallness 
we  are  considering  here  are  comparatively  large,  and  we  usually  deal  with 
much  smaller  quantities,  but  the  smaller  a  quantity  is,  the  more  negligible 
the  correspondingly  smaller  quantity  of  higher  order  becomes. 

Let  us  consider  a  geometrical  interpretation  of  the  above.  If  we  represent 
a  quantity  X  by  a  line  segment,  and  a  slightly  greater  quantity,  x+dx ,  by  a 
slightly  longer  line  segment ;  then  the  quantities  x2  and  (x  *f  dx)2  =x2 +2xdx  -f  (dx)2 
may  be  represented  by  squares  where  sides  are  the  line  segments  which  represent 

the  quantities  x  and  x+dx  respectively. 

If  we  denote  the  areas  by  A ,  2$,  C,  Df  we  see  that  A-x2  and  that 
A  +B+C+D  *=x2+2xdx+(dx)2.  If  we  select  our  dx  smaller  and  smaller  the 
areas  B  =C—xdx  diminishing  in  one  dimension  only,  become  also  smaller  and 

smaller,  but  D  =  {dx)2  is  vanishing  much  more  rapidly  as  it  is  diminishing  m 
each  of  two  dimensions,  whence  it  is  said  to  be  a  quantity  of  second  order 
smallness,  which  for  all  purposes  at  hand  may  be  neglected. 

If  we  take  y=/(x)  and  its  derivative 

lim  —  ~Dxy. 

Ax— ^0  A  v 

Then 

and 

^=2?xy+cf  where  t  is  an  indefinitesimal, 
Ax' 

A y  ~DzyAx  -}-  eAx. 

582  VIII.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  MATHEMATICS 

In  the  above  expression  Dxy Ax  represents  the  principal  part  and  «A*  appears 
as  an  indefinites, mal  of  higher  order.  This  principal  part  is  called  the  dif¬ 
ferential  of  y  and  is  denoted  by  dy.  If  we  choose  f(x)  -*  we  have  dx  =»A*  and 

so,  ay*=Dxydx . 

So  we  see  that  the  differential  of  the  independent  variable  x  is  equal  to 
the  increment  of  that  variable.  This  statement  is  not  generally  true  about 
the  dependent  variable,  as  t  does  not  generally  vanish. 

The  derivative  is  also  sometimes  denoted  as/(x)  or  y'  and  this  notation 

is  due  to  Lagrange;  all  three  notations  are  used  and  it  is  well  to  be  acquainted 
with  them. 

The  denyatiye  of  a  function /(x)  is  in  general  another  function  of  x,  let 
us  say  /  {x).  If  /  (x)  has  a  derivative,  the  new  function  is  the  derivative  of  the 
derivative  or  the  second  derivative  olf(x)  and  is  denoted  by  y"  or /"(*).  Similarly 
the  third  derivative  y"’  or  f'"(x)  is  defined  as  the  derivative  of  the  second 
derivative  and  so  on.  In  the  other  notations  we  have: 

.  .  dx  \dx  /  dx 2 

Having  introduced  these  few  definitions  it  must  be  emphasized  that  the 
main  importance  of  the  calculus  is  in  its  central  idea;  namely,  the  study  of  a 
continuous  function  by  following  its  history  by  indefinitely  small  steps,  as  the 
function  changes  when  we  give  indefinitely  small  increments  to  the  independent 
variable.  As  was  emphasized  before,  the  whole  psycho-logics  of  this  process  is 
intimately  connected  with  the  activities  of  the  nervous  structure  and  also  with 
the  structure  of  science.  In  this  work  we  are  not  interested  in  calculations, 
comp  1  cations,  or  analytical  niceties.  Mathematicians  have  taken  excellent  care 
of  all  that.  We  need  only  to  know  about  the  structure  and  method  which  help 
to  trans  ate  dynamic  into  static,  and  vice  versa;  to  translate  'continuity'  on 
one  level,  or  order  of  abstraction,  into  ‘steps’  on  another. 

To  illustrate  what  has  been  said  and  to  give  the  reader  the/eel  of  the  process 
let  us  take  for  instance  a  simple  equation  y  =  2x3-x+5  where  y  represents  the 
function  of  the  variable  *  expressed  by  a  group  of  symbols  to  the  right  of  the 
sign  of  equality. 

To  .determme  the  relative  rate  of  growth  of  this  function,  that  is,  to 
lfferentiate  it,  we  replace  x  by  a  slightly  larger  value;  namely,  x+Ax,  and  see 
what  happens  to  the  expression.  2x*  becomes  2(x  +Ax)3  =  2x3  +6x*Ax  +6x(Ax)2 
+2(Ax)3;  —x  becomes  -x-Ax  and  the  constant  5  remains  unchanged.  In 
symbols,  y+Ay  =  2**+6*?Ax+6x(Ax)*+2(.Ax)*-x-Ax+S,  where  Ay  repre¬ 
sents  the  increment  of  the  function  and  Ax  represents  the  increment  of  the 
independent  variable. 

Subtracting  the  original  expression  y  =  2x3-x+S  we  get  the  amount  by 
which  the  function  has  been  increased,  namely: 

Ay  =  6x*Ax+6x(Ax)*+2(Ax)a -Ax. 

To  determine  the  relation,  or  ratio,  of  Ay,  the  increment  of  the  function,  to  Ax 
Oie  increment  of  the  independent  variable  which  produced  Ay,  we  divide 
Ay  by  Axt  and  obtain  the  equation 

SEMANTICS  OF  THE  DIFFERENTIAL  CALCULUS  583 

^-6*>+6*Ax+2(A*)l-l. 

Ax 

Then  as  Ax  approaches  0  the  terms  in  the  right-hand  side  of  the  equation 
which  contain  Ax  as  a  factor  also  approach  0  and  replacing  the  left-hand  side 

by  -  we  obtain  the  equation  -p  -  6**  - 1  which  means,  that  as  Ax  approaches  0, 

J  dx 

the  ratio  of  the  increment  of  the  function  to  the  increment  of  the  independent 
variable  approaches  6x2-l,  true  for  any  value  we  may  arbitrarily  assign  to  *. 

It  should  be  noticed  that  in  our  function  the  left-hand  side  represents 
the  ‘whole*  as  composed  of  interrelated  elements  which  are  represented  by  the 
right-hand  side.  When  instead  of  x  we  selected  a  slightly  larger  value;  namely, 
%+Ax,  we  performed  upon  this  altered  value  all  the  operations  indicated  by 
our  expression.  We  thus  have  in  mathematics,  because  of  the  self-imposed 
limitations,  the  first  and  only  example  of  complete  analysis,  impossible  m 
physical  problems  as  in  these  there  are  always  characteristics  left  out. 

An  important  structural  and  methodological  issue  should  also  be  empha¬ 
sized.  In  the  calculus  we  introduce  a  ‘small  increment'  of  the  variable;  we 
performed  upon  it  certain  indicated  operations,  and  in  the  final  results  this 
arbitrary  increment  disappeared  leaving  important  information  as  to  the 
rate  of  change  of  our  function.  This  device  is  structurally  extremely  useful 
and  can  be  generalized  and  applied  to  language  with  similar  results. 

It  has  been  noticed  already  that  the  calculus  can  be  developed  without  any 
reference  to  graphs,  co-ordinates  or  any  appeal  to  geometrical  notions;  but  as 
geometry  is  an  all-important  link  between  pure  analysis  and  the  outside  world 
of  physics,  we  find  in  geometry  also  the  psycho-logical  link  between  the  higher 
and  lower  orders  of  abstraction.  But  the  appeal  to  geometrical  notions  helps 
intuition  and  so  is  extremely  useful.  For  this  reason  we  will  explain  briefly  a 
system  of  co-ordinates  and  show  what  geometrical  significance  the  derivative  has 

We  take  in  a  plane  two  straight  lines  X'X  and  Y'  Y,  intersecting  at  0  at 
right  angles,  so  that  X'OX  is  horizontal  extending  to  the  left  and  right  of  0, 
and  YOY ',  is  vertical,  extending  above 

and  below  0,  as  a  frame  of  reference 
for  the  locations  of  point,  lines,  and 
other  geometrical  figures  in  the  plane. 
We  call  this  a  two-dimensional  rec¬ 
tangular  system  of  co-ordinates.  This 
method  may  be  extended  to  three  di¬ 
mensions,  and  our  points,  lines,  and 
other  geometrical  figures  referred  to  a 
three-dimensional  rectangular  system  of 

co-ordinates  consisting  of  three  mutually 

Fig.  2 

perpendicular  and  intersecting  planes. 

As  we  see  in  Fig.  2,  we  have  four  quadrants  I,  II,  HI,  IV,  formed  by  the 
intersecting  axes  X'X  and  Y'Y.  The  co-ordinates  of  a  point  P,  by  which  we 

584  VIII.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  MATHEMATICS 

mean  the  distances  from  the  axes  determine  the  position  of  the  point  uniquely. 
We  call  X'X  and  Y'Y  the  axis  of  X  and  the  axis  of  Y  respectively,  and  0  the 
origin.  If  we  select  a  point  Pi  in  the  plane  of  X'X  and  Y*  Y  and  draw  it  line 
P\M  perpendicular  to  X'X  then  OM  and  MP\  are  called  the  co-ordinates 
of  Pi;  OM  is  called  the  abscissa  and  is  denoted  by  x=b;  and  MPi  is  called  the 
ordinate  and  denoted  by  y  =a.  We  speak  of  Pi  as  the  point  (b,a),  or,  in  general, 
of  any  point  as  the  point  (x,y). 

Let  us  draw  ON  =  0M =b  and  draw  lines  PXP4  and  P2P3  through  M  and  N 
respectively  perpendicular  to  X'X,  making  MP4  =*NP2  =NPZ  =MPi  We 
then  have  four  points  Pi,  P2,  Pj,  P4»  in  each  one  of  the  four  quadrants  and 
all  of  them  by  construction  would  have  equal  numerical  values  for  their 
abscissas  and  ordinates.  To  be  able  to  discriminate  between  the  four  quadrants, 
and  so  avoid  ambiguity,  we  make  the  convention  that  all  values  of  y  above 
X'X  are  to  be  positive  and  below  X'X  negative;  and  all  values  of  x  to  the  right 
of  Y'Y  positive,  to  the  left  negative.  Thus  we  see  that  by  such  conventions 
the  point  Pi  would  have  both  b  and  a  positive;  P2  would  have  b  negative  and 
a  positive;  P3  both  b  and  a  negative,  and  finally  P4  would  have  b  positive  and 
a  negative,  or  in  symbols  Pi(b,a);  P2(~b,a);  £*(-&,  -a);  and  finally  P4(b,  -a). 

It  is  obvious  that  for  any  point  on  the  X  axis  (for  instance  M)  the  ordinate 
y=0.  If  our  point  is  on  the  Y  axis  the  abscissa  x-0  and  the  co-ordinates  of 
the  origin  0  are  both  zero  (0,0). 

From  the  above  definitions  we  see  at  once  how  to  plot,  or  locate,  a  point. 
To  plot  the  point  (—4,3),  since  the  abscissa  x  is  negative  and  the  ordinate  y  is 
positive  we  locate  N  on  X'X,  4  units  to  the  left  of  O.  At  N  we  erect  a  perpen¬ 
dicular  upon  which  we  locate  the  point  (-4,3),  3  units  above  N.  The  symbol 
( -4,3)  represents  a  particular  case  of  the  general  symbol  (x,y)  and  is  accordingly 
plotted  as  a  particular  point  as  just  shown.  If  instead  of  the  pair  or  relations 
expressed  by  two  equations  x  —  —4,  y  =3,  we  have  a  single  relation  expressed 
by  one  equation,  for  example,  y  =x~2,  we  have  y  expressed  as  a  function  of  x, 
whence  by  assigning  to  x  different  values,  corresponding  values  of  y  are 
determined,  and  a  set  of  points  may  be  plotted  where  abscissas  and  ordinates 
are  corresponding  values  of  x  and  y  respectively.  Thus,  when  x=X),  y=  -2, 
when  *  =  1,  y=  -1,  when  x  =  2,  y  =0,  when  x  =  3,  y  =  l,  when  x=4,  y  =  2  ,  . 

We  may  now  plot  the  points  A(0, -2);  B(l, -1);  C(2, 0);  £>(3,1);  £(4,2); 
or  as  many  more  points  as  we  may  choose  by  giving  x  additional  different 

values. 

If  we  give  to  x  successive  values  with  smaller 
differences  our  points  would  be  closer  together, 
for  instance  for 

*=0  y  =  —2  (A) 

*=0.5  y=  —1.5  (A’) 

*  =  1  y=  — 1  (5) 

*  =  1.5  y=  —0.5  ( J3 ') 

*  =  2  y  =  0  (C) 

Y 

SEMANTICS  OF  THE  DIFFERENTIAL  CALCULUS  585 

As  we  plot  larger  and  larger  numbers  of  points  closer  and  closer  together,  in 
the  limit,  if  we  take  indefinitely  many  such  points,  we  approach  a  smooth  line. 
It  can  be  proved  that  an  equation  of  the  type  given  in  this  example;  namely, 
where  both  variables  are  of  the  first  order,  always  represents  a  straight  line. 
Such  equations  are  called  therefore  Unear  equations,  as  they  represent  straight 
lines. 

The  problem  of  linearity  and  non-linearity  is  of  extreme  importance,  and 
we  will  return  to  it  later  on.  Here  we  are  interested  only  in  the  definition  and 
meaning  of  linearity  of  equations. 

x 2 

Let  us  consider  next  a  simple  equation  of  second  degree,  y  - y.  In  assign¬ 
ing  arbitrary  values  to  we  note  that  x2  is  always  positive  (by  the  rule  of 
signs)  whether  x  is  positive  or  negative.  Hence,  we  may  tabulate  values  of  x 
*vith  the  double  sign  ±  meaning  either  +  or  —  . 

x=0 

y  =0 

(0) 

x-=fcl 

i 

(A) 

X  —  zb2 

y- 2 

(B) 

x  =  ±3 

■** 

(C) 

x  =  ±4 

y=8 

(D) 

We  see  for  each  value  of  y  we  have  two  values  for  x  which  differ  only  in  sign 
This  means  that  we  have  points  on  two  sides  of  the  V  axis  with  numerically 

equal  abscissas  and,  since  for  #  =0,  y  -0, 
the  beginning  of  our  curve  is  at  the  origin 
of  co-ordinates  and  the  curve  is  symmet¬ 
rical  with  respect  to  the  Y  axis. 

If  we  connect  the  points  D\  C',  B\ 
A',  0t  A,  B ,  C,  Dt  with  straight  lines  we 
have  a  broken  line.  But  if  we  choose  smaller 
and  smaller  differences  between  the  suc¬ 
cessive  values  of  x,  the  broken  line  be¬ 
comes  smoother  and  smoother,  and,  in 
the  limit,  as  we  take  increasingly  smaller 
steps,  or,  in  other  words,  plot  indefinitely 
larger  numbers  of  points  in  one  interval,  we 
approach  a  smooth,  or  continuous  curve. 

variable  x  vary  from  point  to 
It  is  necessary  to  be- 
the  two  different  types 

It  must  be  noticed  that  in  equations 
of  higher  orders  the  ratio  of  changes  in 
the  function  y  to  corresponding  changes  in  the 
point,  and  so  we  have  a  curve  instead  of  a  straight  line, 
come  quite  clear  on  this  point  so  we  may  better  compare 
of  equations  as  to  the  law  of  their  growth. 

586  VIII.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  MATHEMATICS 

Let  us  write  down  in  two  columns  the  successive  values  for  the  two  types 
of  equations.  Let  us  take  the  equation  y-~  with  the  graph  shown  in  the 

preceding  diagram  (Fig.  4)  and  the  equation  y=2x  as  shown  in  Fig.  5. 

V 

Fig.  5 

The  equation  y  =  2x  involves  the  variables  in  the  first  degree  and  we  see  that 
the  ratio  of  changes  in  the  ordinates  to  corresponding  changes  in  the  abscissas 
remains  constant  (proportional).  The  triangles  in  Fig.  5,  are  either  equal  or 
similar,  which  necessitates  the  equality  of  angles  and  so  the  line  OABCD  is 
of  necessity  a  straight  line.  In  this  case  as  *=0  gave  us  y- 0  the  line  passes 
through  the  origin  of  co-ordinates. 

The  picture  is  entirely  different  in  the  case  of  the  higher  degree  equation, 

y  =~2  illustrated  in  Fig.  4.  From  the  table  of  values  of  the  function  we  see 

that  the  value  of  the  function  increases  increasingly  more  rapidly  than  the 
values  of  the  independent  variable  and  so  the  ordinates  are  not  proportional  to 
the  abscissas.  If  in  Fig.  4  we  connect  O  with  A ,  O  with  B,  O  with  C,  O  with  Dt 
respectively,  we  see  that  the  lines  OA,  OB,  OC,  and  OD  have  different  angles 
with  the  axis  X'X ;  the  respective  triangles  are  not  similar,  and  so  there  is  no 
proportionality.  The  lines  OA,  OB,  OC,  OD  .  ,  do  not  represent  a  straight  line 
as  they  have  all  different  angles  with  the  axis  XX'  and  so  the  points  A,  B, 
C,  D  .  ,  cannot  lie  on  a  straight  line  but 'represent  a  broken  line  which,  in  the 
limit,  when  the  points  plotted  become  sufficiently  near  together,  becomes  a 
smooth  and  continuous  curve. 

The  fact  that  equations  in  which  the  variables  are  only  of  the  first  degree, 
represent  straight  lines,  and  that  equations  of  higher  degrees  represent  curved 
lines  is  very  important,  as  will  appear  later  on.  We  must  notice  also  that  the 
problem  of  linearity  is  connected  with  proportionality . 

These  few  simple  notions  concerning  the  use  of  co-ordinates  will  allow  us 
to  explain  the  geometrical  meaning  of  the  derivative  and  the  differential. 

SEMANTICS  OF  THE  DIFFERENTIAL  CALCULUS  S87 

Consider  Pi  and  P% ,  (Fig.  6)  two  points  on  the  curve,  y**/(x),  referred  to 
the  axes  OX  and  OF.  Drop  perpendiculars  PXMX  and  P2M%  from  Pi  and  P2 
to  OX.  These  are  the  ordinates  yi  -/(*  1)  and  y2  =/(*2)  of  the  points  Pi  and  P2, 

and  OM\  and  OM2  are  the  abscissas  xx 
and  xt  of  the  points  Pi  and  P*.  Through 
Pi  draw  the  secant  PXP%,  the  tangent  to 
the  curve  P\T,  and  the  line  P\Q  parallel 
to  OX.  Then  PxQ  represents  Ax  =x2—xx 
the  change  in  the  variable  x,  and  P%Q 
represents  Ay =y2  —  yi  =/(*a)  — fixi)  the 
change  in  the  function  y. 

In  the  right  triangle  PXQP%  the  ratio 
PtQ/PxQ  is  a  measure  (the  tangent) 
of  the  angle  P%PiQ  ( — «)  that  is,  tan  a 

-P»Q/PiQ-^y/^-^r~  or< 

since  x2  =xx  4- Ax 
we  may  write 

tan  a  = 

/(xi+Ax)-/(xi) 

Ax 

As  P,  approaches  Pi  along  the  curve,  the  secant  PiPj  rotates  about  Pi 
approaching  PiP  as  its  limit,  and  the  tangent  of  a  approaches  the  tangent 
of  t,  t  being  the  angle  which  PiT,  the  tangent  to  the  curve  at  Pi,  makes  with 
PiQ.  But  as  Pj  approaches  Pi,  A*=*s  — =  approaches  zero  or 

symbolically  as  Ax  -4  0;  (Ay/A*)->  tan  r,  that  is  tan  r  =  ]im  (Ay/A*). 

We  see  that  the  lim  yt~—  -  lim  ^  represents  nothing  more  or  less 

X2~*xi  X2—XX  &X—*0 

than  the  derivative  of  the  function  representing  the  curve.  In  other  words, 
the  geometrical  interpretation  of  the  analytical  process  of  differentiation  is  the 
finding  of  the  slope  of  the  graph  of  the  function.  The  increment  Ay  of  the 
function  is  represented  by  P2Q\  the  differential  dy  is  equal  to  NQ  and  Ax  = 

dx~PiQ;  tan  Z  TPxQ^ 

From  the  above  considerations  we  see  that  the  differential  calculus  gives, 
by  the  application  of  some  extremely  simple  structural  principles,  a  method 
of  analysis  by  which  we  can  discover  a  tendency  at  a  particular  stage  rather 
than  the  final  outcome  after  a  definite  interval.  From  such  fundamental  yet 
simple  beginnings  the  whole  calculus  is  developed.  Most  of  these  developments 
are  not  needed  for  our  purpose,  but  we  will  explain  one  specially  important 
theorem.  The  theorem  in  question  is  that  the  derivative  of  the  sum  of  two 
functions  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  their  derivatives.  In  symbols 

Dx(u  +v)  +Dxv. 

588  VIII.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  MATHEMATICS 

Let  us  symbolize  «  +e  =>y  and  select  a  special  value 

then 
we  have 

we  have 

(4) 

yo  +Ay  ** «o  -FA u  +vq  +Av.  By  subtracting  (4), 

Ay  =  A u  +Ai».  Dividing  by  Ax, 

Ay  A u  Av 

T~=T~+T~*  When  Ax  approaches  zero  the 

left-hand  side  approaches  Dxy  =Dx(u+v);  and  the  first  term  of  the  right-hand 
approaches  Dxut  while  the  second  term  approaches  Dx v  and  so, 

£>x(u  -fv)  =*Dxu  +Dxi>. 

The  symbol  Dx  means  also  that  certain  operations  are  to  be  performed 
upon  our  function;  namely,  to  find  its  derivative.  When  used  in  this  sense  it 
is  called  an  operator.  The  operator  Dx  can  be  also  written  in  its  differential 

form  as  and  similarly  for  higher  derivatives. 

2.  MAXIMA  AND  MINIMA 

It  will  be  useful  to  have  some  applications  of  the  differential  calculus 
explained. 

If  a  function  y=f(x )  is  continuous  in  an  interval  a<x<b  and  has  larger 
(or  smaller)  values  at  some  intermediate  points  than  it  has  at  or  near  the  ends, 
then  it  has  a  maximum  (or  minimum)  at  some  point  x  inside  this  interval. 
If  Fig.  7  represents  the  graph  of  the  function,  it  is  obvious  that  at  the  maximum 
(or  minimum)  the  tangent  to  the  curve  is  parallel  to  the  axis  and  therefore 
the  slope  of  this  tangent  is  zero.  As  this  slope  is  given  by  the  derivative  and 
the  slope  is  zero  we  have  a  simple  method  of  finding  the  maximum  (or  the 
minimum)  of  a  function  by  equating  the  first  derivative  to  zero;  namely, 
Dxy  =0  when  x-x0. 

It  is  useful  to  be  able  to  discriminate  between  the  maximum  and  the 
minimum  of  a  function.  Fig.  7  shows  that  this  can  be  done  by  finding  means 
to  discriminate  between  the  two  cases  when  our  curve  is  concave  upwards  or 
concave  downwards.  The  slope  of  a  curve  for  a  particular  value  of  x 

is  given  by  the  value  of  Dxyt  cor¬ 
responding  to  that  value  of  x.  If 
the  value  Dxy  is  positive,  y  increases 
as  x  increases,  and  the  curve 
slopes  up  as  we  move  to  the  right; 
if  the  value  of  Dxy  is  negative, 
X  y  decreases  as  x  increases,  and 
the  curve  slopes  down  as  we  move 
to  the  right. 

If  we  consider  the  curve  y  =f(x )  which  has  its  concave  side  turned 
upward  (Fig.  8),  the  slope  of  the  curve  itself  is  a  function  of  x,  tan  a  =/'(*). 
If  we  consider  a  variable  point  P  on  a  curve  y  =/(*),  together  with  the  tangent 
to  the  curve  P ,  as  following  the  curve  in  the  direction  of  increasing  values  of  x , 
the  curve  is  concave  upward  whenever  the  slope  is  increasing  algebraically, 

SEMANTICS  OF  THE  DIFFERENTIAL  CALCULUS  589 

that  is  when  D ,  tan  a«0.  In  other  words,  the  curve  is  concave  upwards  for 
those  values  of  x  for  which  Dx  tan  a  is  positive,  or  since  tan  a  =Dxy  for  those 
values  of  x  for  which  Dx  tan  a  ■*  Dx(Dzy)  -  Dx2y  y 
Is  positive.  Similarly  a  curve  is  concave  down¬ 
wards  for  those  values  of  x  for  which  Dx  tan  a 
-Dx{Dxy)  =*D2y  is  negative.  These  results 
can  be  expressed  thus: 

A  curve  y  =/(x)  is  concave  upward  when 
Dz*y>  0,  or,  in  words,  when  the  second  de¬ 
rivative  is  positive,  and  the  curve  is  concave 
downward  when  the  second  derivative  is 
negative,  or,  in  symbols,  when  Dx2y  < 0.  0 

From  Fig.  7,  we  see  that  for  a  maximum 
we  must  have  our  tangent  parallel  to  the  X'X 

and  our  curve  concave  downwards,  hence  for  these  conditions  the  first  deriva¬ 
tive  [Dxy]x-xo  *  0,  and  the  second  derivative  [Dx2y\x-xo  <0.  For  a  minimum  the 
first  derivative  must  again  be  zero  and  the  second  derivative  positive,  whence 
the  concave  side  of  the  curve  is  turned  upwards.  It  should  be  noticed  that 
the  problems  of  maxima  and  minima  play  an  extremely  important  structural 
psycho-logical  and  semantic  role  in  our  lives.  All  theories,  somehow,  are  built 
6n  some  minimum  or  maximum  principle  involving  evaluations  which  are 
fundamental  factors  of  all  semantic  reactions.  In  daily  life  we  apply  these 
structural  and  semantic  notions  continually.  In  science  this  tendency,  made 
its  appearance  quite  early.  The  problem  of  maxima  and  minima  was  treated 
seriously  as  far  back  as  the  second  century  b.c.  In  the  eighteenth  century 
Maupertuis  formulated  a  ‘supreme  law  of  nature' ,  that  in  all  natural  processes 
the  ‘action*  (energy  multiplied  by  'time')  must  be  a  minimum.  Euler  and 
Lagrange  gave  an  exact  basis  and  form  to  this  principle;  and  finally  Hamilton, 
in  1834,  established  this  principle  structurally  as  a  variational  principle,  known 
as  the  hamiltonian  principle,  which  appears  to  be  of  extreme  generality  and 
usefulness.  It  facilitates  the  derivation  of  the  fundamental  equations  of 
mechanics,  electrodynamics  and  electron  theory.  It  has  also  survived,  in  a 
generalized  form,  the  einsteinian  revolution,  for  it  contains  nothing  whatever 
which  would  connect  it  with  a  definite  co-ordinate  system;  it  involves  only  pure 
numbers  and  so  is  invariant  to  all  transformations.  It  is  structurally  one  of  the 
most  important  invariants  ascribed  to  nature,  being  independent  of  the  systems 
of  reference  of  the  observers. 

It  is  very  desirable  that  this  problem  should  be  investigated  further  from 
the  structural  psycho-logical  semantic  and  neurological  point  of  view,  as  the 
very  foundations  of  human  psycho-logics  are  fundamentally  connected  with 
such  a  principle,  which  itself  is  an  invariant  in  human  psycho-logics. 

Its  importance  is  still  increasing,  and  the  hamiltonian  principle  plays  a 
most  remarkable  role  in  all  the  newest  advances  of  science.  Any  reader  need 
only  look  attentively  at  his  daily  life  to  realize  that  there  too  this  principle 
plays  a  predominant  role. 

Fig.  8 

590  VIII.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  MATHEMATICS 

3.  CURVATURE 

In  modern  scientific  literature  we  hear  often  the  fundamental  term  'curva¬ 
ture  mentioned,  and  a  few  words  about  it  will  not  be  amiss.  If  we  take  two 
perpendicular  lines  X'OX  and  OY  and  select  on  OY  a  number  of  points  A, 

B,  C,  D . ,  further  and  further  away  from  0 
and  describe  arcs  of  circles  with  these  points  as 
centres  with  radii  AO ,  BO,  CO,  DO  . ,  respectively 
Fig.  9f  we  find  each  successive  arc  flatter  and 
closer  to  the  line  X'X  than  its  predecessor.  In 
other  words,  the  larger  the  radius  of  our  circle, 
the  flatter  its  arc  is.  In  the  limit  as  the  radius 
of  the  circle  becomes  indefinitely  large,  the  arc 
approaches  a  straight  line  by  intuition  and  by 
t  definition.  We  notice  also  that  the  curvature 

of  each  circle  is  uniform,  that  is,  one-valued  at  every  point;  but  that  when  we 
pass  from  one  circle  to  another  of  different  radius,  the  curvature  changes. 

If  we  consider  a  curve  and  two  points  on  it,  M1  and  M2,  (Fig.  10)  and 
raw  two  tangents  at  these  points;  then  the  angle  between  these  two  tangents 
will  depend  on  two  factors,  the  sharpness  of  the  curve  and  the  distance  between 

the  points  Mt  and  M2.  If  we  take  the 
points  near  enough  and  designate  the 
length  of  the  arc  between  them  by  As, 
the  angle  between  the  two  tangents 
by  AS,  then  the  limiting  value  of  the 
ratio  AS /As,  as  Jlf2  approaches  M\, 
becomes  dS/ds,  and  is  a  measure  of  the 
rate  of  change  of  the  direction  of  the 
tangent  at  M,  as  M  moves  along  the 
curve.  Let  us  designate  the  rate  at 
.  which  the  tangent  turns  where  the 

point  describes  the  curve  with  unit  velocity  as  the  curvature,  or  k=±d6/ds, 
ut  as  is  essentially  a  positive  number  or  zero  we  accept  only  the  absolute 
value  of  this  ratio.  To  find  dS/ds  we  notice  that  tan  6  =dy/dx 

tan~l  ^  =  tan-1  /,  whence  d8-  dy'  ^>dx 

ax 

or  S 

dJS 

1  +/2  1+y'2* 

But  k  “ds  where  *  =y/(dx)i+(dy)1  =V/ 1  +y'Hx 

whence  k  - - - - 

(l+y2)s/2- 

The  reciprocal  of  the  curvature  is  called  the  radius  of  curvature.  The  radius 
of  curvature  of  a  circle  is  its  radius.  The  curvature  of  a  curve  is  measured  by 
the  radius  of  the  osculating  circle,  that  circle  which  fits  the  curve  the  most 
closely  in  the  neighbourhood  of  our  point. 

SEMANTICS  OF  THE  DIFFERENTIAL  CALCULUS  591 

4.  VELOCITY 

Until  now  we  have  treated  our  independent  variables  as  any  quantity: 
but  there  are  many  problems  where  the  independent  variable  represents  'time'. 
For  instance,  if  we  travel  by  railroad  the  distance  increases  as  'time’  increases, 
plants  and  animals  grow  with  ‘time’,  .  By  the  average  velocity  with  which  a 
given  point  moves  for  a  given  length  of  ‘time’  we  mean  the  distance  s  traversed 
divided  by  the  ‘time’  elapsed.  If,  for  instance,  a  train  makes  5  miles  in  10 
minutes  we  say  that  its  average  velocity  is  30  miles  per  hour,  or,  in  symbols: 

Velocity,  v  —  -.  In  this  case  we  were  considering  uniform  velocity,  but  very 
t 

often  we  bave  to  deal  with  velocities  which  are  not  uniform  and  which  might 
be  increasing  or  decreasing.  In  such  a  case  we  can  describe  the  velocity 
approximately  at  any  given  moment  if  we  take  a  short  interval  of  ‘time’ 
immediately  after  the  moment  in  question  and  take  the  average  velocity  for 
this  short  interval. 

For  instance,  the  distance  a  stone  falls  is  according  to  the  law,  s  =  16  t2.  We 
want  to  find  how  fast  it  is  going  after  fa  seconds  when  si  =  16  fa2,  and  a  short 
interval  after  we  have,  let  us  say,  sz  =  16  fa2.  Obviously  the  average  velocity  for 

the  interval  fa— fa  is  — — —  feet  per  second.  If  we  take  fa -l,  $i  =  16,  and  the 
fa  —  *i 

difference  fa  —fa  =0.1  of  a  second  then  ^2  =  16  fa2  =  16  X  1.21  — 19.36  and 

$2 -Si  19.36-16  3.36  „  ,  .  , 

- — :  * — - - - -33.6  ft.  per  second. 

fa- fa  0.1  0.1 

If  we  take  the  interval  of  ‘time’  smaller,  for  instance,  1/100  of  a  second 

we  would  have  — - — -  =32.2  feet  per  second,  and  if  we  take  the  intervals  as 
fa  —fa 

1/1000  of  a  second  the  average  velocity  would  be  32.0  feet  per  second.  We  see 
that  we  could  determine  the  speed  of  the  stone  at  any  instant  with  any  degree 
of  accuracy  by  direct  calculation,  but  this  is  not  necessary.  If  we  regard  the 
interval  fa— fa  as  an  increment  of  the  variable  t ,  that  is  as  At,  and  s%—  si=As 
which  represents  the  increment  of  the  distance  considered  as  a  function  of 
the  ‘time’  we  would  have  the  average  velocity  =As/At .  As  At  approaches 
zero  in  the  limit,  the  average  velocity  approaches  a  limit  and  this  limit  is  the 
velocity  v  at  the  instant  fa,  or  in  symbols 

v  -  lim  —  =— .  In  words,  the  velocity  of  a 
V^oAt  to 

point  is  the  ‘time’  derivative  of  the  space  traveled. 

If  the  velocity  is  not  uniform,  the  rate  at  which  the  velocity  is  increasing 

is  called  the  acceleration  and  may  be  written  as  a  =  — ,  but  as  we  have  already 

at 

592  VIII.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  MATHEMATICS 

In  the  above  notes  we  have  not  attempted  to  give  the  reader  more  than 
some  structural  and  methodological  notions,  and  what  amount  really  to  short 
structural  explanations  of  definitions  which  will  be  useful  later  on.  The  reader 
can  find  many  excellent  books  which  give  all  the  additional  information  he 
may  want. 

Section  C.  On  the  integral  calculus. 

So  far,  we  have  been  studying  a  method  by  which  to  find  the  variation  of 
a  given  function  corresponding  to  an  indefinitely  small  variation  of  our  variable. 
We  saw  that  the  rate  of  change  of  our  function  was  given  by  the  first  derivative, 
which  in  turn  was  also  a  function  (usually  different)  of  our  independent  variable 
and  so  could  itself  vary  and  have  a  rate  of  change,  and  so  give  us  a  second 
derivative  ,  , 

And  now  we  must  explain  briefly  the  inverse  problem;  namely,  given  the 
derivative  to  find  the  function.  In  symbols,  given  u=DxU,  find  U. 

The  function  U  is  called  the  integral  of  u  with  respect  to  x,  or,  in  symbols 
V  —  J*udx. 

To  integrate  a  function  f(x)  is  to  find  a  function  F(x)  which  when  dif¬ 
ferentiated  gives  again  the  function  f(x)  with  which  we  started.  As  in  this 
work  we  are  not  interested  in  computations,  but  only  in  the  structural, 
methodological,  and  semantic  aspects,  the  inverse  problem  of  differentiation; 
namely,  integration,  is  less  important  for  us  here,  and  I  will  explain  only  a 
single  example.  We  have  already  differentiated  the  function  y  =  2x*-x+5  and 
found  its  derivative  dy/dx  =6x2-l.  Just  as  the  derivative  of  the  sum  of  a 
number  of  functions  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  their  derivatives,  a  similar  rule  holds 
for  the  integrals;  namely,  that  the  integral  of  the  sum  of  a  number  of  functions 
is  equal  to  the  sum  of  their  integrals.  Hence  we  can  take  in  our  example  only 
the  first  term  of  our  equation.  In  symbols  Dx(2x?)  *6x2;  in  words,  the  deriva¬ 
tive  of  2x*  is  6x 2. 

In  a  problem  in  integration  we  would  have  6x2  given  and  we  would  have 
to  find  the  original  function  from  which  6xz  was  obtained  by  differentiation. 
In  our  case  the  solution  is  already  given;  namely,  J'6xidx  =  2xs*  In  general 

the  solution  of  problems  of  integration  is  largely 
dependent  on  the  ingenuity  of  the  solver,  al¬ 
though  we  have  a  number  of  standard1  formulae 
and  methods.  The  geometrical  meaning  of  in¬ 
tegration  is  much  more  interesting  for  us  and 
we  will  give  a  Short  explanation  of  it. 

If  we  consider  the  curve  given  by  an  equa¬ 
tion  y  ~f(x)  and  the  area  bounded  by  the  X 
axis,  the  two  ordinates  whose  abscissas  are  x=a 
and  x—b  and  the  curve,  we  may  find  the  area 

as  follows: 

♦The  constant  of  integration  is  omitted  so  as  not  to  confuse  the  reader. 

SEMANTICS  OF  THE  DIFFERENTIAL  CALCULUS  593 

If  we  select  an  arbitrary  value  x  *=#1  for  which  y^yi  —fix i),  denoting  the 
corresponding  value  of  the  area  A  by  A\  (Fig.  11)  and  give  to  x\  an  increment 
fax,  then  the  area  Ai  Would  receive  the  increment  A^4.  We  can  approximate  AA 
by  the  help  of  two  rectangles,  one  of  height  yi-/(xi),  the  other  of  height 
y%  «  yi  +Ay  -/(**)  =/(*i  + Ax) . 

We  see  that  AA  is  larger  than  the  smaller  rectangle.  In  symbols 
yxAx  <AA  <(yi  +Ay)Ax, 

AA 

hence  yi  <—  <  Cyi  + Ay)  * 

Ax 

As  we  pass  to  the  limit  and  let  Ax  approach  zero,  we  have 

lim  —  =yi.  That  is,  D*A  =yi  =/(xi)  when  x=*xi;  which  means  that  the 
A*-*o  Ax 

ordinate  of  the  curve  at  any  point  is  equal  to  the  x  derivative  of  the  area  at 
that  point.  In  general,  D*A  -y,  and  hence,  A  =J*ydx. 

The  consideration  of  what  is  called  the  definite  integral  is  still  more 
Instructive.  Let  us  take  the  curve  in  Fig.  12  represented  by  an  equation  y  =/(x) 
and  a  pair  of  ordinates  which  intersect  the  X  axis  at  the  points  x  «x0  and  x=x„. 
Let  us  divide  the  interval  Xoxn  into  n 
equal  parts  and  erect  ordinates  at  each 
point  of  division.  Let  us  construct  a 
Bet  of  pairs  of  rectangles  with  these 
ordinates  as  we  constructed  the  single 
pair  of  rectangles  in  Fig.  11.  By  inspec¬ 
tion  of  the  figure  we  see  that  the  area 
under  the  curve  is  slightly  greater  than 
the  sum  of  the  areas  of  the  included  rect¬ 
angles  and  slightly  less  than  the  sum  of 
the  areas  of  the  including  rectangles.  When  n  is  allowed  to  increase  without 
limit  the  sum  of  the  areas  of  either  set  of  these  rectangles  approaches  the  area 
bounded  by  the  curve,  the  X  axis,  and  the  end  ordinates.  In  symbols,  the 
area  of  the  first  rectangle  beneath  the  curve  is  /(x0)Ax,  where  Ax  denotes 

Xx-XQJfn~— \  The  area  of  the  second  rectangle  is  fix i)Ax  ,  .  The  sum  of 
n 

fi-i 

these  areas  is/(xo)Ax-t-/(xi)Ax  + .  .  .  +/(xn_i)Ax  =  ^/(x,)Ax. 

*“0 

If  we  allow  n  to  increase  without  limit  we  have  the  area  under  the  curve: 

A  =  lim  lf(x0)Ax+f(xi)Ax  +  .  .  .  +/(x„_i)Ax]  =  lim  £  /(x)Ax 
»->00 

x**xn 

= ffix)dx  ^  [f(x)]  =  F(xn)  -  F(x0)‘ 

In  words,  the  above  formula  indicates  the  fundamental  process  of  the  integral 
calculus;  namely:  Let  fix)  be  a  continuous  function  of  x  throughout  the 
interval  x0i>  x^  x„.  If  we  divide  this  interval  into  n  equal  parts  by  the 
points  x=xo,  xi,  .  .  .  ,  x„,  and  form  the  sum/(x0)Ax-i-/(xi)Ax  + .  .  .  +/(*»-i)Ax, 

Fig.  12 

594  VIII.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  MATHEMATICS 

as  we  let  n  increase  without  limit,  this  sum  will  approach  a  limit,  which  can  be 
found  by  integrating  the  function/!*),  that  is,  by  finding  the  function  F(x)  of 
which  /(*)  is  the  derivative,  and  by  taking  the  integral  between  the  limits 
*  -*o  and  *  -*„;  that  is,  by  taking  the  difference  between  F(xn)  and  F(*0). 

It  must  be  noticed  that  in  our  first  example,  the  case  of  the  indefinite 
integral,  we  considered  integration  as  the  inverse  of  differentiation;  in  the 
second  example,  we  considered  the  definite  integral  as  the  limit  of  a  sum. 

The  symbol  of  the  integral,  J~,  had  its  origin  in  the  letter  5  from  the  latin 
word  'summa’,  the  integral  being  historically  understood  as  the  definite 
integral,  or  the  limit  of  a  sum. 

Section  D.  Further  applications. 

1.  partial  DIFFERENTIATION 
When  we  have  more  than  one  independent  variable,  for  example,  two, 
we  have  to  become  acquainted  with  what  is  called  partial  differentiation! 
This  process  is  important,  as  in  practice  we  usually  deal  with  several  independent 
variables.  It  presents  very  little  that  is  new  from  a  structural  and  method¬ 
ological  point  of  view,  but  we  give  it  here,  simply  to  explain  the  meaning  of 
the  term,  as  the  reader  may  find  it  used  in  other  works. 

If  we  have  a  function  z  of  two  independent  variables  *  and  y,  z=f(x,y) 
which  geometrically  represents  a  surface,  we  may  differentiate  with  respect  to 
one  of  the  variables,  let  us  say  *,  and  hold  the  other  variable  y  fast,  that  is, 
treat  it  as  a  constant.  In  this  way  we  should  then  have  a  partial  derivative 
of  z  with  respect  to  *.  Similarly,  if  we  treat  *  as  a  constant  and  differentiate 
in  respect  to  y,  we  should  have  the  partial  derivative  of  z  with  respect  to  y. 
The  above  definitions  give  us  the  rules  for  partial  differentiation— that  is! 
following  the  ordinary  rules,  considering  each  variable  individually  and  treating 
all  the  other  variables  as  constant. 

The  notation  for  partial  derivatives  is  similar  to  the  ones  explained  before, 
except  that  the  lower  case  letter  d  is  replaced  by  the  script  form  d  or  a  subscript 
is  used  to  indicate  the  variable  with  respect  to  which  the  differentiation  is 

performed;  for  instance,  -Zz' =Dff=Dxz  ,  .  Higher  derivatives  are 

obtained  without  difficulty  in  like  manner.  If  *-/(*, y)  and  —=/,'(*  y)  and 

dz  &X 

the  partial  derivatives  themselves  are  in  general  also  functions 

of  x  and  y  and  can  in  turn  be  differentiated.  Thus,  —  ( — ^  =f„  "(x  v)  or 

,  v  dx\dx)  a**  1  (  ,y>' or 

a/aA  a2z  „ 

dy\dx)~dxdy~*m*"*?e,y)'  The  order  in  which  we  differentiate  is  immaterial 

provided  that  the  derivatives  concerned  are  continuous.  The  total  differential 

of  a  function  of  two  variables,  for  example, /(*,y),  df = dff+dj = ^dx  +^dy  is 

dx  dy 

SEMANTICS  OF  THE  DIFFERENTIAL  CALCULUS  595 

equal  to  the  sum  of  the  partial  differentials  of  the  first  order  if  we  neglect  terms 
of  higher  orders,  whose  values  are  indefinitely  small  quantities  relative  to 

the  first  order  differentials.  In  symbols,  df  - dj +dyf  - *n 

words,  the  total  differential  of  f(xty)  is  found  by  finding  the  partial  derivatives 
with  respect  to  x  and  y,  multiplying  them  respectively  by  dx  and  dyt  and  adding. 

2.  DIFFERENTIAL  EQUATIONS 

A  natural  development  of  the  invention  of  the  calculus  was  the  introduction 
of  differential  equations.  Differential  equations  differ  from  the  ordinary 
equations  of  mathematics  in  that  in  addition  to  variables  and  constants  they 
contain  also  derivatives  of  one  or  more  of  the  variables  involved.  Differential 
equations  are  of  extreme  importance,  and  arise  in  many  problems.  Newton 
solved  his  first  differential  equation  in  1676  by  the  use  of  an  infinite  series, 
eleven  years  after  his  discovery  of  the  calculus  in  1665.  Leibnitz  solved  his 
first  differential  equation  in  1693,  the  year  in  which  Newton  first  published 
his  results.  From  this  date  on,  progress  in  the  development  and  application 
of  differential  equations  was  very  rapid,  and  today  the  subject  of  differential 
equations  occupies  in  the  general  field  of  mathematics  a  central  position  from 
which  important  and  useful  lines  of  development  flow  in  many  different 
directions. 

To  integrate  or  solve  a  differential  equation  means,  analytically,  to  find 
all  the  functions  which  satisfy  the  equation.  In  geometry,  it  means  to  find  all 
the  curves  which  have  the  property  expressed  by  the  equation.  In  mechanics 
it  means  to  find  all  the  motions  that  may  possibly  result  from  a  given  set  of 
forces  , .  The  degree  of  the  differential  equation  is  defined  as  the  degree  of  the 
derivative  of  the  highest  order  which  enters  the  equation.  The  order  of  the 
differential  equations  is  the  order  of  the  highest  derivative  it  contains. 

Equations  in  x  and  y,  of  the  first  degree  in  y  and  its  derivatives  with  respect 
to  x ,  y't  y". ,  are  called  linear  equations .  The  main  equations  of  physics  are 
Unear  differential  equations  of  the  second  order,  since  y,  the  primitive  function, 
/,  the  first  derivative,  and  y",  the  second  derivative,  appear  only  in  the  first 

degree.  For  instance  the  equation  -f  <xi— -f  o*y =X,  or  y’*  +aiyr  +a*y  =Xf 

dx2  dx 

when  X  represents  a  function  of  x  alone  is  such  an  equation.  It  is  linear,  or  of 
the  first  degree,  because  the  second  derivative,  y",  appears  only  to  the  first 
degree.  It  is  of  the  second  order  because  that  is  the  highest  order  derivative 
in  the  equation.  As  we  may  recall,  the  derivative  of  a  function  gives  us  the 
rate  of  change  of  the  function  when  we  give  successive  values  to  the  independent 
variable.  When  we  study  the  rate  of  change  of  the  rate  of  change  of  our  function, 
we  study  the  rate  of  change  of  the  first  derivative  which  expresses  the  rate  of 
change  of  the  function,  whence  we  obtain  the  derivative  of  the  second  order, 
and  so  on.  If  we  equate  our  derivatives  to  zero,  or  choose  a  value  of  the  variable 
for  which  our  derivative  becomes  zero,  the  rate  of  change  of  our  function 

596  VIII.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  MATHEMATICS 

becomes  zero.  In  other  words,  the  value  of  our  function  is  momentarily  constant, 
it  has  a  stationary  value. 

Quite  naturally,  differential  equations  which  involve  derivatives  involve 
implicitly  and  explicitly  the  whole  fundamental  structural  framework  of  the 
calculus  as  explained  in  this  chapter  by  expressing  the  ‘rate  of  change’  of  some 
natural  process.  If  the  rate  of  change  is  zero,  it  might  express  some  ‘natural 
law*,  or  some  uniformity  as  found  in  nature.  In  other  words,  differential 
equations  express  differential  laws,  which  in  turn  express  the  momentary  ten¬ 
dencies  of  processes  whose  outcomes  are  given  by  the  process  of  integration. 

From  what  has  already  been  said  here,  it  is  obvious  that  differential 
equations  and  the  differential  laws  which  they  express  are  of  extreme  structural 
importance.  They  formulate  not  only  the  uniformities  and  tendencies  found 
in  nature,  but  also  of  necessity  somehow  involve  causality.  Besides  which, 
they  are  also  in  accord  with  the  physical  structure  and  function  of  the  nervous 
system.  We  shall  return  to  this  most  important  subject  in  the  next  chapter, 
in  which  we  shall  analyse  the  physical  significance  and  aspects  of  what  has 
been  explained  here. 

3.  METHODS  OF  APPROXIMATION 

In  discussing  the  above  fundamental  notions  of  the  calculus  we  considered 
a  portion  AB ,  of  the  curve  given  by  the  equation  y=/(x),  (Fig.  13)  and  two 
points  on  this  curve  Pi  with  co-ordinates  (*i,  yi)  and  P2  with  co-ordinates 

(*2»  ?2)  moving  along  the  curve,  the 
secant,  or  chord,  P\P%  rotates  about  Pi, 
its  length  steadily  diminishing,  and  in 
the  limit  as  the  length  of  the  chord  PiP2 
tends  toward  zero,  the  slope  of  the  se¬ 
cant  approaches  the  slope  of  the  tangent 
PiP.  We  saw  that  the  slope  of  this  tan¬ 
gent  was  given  by  the  value  of  the  first 
derivative  of  the  function  which  repre¬ 
sented  the  curve.  We  were  trying  to  get 
some  knowledge  of  the  direction  of  our 
curve  at  a  given  point  by  considering 
the  slope  of  a  straight  line  of  smaller  and 
smaller  length.  When  we  studied  the  curvature  of  our  curve  we  considered  the 
rate  of  change  of  the  slope  of  our  tangent  and  so,  by  the  aid  of  a  second  deriva¬ 
tive,  we  found  the  curvature.  In  this  case  we  approximated  our  curve  to  a  circle 
of  radius  equal  to  the  radius  of  curvature  of  the  curve  at  a  given  point. 

In  attempting  to  determine  the  length  of  a  portion  of  our  curve  a  point 
cannot  be  regarded  as  a  piece  of  the  curve  but  only  as  marking  a  position  on  it. 
For  the  purpose  of  determining  the  length  of  an  arc  it  is  convenient  to  replace 
each  small  element  of  the  arc  by  its  chord,  a  lineal  element .  By  definition  the 
length  of  an  arc  of  a  curve  is  the  limit,  if  such  limit  exists,  toward  which  the 

SEMANTICS  OF  THE  DIFFERENTIAL  CALCULUS  597 

aum  of  the  lengths  of  the  chords  of  its  small  subdivisions  tends  as  the  number 
of  chords  increases  indefinitely  and  their  individual  lengths  all  approach  zero 
uniformly.  For  example,  the  circumference  of  a  circle  is  the  limit  approached 
by  the  perimeter  of  an  inscribed  polygon  as  the  number  of  its  sides  increases 
Indefinitely,  the  lengths  of  the  individual  sides  all  approaching  zero. 

Similarly  the  length  of  a  curve  may  be  approximated  by  the  sum  of  the 
lengths  of  segments  of  tangents  at  successive  arbitrarily  chosen  points,  merely 
by  choosing  the  points  nearer  and  nearer  together.  For  example,  the  circum¬ 
ference  of  a  circle  is  the  limit  approached  by  the  perimeter  of  a  circumscribed 
polygon  as  the  number  of  its  sides  increases  indefinitely,  the  lengths  of  the 
individual  sides  all  approaching  zero.  In  either  case,  a  point  on  a  curve  taken 
with  a  vanishingly  small  portion  of  the  tangent  to  the  curve  at  that  point  may 
be  called  the  lineal  element  of  the  curve. 

The  above  definitions  apply  equally  well  in  either  two  or  three  dimensions. 
The  lineal  element  in  two  dimensions  may  be  defined  by  three  co-ordinates  x , 
yt  pt  0f  which  x  and  y  are  the  co-ordinates  of  the  point  through  which  the  lineal 
element  passes  and  p  is  the  slope  of  the  element.  This  slope,  as  we  already 
know,  is  to  be  found  by  differentiation,  and  is  given  by  the  formula  p  =dy/dx. 
In  geometrical  problems  which  relate  the  slope  of  a  tangent  to  that  of  other 
lines,  it  is  not  the  tangent  that  is  of  real  importance  but  the  lineal  element. 
From  this  point  of  view  a  curve  is  made  up  of  infinite  numbers  of  vanishingly 
small  lineal  elements  which  are  tangent  to  it,  which  is  the  point  of  view  of  the 
differential  calculus.  Or  the  curve  is  composed  of  infinite  numbers  of  vanishingly 
small  chords  which  are  the  sides  of  an  inscribed  polygon,  which  is  the  point  of 
view  of  the  integral  calculus. 

Obviously,  in  the  limit,  both  points  of  view  are  equivalent,  although  as  a 
matter  of  convenience  they  may  be  different.  In  any  case,  it  must  be  obvious 
to  the  reader  that  using  straight  lines  instead  of  pieces  of  a  curve,  or  using  as 
closer  approximations  arcs  of  circles,  facilitates  our  study  of  the  curves,  indeed 
renders  such  study  possible  at  all,  and  in  practice  we  can  carry  our  work  to  any 
degree  of  approximation  we  choose.  But  in  theoretical  work  we  require  pre¬ 
cision,  hence  we  think  in  terms  of  infinite  numbers  of  vanishingly  small  steps. 
The  differential  and  integral  calculus  supply  the  only  perfect  technique  for 
these  processes  of  analysis  and  synthesis. 

4.  PERIODIC  FUNCTIONS  AND  WAVES 

We  have  already  said  that  the  most  important  relations  of  physics  are 
represented  by  linear  differential  equations  of  the  second  order.  It  is  important 
to  know  the  connection  of  these  equations  with  the  general  theory  of  waves 
or  oscillations. 

If  on  a  circle  of  unit  radius,  as  shown  in  Fig.  14,  we  take  several  points 
Pi,  P2,  P3 ,  P4,  and  connect  these  points  by  straight  lines  with  the  centre  0, 
we  get  angles  XOPu  XOP2  ,  .  In  trigonometry  we  define  certain  functions  of 
these  angles  and  a  unit  of  measurement.  For  our  purpose  we  will  only  define 
the  so-called  sine  and  cosine,  as  we  have  already  met  the  definition  of  tangent 

598  VIII.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  MATHEMATICS 

tan  6 

M1P1 

OMi  ’  The  angles  XOPu  XOPt .  ,  may  be  specified  by  the  ratios 

MiPi/OPi,  MtPt/OP'i .  ,  respectively  each  of  which  ratios  has  a  definite  value. 
I  his  ratio  m  any  case  is  called  the  sine  of  the  angle,  and  is  written  in  abbreviated 
form  sin  0.  If  the  radius  of  our  circle  is  taken  as  unity  then  simply  MiP1  - 

8inCe  0Pl~l-  The  ratio  OM1/OPl  is  called  the  cosine 
of  the  angle  XOP\,  and  is  written  cos  0. 

Y 

There  are  two  units  of  measurement  of  angles.  In  ordinary,  or  Bevagaa.’moi 
measure,  the  unit  angle  is  the  degree,  1/360  of  the  entire  angle  about  a  point! 
1/180  of  a  straight  angle,  or  1/90  of  a  right  angle.  The  degree  is  divided  into 
60  equal  parts  called  minutes.  The  minute  is  divided  into  60  parts  called 
seconds.  In  circular  measure  the  unit  angle  is  the  radian,  the  an£l»  at  the 
centre  of  a  circle  whose  arc  is  equal  to  the  radius  of  the  circle.  This  angle  is 
a  constant  whether  the  circle  be  large  or  small,  due  to  the  fact  that  the  cir¬ 
cumferences  of  circles  vary  as  their  radii,  and,  in  one  circle,  angles  at  the  centre 
are  proportional  to  their  arcs.  The  constant  ratio  of  the  circumference  of  the 
circle  to  its  radius  is  given  by  the  number  it  =3.14159  ....  this  number  being 
‘incommensurable’  with  unity.  As  the  length  of  the  circumference  of  a  circle 
with  radius  R,  is  2  t  R  we  see  that  the  entire  angle  about  the  centre,  which  in 
degrees  is  360,  is  in  radians  2  x;  that  a  straight  angle  equals  180  degrees  or  x 

radians;  and  that  a 
Thus  1  radian 

right  angle  equals  90  degrees  or  -  radians. 

180° 

=57°17'44".  806 . . .  which,  as  it  depends  on  the  value 

of  x,  is  itself  an  'irrational'  number.  The  ‘incommensurability'  of  the  radian 
with  right  and  straight  angles  makes  its  practical  use  inconvenient.  One  of 
the  mam  uses  of  the  radian  is  in  theory  as  it  introduces  a  marked  simplification 
in  that  the  ratio  of  the  sine  of  an  indefinitely  small  angle  to  the  angle  itself  is  1, 
when  riie  angle  is  measured  in  radians.  In  other  words,  the  equivalence  of  an 
indefinitely  small  arc  and  chord  becomes  apparent  numerically  when  the  angle 
and  sine  are  expressed  in  one  unit. 

SEMANTICS  OF  THE  DIFFERENTIAL  CALCULUS  599 

The  following  table  gives  the  ordinary  and  radian  measures,  the  sine, 
cosine  and  tangent  of  angles  of  0,  1,  2,  3,  and  4  right  angles. 

Angle  in 
Right  Angles 

Angle  in 
Degrees 

Angle  in 
Radians 

Sine 

Cosine 

Tangent 

r/2 

=fcoo 

T 

-1 

St/2 

-1 

=F00 

2* 

From  Fig.  14  and  from  this  table,  it  follows  that  the  values  of  the  trigono¬ 
metric  functions  are  equal  for  the  angles  0  and  2ir,  or  in  the  language  of  degrees, 
for  the  angles  0°  and  360°.  We  see  also  from  Fig.  14  that  the  angle  XOPu  or 
any  other  angle,  has  one  measure  as  expressed  by  its  trigonometric  functions 
if  we  add  to  it  360°  or  2ir  radians. 

The  structural  importance  of  the  trigonometric  functions  in  analysis  lies 
in  the  fact  that  they  are  the  simplest  singly  periodic  functions  and  are  therefore 
adapted  for  the  representation  of  undulations.  As  we  have  already  seen  the 
sine  and  cosine  have  the  single  real  period  2tt,  which  means  that  they  are  not 
altered  in  value  by  the  addition  of  2ir  to  the  variable.  The  tangent  has  the 
period  tt. 

Besides  the  three  functions  defined  above,  we  usually  define  three  others, 
the  secant,  the  cosecant  and  the  cotangent  as  reciprocals  respectively  of  the 
cosine,  the  sine,  and  the  tangent.  These  last  three  we  may  disregard  in  our 
present  discussion. 

Let  us  consider  the  function  y~sin  *,  and  construct  the  curve  which  this 
equation  represents.  If  we  draw  a  circle  of  unit  radius,  Fig.  14,  the  ordinates 
corresponding  to  the  different  angles  XOPu  XOPu .  ,  give  the  values  of  y, 
while  the  angles  measured  in  radians,  give  the  corresponding  values  of  the 
abscissa  x. 

Plotting  corresponding  values  of  x  and  y  as  thus  obtained  in  Fig.  14  we 
get  in  Fig.  15  the  partial  graph  of  the  function  y  =  sin  Proceeding  again 
around  our  circle  in  Fig.  14,  that  is,  adding  360°  or  2ir,  to  each  of  our  angles, 
hence  to  their  abscissas  of  the  curve  in  Fig.  15,  we  add  to  the  graph  a  second 
complete  wave.  We  may  thus  proceed  either  forward  or  backward  obtaining 
as  many  complete  waves,  or  undulations,  as  we  please,  as  in  Fig.  16. 

The  curve  represented  by  y  =  cos  *  is  obtained  in  like  manner  and  is  quite 
similar  to  the  sine  curve.  (See  Fig.  17.) 

To  differentiate  sin  x  we  give  to  x  the  arbitrary  values  xu  and  xx+Ax  and 
compute  for  y  the  corresponding  values  yi  = sin  x\  and  yi+Ay  =sin  (xi+Axh 

600  VIII.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  MATHEMATICS 

y  =sin  x 

Fig.  16 

Fig.  17 

Subtracting  yx  from  yx  -f  Ay,  we  have  *Ay  =  sin  (xx  +Ax)  -sin  xv  Dividing 

by  Ax  we  have  Ay/Ar  -  —  ^Xl  ~~s*n  xi 

Ax 

To  express  the  meaning  of  the  above  geometrically  we  may  take  a  circle 
of  unit  radius  and  construct  the  angles  Xi  and  (xx+Ax),  (Fig.  18).  Then 
MiP1  -sin  xu  M2P%  -sin  (xx  +Ax),  QPt  =sin  (xx  +Ax)  -sin  xx  -  Ay,  and  arc 
P\P%  -  jCPiPi  -  Ax. 

The  limit  approached  by  the  ratio  Ay /Ax  =QP2/P\P2  as  P2->  Pi  or 
as  Ax-+  0,  is  by  previous  definitions  the  sine  of  the  angle  MtPtPi,  since  in  the 
/imtf  the  arc  PtP,  becomes  a  straight  line,  the  hypotenuse  of  the  right  triangle 
PiQPt,  which  is  similar  to  the  righ  t  triangle  PxMvO,  whence  angle  ZMlPiP1  =  Zxu 

In  other  words,  lim  —  =  lim  ; 

Ax— »0  Ax  Ax~+Q  PXP2  Op ,  C°S  *’  °r  Sln  X  COS  X • 

in  other  woixis,  lim  ^-Hm  l=cosx  orD 

Ax-tO  Ax  Ax~*Q  PyP2  QPX  COS  *’  °r  Sin  x  COS  X' 

T  ^  may  be  easily  and  similarly  shown 

s.  \  that  Dx  cos  x  =  -sin  x.  Our  main 

\  interest  is  in  the  second  derivative. 

j^y\/  We  see  that  the  derivative  of  sin  x  is 

cos  x,  and  that  the  derivative  of 
yr  j  ^  cos  x  is  —sin  x. 

f  Differentiating  again  we  obtain 

^ \  tbe  second  derivative  of  sin  x  as 

y0^0000^  j  j  W  —sin  x,  and  the  second  derivative  of 

j  j  \T*  cos  x  as  -cos  x. 

j  |  j  The  sine  and  cosine  and  their 

- M-"  M  *  linear  combinations  are  the  only  func- 

Fig.  18  Z  *  tions  which  when  differentiated  twice 

c  .  ,  .  ,  give  us  the  second  differential  coef- 

ficient  equal  and  of  opposite  sign  to  the  original  function.  In  symbols 

^(sin  x)  ,  ,  d2(cos  x) 

- -  sin  x;  and 

—  —cos  x. 

SEMANTICS  OF  THE  DIFFERENTIAL  CALCULUS  601 

In  physics  we  deal  with  many  processes  which  are  structurally  periodic,  which 
means  that  a  definite  physical  condition  constantly  recurs  after  equal  intervals 
of  ‘time*.  The  number  of  seconds  or  fractions  of  seconds  within  which  the 
process  runs  its  course  is  called  the  period.  We  know  already  that  the  simplest 
periodic  functions  are  sine  and  cosine  functions  of  the  type 

sin  (x+2 me)  =sin  x ,  and 

cos  (x+2«ir)  =  cos  x,  where  n  may  have  any  in¬ 
tegral  value.  Furthermore  we  have  already  seen  that  the  first  derivatives, 
therefore  all  derivatives  of  such  functions  are  likewise  simple  sine  and  cosine 
functions.  In  particular,  the  second  derivatives  of  the  sine  and  cosine  functions 
are  likewise  sine  and  cosine  functions  taken  with  the  opposite  algebraic  sign. 

If  we  express  the  variability  of  a  process  as  a  function  of  ‘time’,  that  is, 
by  an  equation  of  the  form  S  -  F(t)7  then  in  a  periodic  process,  F(h  +nT)  =  F(h)7 
where  T  is  the  period  and  n  any  integer.  If  the  process  repeats  itself,  as  in  a 
periodic  process,  we  must  have 

dF  I  dF  I  .  &F  I  d2F 

—  1  =  —  1  ana  —~r  ~  •  * 

dt  |twi+nr  dt  jfwi  dt 

but,  as  we  have  already  seen,  the  sine  and  cosine  functions  satisfy  these 
conditions. 

2  T$ 

A  process  which  can  be  described  by  an  equation  of  the  type  S  *=A  sin  -y 

is  called  a  harmonic  vibration  or,  a  ‘pure  sine  vibration*,  or  simply  a  ‘vibration* 
or  ‘oscillation*.  The  constant  A ,  which  represents  the  maximum  value  of  the 
displacement  on  either  side,  is  called  the  amplitude.  The  period  T  is  called 
the  ‘time  of  vibration*,  its  reciprocal  value  which  gives  the  number  of  vibrations 
in  a  unit  of  ‘time*  is  called  the  vibration  number  or  frequency. 

As  the  second  derivatives  of  sine  and  cosine  functions  are  equal  to  the 
original  functions  taken  with  the  opposite  signs,  we  can  describe  harmonic 
vibrations  by  differential  equations  of  the  first  degree  (linear)  and  of  the  second 
j2  c  dirt 

order  of  the  special  type  — -  =  —a2Sf  where  S  =A  sin  — +«),  A  representing 
dr  J 

the  amplitude,  T  the  period,  €  the  phase  of  the  vibration.  The  factor  of  propor¬ 
tionality  a  is  taken  as  the  square  of  any  arbitrary  real  quantity  to  indicate 
that  the  right-hand  side  must  always  have  the  opposite  sign  to  that  of  5. 

The  propagation  of  a  vibration  is  called  an  advancing  plane  wave  which 
has  both  velocity  and  direction. 

Fourier  has  shown  that  any  given  form  of  wave  may  be  represented  by 
the  superposition  of  a  series  of  sine-waves,  which  gives  sine-waves  great 
theoretical  and  practical  importance. 

In  writing  this  chapter  I  had  two  main  aims.  One  was  to  briefly  indicate 
the  essential  semantic  factors  involved  in  the  differential  methods.  The  other, 
to  make  the  general  reader  and  even  specialists  who  are  not  mathematicians 
acquainted  with  some  terms  and  rudiments  of  method  which  will  be  necessary 
for  further  discussion. 

602  VIII.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  MATHEMATICS 

The  differential  methods  involve  semantic  factors  essential  for  a  ^-system, 
the  oo-valued  semantics  of  probability  and  for  sanity  and  cannot  be  longer 
disregarded. 

The  main  pressing  issues  are  twofold.  One,  to  formulate  methods  which 
would  impart  the  A  semantic  reactions  of  the  calculus,  which  need  not  involve 
any  technicalities,  and  can  be  imparted  in  the  most  elementary  home  or  school 
education.  The  other  is  to  draw  the  attention  of  specialists  to  these  semantic 
problems  so  that  they  will  work  them  out. 

An  attempt  to  solve  the  first  issue  has  been  undertaken  in  the  present 
volume.  The  second  task  will  probably  be  accomplished  in  the  not  too 
distant  future. 

It  is  earnestly  suggested  to  all  scientists,  professional  men  and  teachers, 
who  are  not  mathematicians,  to  become  familiar  with  differential  methods 
and  so  acquire  the  appropriate  semantic  reactions.  Experience,  in  many  cases, 
has  shown  that  this  will  assist  them  in  acquiring  semantic  balance  and  'mental* 
efficiency.  Teachers  and  physicians  in  particular,  would  be  greatly  helped  in 
their  efforts  to  train  children  and  patients  in  the  A  reactions.  The  benefit 
is  not  in  any  'calculations'  whatsoever,  but  in  the  method  and  the  related 
psycho-logical  reactions. 

There  is  an  excellent,  short,  most  elementary  and  amusing  account  of 
the  calculus  by  Sylvanus  P.  Thompson  Calculus  Made  Easy  (Macmillan)  which, 
for  the  present,  is  all  that  is  needed  for  this  purpose. 

CHAPTER  XXXIII 

ON  LINEARITY 

The  conception  of  linear  transformation  thus  plays  the  same  part  in 
affine  geometry  as  congruence  plays  in  general  geometry;  hence  its  funda¬ 
mental  importance*  <547)  Hermann  weyl 

It  is  instructive  to  compare  the  mathematical  apparatus  of  quantum 
theory  with  that  of  the  theory  of  relativity.  In  both  cases  there  is  an  ap¬ 
plication  of  the  theory  of  linear  algebras.  <2is>  w.  Heisenberg 

This  “perturbation  theory"  is  the  complete  counterpart  of  that  of  clas¬ 
sical  mechanics,  except  that  it  is  simpler  because  in  undulatory  mechanics 
we  are  always  in  the  domain  of  linear  relations.  (466)  E.  schr6dinger 

As  a  result  of  experimental  research  on  association,  in  1904,  I  was  led 
to  show  the  complexity  of  the  factors  governing  evocation.  . .  .  And  I 
have  often  insisted  since  then  on  this  essential  idea,  in  opposition  to  the 
simple  schema  of  linear  associative  connection.  (411)  henri  fieron 

We  have  already  had  several  occasions  to  mention  the  *plus’  or  additive 
issues  as  connected  with  linearity.  This  problem  is  of  structural  and  linguistic 
as  well  as  empirical  and  psycho-logical  semantic  importance.  It  is  sufficient 
for  our  purpose  at  present  that  we  should  notice  two  facts;  namely,  (1)  That 
in  one  dimension,  linearity  expresses  the  relation  of  proportionality;  (2)  That 
the  problems  of  linearity  are  dependent  on  the  relation  of  additivity. 

The  structural  notion  of  additivity  is  of  great  antiquity.  Being  the 
simplest  of  such  notions,  it  naturally  originated  very  early  in  our  history.  The 
earliest  records  show  *hat  the  Babylonians  and  the  Egyptians  used  the  additive 
principle  in  their  notation.  Our  primitive  ancestors,  long  before  any  records 
were  written,  had  similar  structural  conditions  present,  open  for  investigation 
and  reflection,  that  we  have  today.  That  this  was  the  case  is  not  a  mere  guess. 
Otherwise  we  would  still  be  at  their  stage  of  development.  Some  beginning 
had  to  be  made  somewhere.  There  is  little  doubt  that  the  men  of  remote 
antiquity  presented  many  types  of  make-up,  as  we  do  today.  Some,  for  instance, 
were  more  curious  than  others;  some  more  inventive,  some  more  reflective . , 
which,  as  we  know  today,  is  found  even  among  animals.  These  more  gifted 
individuals  were,  as  usual,  the  inventors,  discoverers,  and  builders  of  systems 
and  language  of  their  period.  They  could  not  long  fail  to  recognize  the  fact 
that  a  stone  and  a  stone,  or  a  fruit  and  a  fruit  are  different  from  one  stone  or 
one  fruit.  For  instance,  the  two  stones  might  have  saved  the  early  observer’s 
life  in  defence,  or  the  two  fruits  might  have  satisfied  his  hunger  or  thirst,  where 
one  would  not  have  done  so.  An  accumulation  of  objects  was  obviously  some¬ 
how  different  from  a  single  object.  As  these  problems  were  often  of  vital 
importance  to  their  lives,  names  for  such  accumulations  of  objects  began  to 
be  invented,  and  one  and  one  was  called  two,  two  and  one  was  called  three  , . 
Number  and  mathematics  were  born  as  a  structural  semantic  life-necessity 

604  VIII.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  MATHEMATICS 

for  a  time-binding  class  of  life.  They  were  an  expression  of  the  neurological 
structure  and  function  and  of  the  tendency  toward  induction. 

In  the  beginning,  names  and  generalizations  were  made  from  the  simplest 
brute  facts  of  life,  and  our  primitive  ancestors  did  not  realize,  that  these  crude 
generalizations  might  not  have  a  structural  validity,  which  they  seldom  doubted 
that  they  possessed,  even  as  we  today,  seldom  doubt.  Those  primitive 
scientists,  (and  we  today  differ  very  little  from  them),  having  produced  terms , 
objectified  them,  and  began  to  speculate  about  them.  Let  us  examine  some 
examples  of  such  primitive  mathematical  speculations.  Addition,  of  course, 
by  which  we  generate  numbers , — one  and  one  make  two,  two  and  one  make 
three .  ,  was  all-important.  They  could  not  miss  the  simple  fact  that  three, 
which  is  equal  to  two  and  one,  by  definition,  is  more  than  two  or  one.  A  primi¬ 
tive  generalization;  namely,  that  the  sum  is  always  more  than  the  summands 
taken  separately,  was  still  further  generalized  to  a  postulate  that  a  part  is 
smaller  than  the  whole.  This  generalization  has  hampered  mathematics  almost 
up  to  our  own  day,  and  for  many  thousands  of  years  it  prevented  the  discovery 
of  the  notion  of  mathematical  infinity,  which  we  have  already  discussed  in 
Chapter  XIV. 

It  must  be  noticed  that  such  generalizations  involve  s.r ,  which  are  objective 
and  un-speakable.  If  verbally  formulated  they  should  have  a  structure  similar 
to  that  of  the  facts,  otherwise  they  are  fanciful  and  vicious,  because  not  properly 
formulated.  When  formulated  they  become  public  structural  facts  ( s.r  are 
personal,  individual,  non-transmittable,  and  un-speakable)  and  so  they  may  be 
criticized,  improved,  revised,  rejected  , .  All  human  history  shows  that  the 
correct  structural  formulation  of  a  problem  is  usually  as  good  as  the  solution 
of  it,  because  sooner  or  later  a  solution  always  follows  a  formulation. 

After  many  thousands  of  years — in  fact,  practically  only  the  other  day — it 
was  found  that  these  primitive  generalizations  were  in  general  not  valid. 
Negative  numbers  were  invented,  and  two  plus  minus-one  was  no  more 
three  but  one,  2  -h(  —  1)  =  L  The  sum  was  no  longer  greater  than  its  summands. 
The  usual  tragedy  takes  place  here  also.  A  few  people  know  the  facts,  but  the 
old  primitive  structural  s.r  remain  in  some  of  these  few,  as  well  as  in  the  great 
majority  of  us  who  did  not  even  know  the  facts.  That  such  structural  s.r  do 
not  vanish  quickly,  or  generally,  is  proven  again  and  again  throughout  history. 
We  see  it  very  clearly  in  the  problems  of  'infinity',  or  £  geometries,  or  pf 
physics.  But  the  most  pathetic  sight  is  to  see  scientists  who  have  rationalized 
the  technique  without  a  deeper  re-education  of  their  s.r.  This  is  most  clearly 
seen  in  the  case  of  many  writers  on  the  foundations  of  mathematics,  the  Einstein 
theory  or  on  the  newer  quantum  mechanics.  They  feel  in  the  old  structural 
way,  they  rationalize  in  the  new,  hence  their  works  are  full  of  self-contradictions. 
Readers  and  students  alike  feel  how  ‘difficult*  and  messy  the  whole  subject  is. 
As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  new  theories  are  neither  messy  nor  difficult.  They  are 
really  much  simpler  and  easier  than  the  old  theories,  provided  our  structural  s.r 
are  purged  of  the  primitive  structural  tendencies  to  which  every  one  of  us  is 
heir.  When  this  semantic  re-education  of  our  structural  feelings  is  accomplished 

ON  LINEARITY 

It  is  the  old  that  becomes  ‘unthinkable’  and  incomprehensible,  because  it  gives 
•uch  a  structural  mess. 

Something  similar  might  be  said  about  a  feeling  deep-rooted  in  all  of  us 
namely,  the  ‘plus’  feeling.  In  all  the  advances  of  science  we  struggle  against  it. 
For  instance,  the  example  of  the  green  man-made  leaf  given  previously  shows 
clearly  that  man-made  affairs  may  with  some  plausibility  be  considered  as 
‘plus’  affairs,  but  not  so  with  non-man-made  natural  leaves,  which  appear 
not  as  ‘plus’,  but  functional  affairs,  where  the  greenness  was  structurally  not 
added  but  happened,  or  became.  As  a  structural  fact,  the  world  around  us  is 
not  a  ‘plus’  affair,  and  requires  a  functional  representation.  In  chemistry,  for 
instance,  does  hydrogen  ‘plus’  oxygen  produce  water,  H2O?  If  we  mix  the 
two  gases,  two  parts  of  hydrogen  with  one  of  oxygen  we  do  not  get  water. 
We  must  first  pass  a  spark  through  the  mixture,  when  an  explosion  occurs 
and  the  result  becomes  water,  a  new  compound  quite  different  from  its  elements 
or  from  a  mere  mixture  of  them.  Does  one  gallon  of  water  and  one  gallon  of 
alcohol  make  two  gallons  of  a  mixture?  No,  it  makes  less  than  two  gallons. 
Does  light  added  to  light  make  more  light?  Not  always.  The  phenomena  of 
interference  show  clearly  that  light  ‘added’  to  light  sometimes  makes  darkness. 
Four  atoms  of  hydrogen,  of  atomic  weight  1.008,  produce,  under  proper  con¬ 
ditions,  one  atom  of  helium,  not  of  atomic  weight  4.032,  but  of  atomic  weight  4. 
The  0.032  has  somehow  mysteriously  vanished.  Such  examples  could  be  quoted 
endlessly.  They  show  unmistakably  that  structurally  this  world  is  not  a  ‘plus’ 
affair,  but  that  other  than  additive  principles  must  be  looked  for. 

The  struggle  against  this  ‘plus’  feeling  is  quite  evident,  but  often  unsuc¬ 
cessful,  in  scientific  literature.  Man  ‘is’  an  animal  ‘plus*  something.  Life  ‘is’ 
‘dead  matter’,  ‘plus’  some  ‘vitalizing  principle’, .  In  scientific  literature  we 
find  curious  expressions:  as  for  instance,  ‘It  is  impossible  to  express  the  conduct 
of  a  whole  animal  as  the  algebraic  sum  of  the  reflexes  of  its  isolated  segments’ ; 
or,  ‘The  individual  represents  heredity  plus  environment’;  or,  ‘That  the 
abstraction  does  not  merely  take  away  from  a  number  of  engrain  groups  some 
components  and  combine  the  rest  into  one  sum,  but  forms  thereby  a  new  psychic 
Structure  is  self  evident  and  is  in  no  way  peculiar  to  the  psyche.  Thus  a  clock 
work  is  as  little  the  mere  sum  of  its  little  wheels  as  a  human  being  is  the  sum 
of  his  cells  and  molecules’;  and  later  on,  ‘to  be  exact  the  ego  consists  of  the 
engrams  of  all  our  experiences  plus  the  actual  psychism’.  There  is  endless 
material  that  might  be  quoted,  but  for  our  purpose  these  few  samples  will 
suffice.  We  do  not  give  them  with  the  purpose  of  citing  authoritative  examples 
of  the  need  of  non-plus  considerations.  Far  from  it.  We  do  it  to  emphasize 
the  astounding  fact  that,  although  the  best  men  in  their  fields  have  vaguely  felt 
this  necessity,  yet  even  they  become  a  prey  to  this  very  old  structural  linguistic 
semantic  tendency.  In  all  three  cases  quoted  the  authors  were  of  the  best 
we  have.  They  have  fought  all  their  lives  against  the  ‘plus’  tendency  and 
methods;  and  yet,  if  they  succeed  in  eliminating  this  tendency  from  one  part 
of  their  subject,  they  plant  it  quite  obviously  somewhere  else.  We  see  that 

VIII.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  MATHEMATICS 

k  7“^  an  lngrain-ed  Psycho-logical  tendency  which  can  be 
remedied  only  by  a  fundamental,  A,  structural,  semantic  investigation. 

Let  us  analyse  these  quotations.  In  the  second  case,  we  hear  after  a 

he^dSU,W«  °"  ^  te"deTnCieS’  3  8tatement  that  *e  ‘individual  represents 
heredity  plus  environment'.  Is  this  statement  true?  JLet  us  take  examples 

There  are  certain  fishes  which  are  heliotropic  and  swim  toward  the  light  Pbut 
if  we  change  the  temperature  of  the  water  they  become  negatively  hefiotropic 
and  swim  away  from  the  light.  Is  this  most  complex  activhy  of  the  oi^anZ- 
^ma;Wfh0lf  a  P'^  cnvnonmenf  fact,  or  does  the  change  of  temperature  produce 
some  fundamental  functional  changes?  When,  for  instance,  a  good  mother  rat 

SfTme  m"  T  00  "  diffrnt  th°Ugh  8tiU  abundant  die‘>  -hich  is  depriS 
aL^  a  “  am°Unt  °{  speaal  vitarains-  begins  to  eat  her  litters,  Ts  this 
PUS  TfTZ  °T  “  il  3  mosf  complex  functional  change  of  the 
organism-as-a-whole?  Or  when  a  human  being,  because  he  received  in  childhood 
an  emotional'  shock  through  outside  events  (action  or  language  of  parkT 
for  instance)  develops  a  functional  disorder,  or  even  a  physiol  ailment  is  tht 
again  a  'plus  environment'  problem?  Or,  when  chickens  fed  on  eggs  iaid  by 
ens  kept  without  sunlight  or  violet  rays,  or  which  have  only  received  sunlight 
through  a  glass  window,  develop  rickets  and  soon  die,  though  they  do  not 
do  so  when  the  glass  windows  are  removed  and  the  sunlight  is  allowed  to 
operate  ra  y  upon  the  hens.  Is  this  again  a  ‘plus  environment’  example? 

t,Vk?  S  ^  t°T  make  two  ‘Smiths’,  as  far  as  theatre  or  railway 

tictets  are  concerned,  but  in  life,  under  proper  conditions,  they  form  a  famfly 

and  very  often  many  more  than  two  ‘Smiths’  come  out  of  such  ‘addition’ 

”°v:  atU  ntflhelr  IS  h  3  ^  SUm?  In  the  °f  -ventors  who  may 

have  been  influenced  by  one  or  many  men  directly  or  indirectly,  do  their  invent 

tions  produce  a  sum  of  the  work  of  as  many  men?  Surely  the  steam  engine  or 
the  dynamo  produces  more  work  than  not  only  the  inventors,  but  the  series 

inventor  “en  ^  been  ‘“Meetly  responsible  for  the  inspiration  of  the 
inventors,  could  ever  have  produced.  So  again  it  is  not  a  ‘plus’  affair. 

8  the  third  case  we  see  the  author  attacking  the  ‘plus’  tendency  on  one 

tome  ohtSngr?  ,  PlU-’  *  fCW  PagCS  further  0n’  which  ™PIi  Jat  once 
ft'1™™1  entity.  In  this  respect  it  must  be  noticed  that 
this^nddilire  tendency  represents  a  partial  and  important  structural  and 
semantic  mechanism  of  identification,  and  to  deal  successfully  with  it,  we  must 
clear  up  the  problem  connected  with  the  additive  tendency 

The  numberless  and  endless  ‘philosophical’  volumes,  for  instance  which 

torn!  iT  Wrltt!n  ab°Ut  tHe  ‘b°dy'sou1’  P^lems,  show  the  tremendous  struc- 
S  Thr™?  C  “portnnee  of  the  clearing  up  of  this  ‘plus’  versus  ^non-plus’ 

mH  l  ?  may  feCa11  that  the  A,theE,  and  the  N  systems  have  one 
underlying  structural  metaphysics.  The  E  systems  deal  with  non-linear 
equarions  and  with  curved  lines,  of  which  the  linear  equation  and  the  straight 
me.  (one  of  zero  curvature),  are  only  particular  cases.  And  the  general  theory 
of  Einstein  which  is  the  foundation  of  N  systems,  also  introduces  non-linelr 
equations.  Ought  we  to  be  surprised  to  find  that  a  ^-system  must  also  solve 

ON  LINEARITY 

this  difficult  structural  and  semantic  problem  of  linearity  versus  non-linearity, 
of  additivity  versus  non-additivity? 

Indeed  the  problems  demanding  our  attention  are  extremely  baffling  and 
difficult.  Even  in  such  a  perfected  science  as  physics,  we  have  great  difficulties 
in  using  non-linear  equations,  and  are  still  at  the  stage  where  we  solve  few 
equations  other  than  linear  ones.  To  make  any  progress  at  all  we  must  start 
with  the  simplest  available  problems  in  this  field;  namely,  mathematical 
problems.  The  main  point  at  this  stage  is  not  a  solution  of  the  problem  but  its 
formulation.  When  formulated  and  brought  to  the  attention  of  mankind, 
there  is  no  doubt  that  it  will  be  eventually  solved. 

To  better  understand  the  additive  principle,  let  us  consider  a  group  of 
elements,  the  individuals  of  which  we  denote  by  letters  tt,  b,  c,  d  , .  Let  us  take 
two  or  more  of  these  elements  and  produce  a  synthesis  which  results  in  a  third 
or  tt-th  entity.  Let  this  synthesis  be  of  such  a  nature  that  the  characteristics 
ascribed  to  the  elements  are  also  present  in  the  resultant  synthesis,  in  other 
words,  let  them  have  the  so-called  group  characteristic.  If  our  elements  are, 
for  instance,  numbers,  the  new  synthesis  is  also  a  number  and  belongs  to  the 
original  group.  We  must  notice  that  the  problem  of  order  is  important  in  the 
formulation  of  the  additive  principle.  If  a  and  b  are  the  two  elements  the 
synthesis  of  which  we  define,  we  must  be  clear  that  a  first  and  b  second,  or 
b  first  and  a  second,  must  be  recognized  in  the  synthesis.  Let  us  assume  also 
that  only  the  two  alternative  orders  a  and  b,  or  b  and  a,  are  of  importance  in 
this  case.  The  commutative  law  asserts  that  a  plus  b  is  equal  to  b  plus  o, 
a  s  b  +a,  which  means  that  the  two  possible  alternative  orders  give  equivalent 
results.  We  must  notice  that  this  does  not  mean  that  order  does  not  enter 
into  this  synthesis;  in  such  a  case  the  above  mentioned  commutative  law  would 
make  no  assertion  at  all.  It  is  of  importance  that  order  should  be  involved  in 
the  synthesis.  It  is  a  matter  of  indifference  only  as  far  as  equivalence  by  a 
commutative  law  is  concerned. 

We  should  notice  for  our  purpose  that  the  synthesis  has  the  ‘same'  charac¬ 
teristics  as  the  elements  had.  In  other  words,  if  we  know  the  characteristics 
of  the  elements  we  know  the  characteristics  of  the  result.  For  instance,  if  the 
elements  were  numbers,  the  result  will  be  a  number,  and  no  characteristic 
absent  in  the  elements  will  appear  in  the  result.  This  predictability  from  the 
characteristics  of  the  elements  to  those  of  the  result  is  perhaps  one  of  the  most 
striking  characteristics  of  additivity.  On  the  one  hand,  it  allows  us  to  foretell 
the  future;  on  the  other  hand,  it  limits  considerably  the  applicability  of  the 
additive  principle.  It  is  obvious  that  when  we  combine  elements,  and  the 
results  have  new  characteristics  absent  in  the  original  elements,  the  new 
problems  are  structurally  no  more  of  an  additive  character,  and  the  synthesis 
must  be  different. 

Only  a  few  of  the  simplest  entities  in  physics  possess  additive  character¬ 
istics.  If  we  take,  for  instance,  'weight'  or  ‘length’  or  'time',  we  see  that  these 
units  are  additive.  One  pound,  or  inch,  or  second,  if  added  respectively  to  one 
pound,  or  inch,  or  second,  gives  us  two  pounds,  or  two  inches,  or  two  seconds. 

608  VIII.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  MATHEMATICS 

Not  so,  however,  with  temperature,  or  density,  or  many  other  derived  magni¬ 
tudes,  as  we  call  them.  If  we  have  a  body  of  temperature  of  one  degree  and 
combine  it  with  another  body  of  equal  temperature  the  synthesis  will  not 
have  a  temperature  of  two  degrees,  (as  in  the  case  of  weight),  but  of  one  degree. 
This  applies  to  density , ,  two  bodies  of  density  one  each  will  not  give  us  a  body 
of  density  two,  but  of  density  one. 

Before  further  analysis  of  the  problems  of  linearity  and  additivity,  it 
will  be  well  to  consider  a  few  definitions. 

If  an  entity  u  is  changed  into  an  entity  v  by  some  process,  the  change 
may  be  regarded  as  the  result  of  an  operation  performed  upon  u,  the  operand, 
which  has  converted  it  into  v.  If  we  denote  the  operation  by/,  then  the  result 
might  be  written  as  v  =Ju.  The  symbol  of  the  operation  /  is  called  the  operator . 
We  are  familiar  with  many  such;  indeed  the  symbols  for  all  mathematical 
operations  may  be  treated  as  operators.  So  for  instance  the  symbol  V 
indicates  the  operation  of  extracting  the  square  root.  If  we  deal  with  a  range 
of  values  for  a  variable  x,  what  we  have  defined  as  the  function  symbol /(x)  may 
be  treated  as  an  operator  whose  operation  on  x  may  be  indicated  by  the 
symbol /x.  The  operation  of  differentiation  may  be  symbolized  by  D,  the  result 
of  whose  operation  on  the  variable  u,  Du  is  the  derivative  of  «.  The  sign  of 

a 

the  definite  integral  f  may  be  taken  as  indicating  an  operation  which  con- 
b 

verts  a  function  into  a  number  ,  . 

It  is  important  to  know  that  many  of  the  rules  of  algebra  and  arithmetic 
when  defined  in  this  way,  give  rise  to  a  calculus  of  operations.  The  fundamental 
notion  in  such  a  calculus  is  that  of  a  product.  If  u  is  operated  upon  by  / 
the  result  v  is  indicated  by  /#,  or  symbolically,  v  =fu.  If  v  in  turn  is  operated 
upon  by  g  the  result  w  is  indicated  by  gv,  or  symbolically,  w  =gv=gfu,  whence 
the  operation  gf  which  converts  u  directly  into  w  is  called  the  product  of  / 
and  g.  If  this  operation  is  repeated  several  times  in  succession  the  usual  notation 
of  powers  is  used,  for  instance  ff  fff  =/3, .  Not  applying  the  operator  at 
all,  which  we  would  denote  by  /°,  leaves  u  unchanged,  which  we  indicate 
symbolically  by  the  equation  f°u  ~u.  The  operator  /°  is  equivalent  to  multi¬ 
plication  by  1,  /°-l,  whence/0  may  be  called  the  idem  operator .  We  see  also 
that  the  law  of  indices  holds;  namely,  th efmXfn—fm+n, 

For  our  purpose  we  will  analyse  only  one  special  case;  namely,  where  we 
have  «,  v  and  u  -ftf  as  operands,  and  such  an  operator,  /,  that  /(«  +p)  — fu  +fv. 
Expressed  in  words,  this  means  that  the  operator  applied  to  the  sum  of  the 
two  operands  gives  a  result  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  results  of  operating  upon 
each  operand  separately.  Such  a  special  operator  is  called  a  linear ,  or  dis¬ 
tributive,  operator. 

In  terms  of  functions  we  would  have  /(x+y)  =/(x)~b/(y)  which  may  be 
called  a  functional  equation.  Lt  has  been  proved  that  such  a  functional  equation 
has  one  type  of  solutions;  namely,  when  /  is  equivalent  to  a  multiplication 
by  a  constant ,  or  fx  =  cx.  This  fact  is  of  great  importance  for  us.  Many  problems 
in  science  are  stated  in  terms  of  variation.  For  purposes  of  analysis  a  statement 

ON  LINEARITY 

that  *x  varies  as  /  is  written  y  -kx,  where  k  is  called  a  factor  of  proportionality, 
which  enables  Us  to  convert  a  statement  of  variation  into  an  equation.  If 
y  varies  inversely  as  xf  we  write  y=k(\/x)  or  y  —  k/x.  A  multiplication  by  a 
constant  thus  introduces  a  relation  of  proportionality,  hence  the  importance  of 
proportionality  in  a  world  where  constants  are  present. 

It  must  also  be  noticed  that  the  two  fundamental  operations  of  the  calculus 
are  linear  without  being  equivalent  to  multiplication  by  a  constant.  These 
are:  ‘the  derivative  of  the  sum  is  the  sum  of  the  derivatives’,  that  is, 
P(w+v)  =*Du+Dv;  and  ‘the  integral  of  the  sum  is  the  sum  of  the  integrals', 
that  is  J'(u+v)dx  =  J*ttdx+J'vdx.  But  as  the  fundamental  notion  of  the 
calculus  is  to  substitute  for  a  given  function  a  linear  function,  in  other  words, 
to  deal  with  curves  as  the  limits  of  vanishingly  small  straight  lines,  this  linearity 
underlies  structurally  all  fundamental  assumptions  of  the  calculus,  and  one 
might  say  with  Weyl  that  ‘one  here  uses  the  exceedingly  fruitful  mathematical 
device  of  making  a  problem  linear  by  reverting  to  infinitely  small  quantities’.1 

A  vector  is  defined  roughly  as  a  line-segment  which  has  a  definite  direction 
and  magnitude,  and  any  quantity  which  can  be  represented  by  such  a  segment 
is  defined  as  a  vector  quantity. 

The  addition  of  vectors  is  defined  by  the  law  of  the  parallelogram,  as  in 
the  case  of  two  forces.  It  should  be  noticed  that  because  of  this  definition  the 
sum  of  two  vectors  differs  in  general  from  the  arithmetical  sum  of  the  lengths, 
and  only  collinear,  or  parallel  vectors  obey  the  arithmetical  summation  law. 

The  introduction  by  definition  of  mathematical  entities  which  obey  dif¬ 
ferent  laws  from  the  usual  arithmetical  laws  is  an  important  structural  and 
methodological  innovation.  It  gives  us  the  useful  precedent  of  defining  our 
operations  to  suit  our  needs.  The  vector  calculus  accepted  as  the  definition  of 
the  sum  of  two  vectors  the  law  established  experimentally  in  physics  for  the 
sum  of  two  forces;  and  so  the  vector  calculus  from  the  beginning  was  struc¬ 
turally  a  particularly  useful  language  in  physics.  Only  since  Einstein  has  the 
value  and  importance  of  the  vector  calculus  for  physics  become  generally 
appreciated. 

If  we  have  two  vectors,  a  and  b,  start¬ 
ing  from  a  common  origin  O  and  complete 
the  parallelogram  as  in  Fig.  1,  then  the  di¬ 
agonal  of  the  parallelogram  will  be  the  re¬ 
quired  sum,  a+b,  by  definition .  Q 

If  we  choose  two  co-initial  vectors  of 
unit  length,  one  on  the  X  axis,  and  the  other 
on  the  Y  axis,  and  call  them  I  and  j,  we  can 
always  represent  any  vector  x  as  the  sum  of  Fig.  1 

two  vectors,  one  of  which  is  the  projection 

of  x  on  the  X  axis,  and  the  other  the  projection  of  x  on  the  Y  axis.  (See  Fig.  2.) 
Let  us  call  these  vectors  x'  and  x"  respectively.  Then  x  =x'  +  x",  by  definition. 
But  X'  differs  from  i  in  length  only,  hence  it  can  be  obtained  by  multiplying  1  by 

610  VIII.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  MATHEMATICS 

an  appropriate  number,  say  a.  Similarly,  x"  can  be  obtained  from  j  by  multi¬ 
plying  j  by  bf  and  so,  in  symbols,  x'  =ai,  x"  =b},  and  x  =ai+6j.  All  vectors 

of  the  plane  can  be  obtained  from  i  and  j  in  this 
Y  form.  The  numbers  a  and  b  are  called  com¬ 

ponents  of  x. 

Now  that  we  know  how  to  express  a  vector 
in  terms  of  its  components;  namely,  x=ai+6j, 
let  us  consider  a  vector  function /(x)  which  satis¬ 
fies  the  equation  /(x-f-y)  =/(x)  +/(y).  We  may 
take  ai  =x  and  b\  =y  and  x+y  =z  then  we  have 
/(z)  =/(x+y)  =/(ai)+/(&j).  But  since  a  and  b 
are  numbers,  we  have  /(ai)  =a/(i),  and  likewise, 
f{bj)  ~bf( j);  so  that/(z)  -a/(i)  +&/(]).  But /(l)  is  itself  a  vector  and  therefore 
expressible  in  the  form  a'i+6'j,  and,  /(j)  =ci+dj.  Hence,  /( z)  =a(a'i+6'j)-|- 
fc(d+dj)  =(aa'+&c)i+(a&'+6d)j.  In  general,  the  components  are  the  co¬ 
efficients  accompanying  i  and  j,  and  so  we  have  the  components  of  /(z)  — /(x  +y) 
in  terms  of  the  components  of  z;  and  we  see  how  the  components  of  a  vector 
are  changed  into  the  components  of  the  linear  vector  function  of  the  vector. 

In  general  terms,  a  continuous  vector  function  of  a  vector  is  said  to  be 
a  linear  vector  function  when  the  function  of  the  sum  of  any  two  vectors  is 
the  sum  of  the  functions  of  those  vectors;  that  is,  the  function  /  is  linear  if 
/( ri  +r2)  =/( ri)  +/(r2),  whence,  if  a  be  any  positive  or  negative  number  and 
if  /  be  a  linear  function  then  the  function  of  a  times  r  is  a  times  the  function 
of  r;  f(at)  ~a/(r). 

Linear  vector  operators  are  also  defined  by  a  similar  equation;  namely, 
L(a+b)  =Za-fLb. 

Let  us  recapitulate.  If  we  take  the  functional  equation  f(x+y)  =f(x)  +/(y), 
which  might  be  used  as  a  definition  of  linearity ,  and  which  is  based  on  additivity , 
and  take  x  =y  =  1,  then  we  have  /(I  +1)  =/(2)  and  also /(l)  +/(1)  -2/(1) ;  and 
so  our  original  equation  becomes  by  substitution  /(2)=2/(l).  It  is  obvious 
that  the  original  equation, /(x+y)  —f(x)  +f(y),  is  the  source  of  indefinitely  many 
such  relations  for  particular  numbers.  For  instance,  /(3)  =/(2+l)  =/(2)  4*/(l); 
but,  in  accordance  with  what  we  obtained  before,  /(2)=2/(l);  so  that 
/(3)  =2/(1)  +/(1)  =3/(1),  and  in  general,  f(x)  =x/(l).  So,  if  we  have  an  equation 
f(x+y)  =/(x)  +/(y)  for  numbers,  we  know  that  we  can  obtain  the  value  of  this 
function  for  any  x  if  we  know  it  for  1.  If  we  denote  the  function  of  1,  which 
is  a  constant ,  by  /( 1)  =k,  we  have  the  general  form  of  the  function  which 
satisfied  f(x+y)=f(x)+f(y)  expressed  by  f(x)  —kx.  In  words,  a  functional 
equation  of  the  above  type;  namely,  a  function  of  the  sum  equal  to  the  sum 
of  the  functions,  has  only  one  possible  type  of  solution;  namely,  when  /  is 
equivalent  to  a  multiplication  by  a  constant,  or ,/(x)  But  this  last  means 

proportionality.  The  values  of  the  function  are  proportional  to  the  arguments 
(variables).  In  fact,  let  us  consider  two  arguments,  that  is,  two  values  of  the 
independent  variables  x  and  y.  We  have,  as  shown  before,  f(x)=kx  and 

ON  LINEARITY 

f(y)  *=ky.  Dividing  the  first  by  the' second,  we  obtain  f(x)/f(y)  ~kx/ky  —  x/y\ 
or,  in  another  form,  f(x)/x  =f{y)/y  ~k. 

Let  us  consider  an  example.  We  know  from  elementary  geometry  that  if 
we  take  an  angle  a  and  draw  parallels  which  cut  the  sides  at  AA',  BB',  CC', 
DDr .  ,  the  corresponding  intercepts  are  propor¬ 
tional.  In  general,  the  lengths  of  the  segments  on 
the  left  side  are  not  equal,  neither  are  they  equal 
to  the  segments  on  the  right  side.  If  we  designate 
the  segment  AB  as  x  and  BC  as  y,  the  correspond¬ 
ing  segments  A'B'  and  B'C'  we  may  designate  as 
f(x)  and/(y),  respectively,  which  means  function 
of  x  and  function  of  y.  A'B' =f(x),  B'C'=f(y). 

But  the  above  intercepts  are  proportional,  which 
AB_ _B£  _  AB+BC 
A'B'~  B'C'~  A'B'+B'Cr 

means  that 

We  easily  see  from  Fig.  3,  that  AB -\-BC —AC  —  x+y;  and  A'B'  +B'C'  —  A'Cr 
and  so  A'C'  on  the  one  hand  is  f(AC)  =f(x+y)  and  on  the  other  hand  it  is 
f(x)+f(y)  and  therefore  /(x+y)  =/(x)  4-/(y).  We  could  multiply  examples  by 
taking  relations  between  central  angles  in  a  circle  and  arcs  of  its  circumference* 
In  fact,  any  problem  of  measure  in  £  geometry  could  be  used  as  an  example* 

In  our  development  we  started  with  definite  additive  natural  tendencies, 
not  only  in  our  highest,  yet  undeveloped,  mathematics,  which  we  call  our 
daily  and  scientific  language,  but  also  in  our  lowest,  but  perfected,  language 
which  we  call  mathematics.  In  this  perfected  language  the  notion  of  additivity 
is  connected  with  linearity ,  and  the  methods  of  approximation  are  also  founded 
on  additivity  and  linearity. 

Yet  the  world  around  us  in  its  more  fundamental  structural  aspects  is  not 
additive;  and  for  adjustment  we  must  find  means  of  passing  from  additive 
tendencies  and  formulations  to  non-additive  tendencies  and  formulations. 
Modern  mathematics  has  developed  these  methods,  and  modern  physics  is 
beginning  to  apply  them.  Let  us  repeat:  the  importance  of  linear  functions 
implies  the  importance  of  ‘straight’  lines.  They  are  important  on  two  counts: 
first,  because  they  are  simpler  than  all  other  curves,  so  that  naturally  we  want 
to  study  them  before  we  study  other  curves,  such  as,  for  instance,  circles  or 
the  other  conic  sections  in  elementary  geometry;  and  secondly,  because  all 
curves  can  be  approximated  by  straight  lines.  This  point  is  very  important, 
as  approximation  is  the  most  powerful  method  we  have  of  handling  com¬ 
plicated  situations. 

There  are  two  methods  of  approximating  a  curve  in  the  vicinity  of  a  point. 
If  we  are  interested  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  a  point  we  approximate  the 
curve  by  its  tangent,  as  the  tangent  approximates  the  curve  in  the  vicinity  of 
a  point  better  than  any  other  straight  line.  If  we  want  to  decrease  the  error 
which  we  make  in  this  approximation,  we  have  only  to  decrease  the  vicinity 
in  which  we  consider  it.  If  we  do  not  want  to  restrict  ourselves  to  a  small 

612  VIII.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  MATHEMATICS 

neighbourhood  we  have  to  use  more  complicated  methods  of  approximation. 
We  inscribe  into  the  curve  a  broken  line  which  consists  of  segments  of  straight 
ines.  he  beginnings  of  the  study  of  curves  consist  in  reducing  the  study  of 
curves  to;  (1)  The  study  of  straight  lines  connected  with  the  curves’  tangents 
which  is  the  point  of  departure  of  the  differential  calculus;  and  (2)  The  study 

of  the  inscribed  broken  lines,  which  is  the  point  of  departure  of  the  integral 
calculus. 

Now  curves  represent  only  the  simplest  dependences.  In  other  cases  we 
have  more  complex  kinds  of  functions;  for  instance,  vector  functions;  but  in 
every  case  we  have  linear  functions,  the  simplest  of  their  type;  and  other 
functions  are  studied  by  approximating  them  in  one  way  or  another  by  l.™>a, 
functions.  In  using  the  term  ‘function’,  we  mean  not  merely  numerical  functions 
but  also  operators,  which  are  to  the  ordinary  functions  what  ordinary  functions 
are  to  numbers.  A  general  definition  of  linearity  can  be  connected  with  that 
of  proportionality  in  the  following  manner.  If  two  variables  are  proportional 
one  to  another,  then  to  the  sum  of  any  values  of  the  first  corresponds  the  sum 
oi  the  corresponding  values  of  the  second. 

The  simplest  part  of  any  field  is  the  consideration  of  linear,  additive 
questions;  linear  equations  (equations  of  first  degree  in  algebra),  linear  dif- 
erential  equations,  linear  integral  equations,  linear  matrices,  linear  operators 
But  sooner  or  later  we  come  to  the  more  difficult  and  more  interesting  non-linear 
problems.  Perhaps  the  main  importance  of  the  General  Theory  of  Einstein 
les  in  the  fact  that  the  equations  of  physics  become  non-linear.  Now,  although 
non-linear  equations  can  be  approximated  by  linear  equations,  the  character 
of  a  world  determined  by  non-linear  equations  must  be  entirely  different  from 
a  world  determined  by  linear  equations.  In  a  linear  world  electrons  would  not 
repel  each  other  but  would  travel  independently  of  each  other,  and  there  could 
be  no  relation  between  the  charges  of  different  electrons.  But  we  know  that 
electrons  do  repel  each  other,  and  attract  protons,  and  that  their  charges  are 
equal.  In  physics,  if  a  system  can  be  described  by  linear  differential  equations, 
the  causal  trains  started  by  different  events  propagate  themselves  without 
interference ,  with  simple  addition  of  effects. 

The  properties  of  systems  which  can  be  described  by  linear  differential 
equations  have,  as  we  have  already  seen,  the  property  of  addUivity.  This  means 
that  the  result  of  the  effects  of  a  number  of  elements  is  the  sum  of  the  effects 
separately,  and  no  new  effects  will  appear  in  the  aggregate  which  were  not 
present  in  the  elements.  In  such  a  universe  there  is  ‘continuity’,  fields  are 
superposable,  wave  disturbances  are  additive,  ‘energy’  and  ‘mass’  are  inde¬ 
structible  ,  .  In  such  a  universe  we  can  have  two-valued  causality,  as  causal 
trains  started  by  different  events  propagate  themselves  without  interference , 
and  with  simple  addition  of  effects,  and  the  present  can  be  analysed  backwards 

possible^  SUm  °f  C  ementary  events’  that  is’  a  two-valued  causal  analysis  is 

If  our  equations  are  not  linear,  the  effects  are  not  additive  and  a  two- 
valued  causal  analysis  is  not  possible. 

ON  LINEARITY 

The  joint  effect  of  two  causes  working  together  is  not  the  sum  of  their 
effects  separately2,  and  we  need  oo -valued  causality. 

Analytically,  if  we  have  linear  differential  equations  and  we  have  one 
solution  yi  =/(*)  and  another  solution  y%  =  F(x)  then  their  sum  is  also  a  solution ; 
namely,  y3  =/(x)  +F(x).  If  the  differential  equations  are  non-linear  and  if 
yi=f(x)  and  y2  =  F(x)  are  two  solutions,  then  f(x)  +  F(x)  is  not  a  solution. 

Linear  problems  and  linear  equations  play  a  very  important  structural 
role  in  science  and  there  is  little  doubt  that  linear  equations  preponderate 
enormously,  although  many  fundamental  events  cannot  be  described  by  such 
equations.  A  universe  which  can  be  described  by  linear  differential  equations 
of  the  second  order  has  definite  structural  characteristics— in  the  main  in 
rough  accord  with  observation.  As  such  differential  equations  give  us  the 
tendency  of  a  process,  we  may  use  them  to  describe  large-scale  phenomena  by 
integration,  or  the  statistical  phenomena  of  great  numbers. 

Unfortunately,  the  study  of  non-linear  problems  is  structurally  very 
difficult  and  largely  a  problem  of  the  future. 

There  is  one  very  important  point  which  we  should  not  miss.  We  know 
already  that  there  is  a  fundamental  difference  between  different  orders  of 
abstractions.  Physical  abstractions  have  always  characteristics  left  out,  and 
our  higher  order  abstractions  are  further  removed  from  life,  but  they  have  all 
characteristics  included.  The  problem  of  sanity  being  a  problem  of  adjustment, 
we  must  somehow  correlate  these  abstractions  in  which  characteristics  are 
left  out  with  those  which  include  all  characteristics,  and  so  must  proceed  by 
approximations.  Mathematical  methods,  particularly  those  of  the  differential 
and  integral  calculus,  have  evolved  the  best  technique  of  approximation  in 
existence  today,  which,  as  we  have  seen,  is  strictly  connected  with  linearity 
or  additivity . 

A  similar  urge  which  prompted  us  in  the  expression  of  our  additive 
tendencies  and  methods  in  the  structure  of  language,  has  led  to  the  production 
of  the  calculus.  For  organisms  which  abstract  in  so  numerous  and  such  different 
orders,  the  methods  of  the  calculus  are  therefore  fundamental  psycho-logical 
devices,  conditioning  sanity. 

In  conclusion,  we  should  notice  two  quite  important  facts.  One  of  these 
is  that  the  nervous  system,  being  in  a  state  of  nervous  tension,  cannot  struc¬ 
turally  be  a  simple  additive  affair  in  all  its  functions,  a  fact  which  every  one 
of  us  has  experienced.  Too  many  stimulations  dull,  or  abolish,  or  change 
reaction  in  an  enormous  variety  of  ways.  Pieron,  as  a  result  of  experimenting 
in  association,  has  not  only  shown  the  complexity  of  these  processes,  but  also 
reaches  the  conclusion  that  the  associative  connections  are  non-linear.  ^  The 
other  most  important  point  is  that  structurally  the  term  ‘and  implies  addition. 
When  we  confuse  orders  of  abstractions  or  levels  of  analysis,  the  ‘and  additive 
implications  falsify  the  issues.  Thus  for  instance  two  atoms  of  hydrogen  and 
one  atom  of  oxygen  and  a  spark  produce  water.  The  second  ‘and’,  at  least, 
is  used  illegitimately,  as  it  applies  to  an  entirely  different  level  (the  spark) 
from  that  of  the  atoms.  Linguistically  we  introduced  additive  implications, 

614  VIII.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  MATHEMATICS 

while  empirically  we  are  dealing  with  most  complex  non-additive,  non-linear 
higher-degree  functions.  When  we  confuse  orders  of  abstractions,  as  we  all 
do,  the  ‘and’  is  bound  to  introduce  structurally  false  implications,  which  it  is 
very  difficult  to  avoid — the  more  so  since  these  semantic  problems  are  generally 
entirely  neglected. 

CHAPTER  XXXIV 

ON  GEOMETRY 

At  the  same  time  it  will  not  be  forgotten  that  the  physical  reality  of 
geometry  can  not  be  put  in  evidence  with  full  clarity  unless  there  is  an 
Abstract  theory  also.  .  .  .  Thus,  for  example,  while  the  term  electron  may 
have  more  than  one  physical  meaning,  it  is  by  no  mcanssueh  a  P™tean 
object  as  a  point  or  a  triangle,  <2S9)  Oswald  veblen 

Euclidean  space  is  simply  a  group.  (417, 

HENRI  POINCARfc 

It  is  only  in  Euclidean  “gravitationless”  geometry  that  integrability 
ht  *n  tSSD  HERMANN  WEYL 

°  The  fundamental  fact  of  Euclidean  geometry  is  that  the  square  of  the 
distance  between  two  points  is  a  quadratic  form  of  the  relative  co-ordinates 
of  the  two  points  ( Pythagoras’  Theorem).  But  tf  we  look  upon  this  law  as 
bring  stricUyvalid  only  for  the  case  when  these  two  points  are  infinitely  near , 
welmter^he  domain  of  Aiemann's  geometry .  (547,  Hermann  weyl 

parallel  displacement  of  a  vector  must  leave  unchanged  the  distance  which 
it  determines.  Thus ,  the  principle  of  transference  of  distances  or  lengths  which 
is  the  basis  of  metrical  geometry,  carries  with  it  a  p nnmpie  °f  «»"■ sf"eg?°{ 
direction;  in  other  words,  an  affine  relationship  is  Inherentinmetrical 
apace.  <s«>  Hermann  weyl 

But  before  dealing  noth  the  brain,  it  is  well  to  distinguish  a  second  char- 
acteristic  of  nervous  organization  which  renders  it  an  organization  in 
levels.  (411)  HENRY  FrfttON 

Section  A.  Introductory . 

The  main  metrical  rule  in  geometry  is  the  familiar  pythagorean  theorem. 
In  1933  this  rule  is  no  longer  considered  as  generally  valid  outside  of  the  euclid¬ 
ean  system*  as  its  proof  depends  on  the  doubtful  postulate  of  parallels.  It  is 
considered  as  an  empirical  generalization  in  which  the  relative  error  decreases 
when  the  distances  become  smaller.  Indeed  the  small  element  of  length,  ds, 
given  by  the  pythagorean  rule  is  considered  con- 
venient  and  reliable  in  our  exploration  of  the  / 

world. 

The  pythagorean  rule  states  that  in  any  right 
triangle,  ABC ,  the  square  of  the  side  opposite  the 
right  angle  (the  hypotenuse)  is  equal  to  the  sum 
of  the  squares  of  the  two  other  sides  (the  legs). 
In  symbols,  AB*  C2  +BC2.  If  we  build  squares 
on  all  three  sides  of  the  triangle  ABC  and  denote 
the  areas  of  the  squares  by  Cf,  Af,  and  B  then 
we  have  C  =Af  +5'. 

The  above  rule  is  also  the  main  metrical 
rule  for  co-ordinate  geometry,  which  gives  us 

A, 

o 

B* 

C 

pi 

Fig.  1 

the  length  of  the  line  segment  joining  any  two 

points.  Consider,  for  example,  two  points  in  two  dimensions,  Pi  and  P2,  whose 

616  VIII.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  MATHEMATICS 

co-ordinates  referred  to  a  pair  of  axes  in  the  plane  are  (#1,  yi)  and  (x2)  ^2)*  By 
drawing  the  lines  P\Q  and  P2Q  parallel  to  the  X  and  Y  axes  respectively,  a  right 
triangle  P1QP2  is  formed  whose  legs  PiQ  and  P2Q  are  equal  to  x2  —Xi  and  y2  -yi 
respectively,  whence  PiP2 ,  the  hypotenuse  of  the  right  triangle,  or  the  distance 
s  between  the  points,  is  equal  to  VPiQ2  +P2Q2,  or  $  *  V (x2  ~*i)2  -f  (yz  -  yi)2. 
If  we  pass  to  indefinitely  small  quantities  and  choose  to  deal  with  differentials 
we  have  ds2  =dx2  +dy2  where  dx  =x2—xi  and  dy -yz  —yi.  Usually  the  physicists 
treat  their  differentials  as  very  small  quantities  and  we  may  do  likewise,  although 
this  is  not  precisely  what  a  differential  represents. 

In  three  dimensions  similar  formulae  appear;  namely,  s2  =x2  +y2  +z2  for 
the  distance  of  a  point  from  the  origin  and  s  =V (x2  —  Xi)2+(y2—yi)2+(z2—  2i)2 

for  the  distance  between  two  points  Pi  (*1,  zx) 
and  P2  (x2,  y2f  z2),  and  also  ds2  =dx2  -My2  ~Mz2, 
for  the  indefinitesimally  small  distance  between 
two  points. 

In  referring  our  geometrical  entities  to  co¬ 
ordinate  axes,  or  frames  of  reference,  as  they  are 
called,  we  are  interested  in  the  properties  of  our 
geometrical  entities  and  not  in  the  accidental  char¬ 
acteristics  of  our  f  rames  of  reference,  or  the  acciden¬ 
tal  characteristics  of  the  form  of  representation  we 
are  using.  Mathematicians  discovered  long  ago 
that  the  form  of  representation  is  not  of  indiffer¬ 
ence  to  the  results  they  obtain.  Speaking  roughly 
they  have  discovered  that  in  one  form  of  representation,  they  obtained  character¬ 
istics  a,  b,  c%  d,  .  .  .  w,  n;  in  another  form,  characteristics  a ,  bt  cy  d,  .  .  .  p ,  q;  and 
in  still  another  form,  characteristics  at  bt  c,  dt  .  .  .  s,  t ,  .  In  cases  where  direct 
inspection  was  possible  they  find  by  checking  up  predicted  characteristics,  that 
such  characteristics  as  a,  bf  c,  d  in  our  example  actually  belong  to  the  subject  of 
our  analysis,  whereas  the  characteristics  m,  n,  q, ...  s,  t, ...  ,  do  not 

belong  to  our  subject  at  all,  but  vary  from  one  form  to  another  depending  on  the 
form  of  representation.  Such  facts  make  mathematicians  distinguish  between 
characteristics  which  are  intrinsic ,  which  actually  belong  to  the  subject  inde¬ 
pendently  of  the  form  of  representation;  and  those  which  are  extrinsic ,  which 
do  not  belong  to  the  subject,  but  are  accidental  and  vary  with  the  form  of 
representation  we  happen  to  use. 

If  we  mix  intrinsic  and  extrinsic  characteristics  we  have  a  structurally 
distorted  knowledge  of  our  subject.  Obviously  we  are  interested  in  methods  by 
which  these  two  types  of  characteristics  can  be  separated  and  distinguished. 

Such  methods  are  found  in  what  we  call  the  transformation  of  co-ordinates, 
which  means  the  passing  from  one  form  of  representation  to  another,  from  one 
system  of  co-ordinates  to  another  which  corresponds  to  translation  from  one 
language  to  another.  Obviously  those  characteristics  which  are  intrinsic  to  our 
subject  are  and  must  be  independent  of  the  accidental  selection  of  our  form  of 

Y 

ON  GEOMETRY 

representation,  and  therefore  should  remain  unchanged  when  we  pass  from  one 
frame  of  reference  to  another.  Any  characteristic  which  is  changed  by  such  a 
transformation  of  our  systems  of  reference  is  clearly  an  extrinsic  characteristic 
injected  by  the  form  of  representation  and  not  belonging  to  our  subject;  and  so 
the  transformation  of  co-ordinates  is  precisely  the  test  we  need  and  use. 

Let  us  take  for  instance  the  line  segment  P i P 2,  as  in  Fig.  3.  We  may  refer 
PiPt  to  a  system  0,  or  to  a  System  O'.  Obviously  the  length  of  the  line  P\Pi 
is  independent  of  the  axes  of  reference  used,  and  the  formula  for  the  length  of 
a  line  is  not  altered,  although  the  values  for  the  *’s  and  y's  are  different  m  the 
two  systems.  In  other  words,  the  sum  of  the  squares  of  the  differences  of  the 
co-ordinates  remains  invariant.  In  symbols,  _  _ 

S  -V  .(*,-*!)*+(  yt-yt?  -  v'  (*!'  -*!')* + W  -yiO*. 

Such  expressions,  however,  as  x\+x%  or 

yxyt . ,  are  not  characteristics  of  our  Y  p 

subject  but  characteristics  of  the  par-  fety-y' 

ticular  frame  of  reference  used,  and  so  / j  ' 

are  mostly  of  no  interest  to  us.  j  \ 

In  such  an  elementary  example  Y\  / *v4f  \  . 

as  given  here  we  are  directly  ac-  \  Uy'  ^  > 

quainted  with  our  entities,  and  so  \ 
we  can  inspect  them  directly  and  \.  i  > 

check  for  intrinsic  and  extrinsic  char-  \  j* 

acteristics.  But  when  we  deal  with  pL-g,  — * 

geometries  of  more  than  three  di-  \ 

mensions,  such  checking  becomes  very 

difficult,  if  at  all  possible,  and  so  new  Fig.  3 

methods  have  to  be  invented. 

If  we  wish  to  eliminate  the  unit  by  which  we  measure  our  lines,  this  can 
be  done  by  using  a  relation  called  a  ratio.  Let  us,  for  instance,  select  3  points 
A,  B,C,  and  write  the  invariant  formulae  for  the  distance  AB  and  AC  in  the 
form  Vte.-x1)i+(yi-yi)2  and  V  (x.-«i),+(ys-yi)2 

V  (xi-*i)2+(ys-yi)2 

then  the  ratio  P  —  ,  ,  ,  ,2 

v  (xj— *i)2+(ys— yi) 

is  independent  of  our  unit  of  measurement.  If,  for  instance,  this  ratio  R  -1.  we 
conclude  that  AB  =AC,  a  characteristic  which  belongs  to  our  lines  and  which 
is  independent  not  only  of  our  system  of  reference  but  also  of  the  unit  which  we  have 

US  A  great  step  forward  in  the  formulation  of  methods  which  lead  to  invariant 
and  intrinsic  formulations  was  made  in  the  invention  of  what  is  called  the  vector 
calculus  and  its  extension  in  the  modern  tensor  calculus.  A  few  explanations  o 

this  principle  will  be  of  interest. 

A  vector  is  roughly  a  directed  segment  of  a  straight  line  on  which  we  dis¬ 
tinguish  the  initial  and  the  terminal  points.  A  vector  has  thus  magnitude  and 
direction.  In  practice  we  deal  with  two  kinds  of  entities;  some  are  purely 

618  VIII.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  MATHEMATICS 

numerical,  establishing  a  specific,  mostly  asymmetrical,  relation  and  have  no 
direction,  as  for  instance,  mass,  density,  temperature,  energy,  electrical  charge, 
population,  mortality  , .  These  quantities  which  do  not  involve  direction  are 
called  scalar  quantities. 

Such  quantities  as  velocity,  acceleration,  electric  current,  stresses,  flow  of 
heat  or  fluids  .  ,  which  involve  not  only  magnitude  but  also  a  definite  direction, 
are  called  vector  quantities,  and  have  given  rise  to  a  special  calculus  called  the 
vector  calculus. 

The  invention  of  the  vector  calculus  was  a  most  revolutionary  and  bene¬ 
ficial  structural  and  methodological  step.  It  was  originated  independently  by 
Hamilton  and  Grassmann.  The  benefits  of  this  method  are  manifold,  but  we 
are  interested  mainly  in  but  two  of  them.  The  first  is  that  vector  equations 
are  simpler  and  fewer  in  number  than  co-ordinate  equations.  The  second,  and 
most  important,  is  that  the  language  of  vectors  is  independent  of  choice  of  axes, 
and  of  frames  of  reference.  It  is  naturally  invariant  for  any  transformations  of 
axes.  If  axes  are  needed  we  can  easily  and  simply  introduce  them,  but  we  al¬ 
ways  have  means  to  discriminate  between  intrinsic  and  extrinsic  characteristics. 
The  modern  tensor  calculus  which  made  the  general  theory  of  Einstein  possible 
is  simply  an  extension  of  the  vector  calculus. 

The  above  methodological  and  structural  remarks  are  of  fundamental 
semantic  importance  to  us  in  all  our  affairs.  Human  life  and  affairs  are  never 
free  from  linguistic  issues.  Their  role  is  similar  to  that  of  mathematics,  that  is 
to  say,  a  form  of  representation  gives  us  not  only  the  characteristics  which  are 
intrinsic  in  our  subject,  but  also  introduces  extrinsic  characteristics  which  do 
not  belong  to  the  subject  of  our  analysis  but  are  due  to  the  particular  language 
we  use  and  its  structure .  The  analysis  of  these  linguistic  issues  is  much  belated 
and  extremely  difficult  because  of  the  structural  complexity  of  our  language. 
These  issues  were  discovered  first  in  mathematics  because  of  its  clear-cut  struc¬ 
tural  simplicity ;  and  it  is  important  that  we  should  be  aware  of  such  new  and 
unexpected  fundamental  semantic  problems.  We  will  not  enlarge  upon  this 
phase  of  the  problem  here,  except  to  mention  that  the  whole  of  the  present 
work,  which  uses  a  different  language,  of  a  different  structure ,  already  shows 
the  usefulness  of  the  new  method.  Sometimes  we  discover  new  characteristics, 
and  sometimes  we  are  led  to  emphasize  characteristics  which  are  known  but 
have  not  yet  been  sufficiently  analysed. 

To  carry  our  linguistic  analogy  further,  we  may  take,  for  instance,  the 
statement,  ‘knowledge  is  useful’.  We  could  translate  this  statement  into  any 
other  language  and  it  would  preserve  its  meaning.  But  if  we  make  the  state¬ 
ment,  ‘knowledge  is  a  word  which  has  six  consonants  and  three  vowels',  such  a 
statement  may  be  false  when  translated  into  another  language.  Mathematics, 
being  a  language,  has  difficulties  similar  to  ordinary  language,  but  in  mathemat¬ 
ics  it  is  often  much  more  difficult  to  separate  from  other  statements  those  which 
are  purely  about  the  language  used.  The  so-called  tensor  calculus  attempts  to 
perform  this  last  task. 

ON  GEOMETRY 

The  tensor  calculus  is  an  extension  of  the  vector  calculus,  which  has  be¬ 
come  famous  since  Einstein.  It  gives  us  formulations  independent  of  any  special 
frame  of  reference.  In  using  it  we  are  automatically  prevented  from  ascribing 
to  the  events  around  us  characteristics  which  do  not  belong  to  them.  The 
tensor  equations  give  us  absolute  formulations,  absolute  being  understood  as 
relative,  no  matter  to  what.  Obviously  the  only  language  fit  to  express  the 
'laws  of  nature*  should  be  independent  of  the  particular  point  of  view  or  lan¬ 
guage  of  some  observer.  It  should  give  us  formulations  invariant  for  any  and 
all  systems  of  reference,  although  we  might  use  preferred  systems  of  reference, 
as,  for  instance,  the  principal  axes  of  an  ellipse,  without  any  danger.  The 
reader  should  not  miss  the  point  that  such  an  ideal  should  be  considered  as  the 
highest  ideal  in  science.  It  is  the  mathematical  species  of  a  theory  of  ‘universal 
agreement*.  The  above  sounds  simple  and  innocent;  but,  when  actually  applied, 
plays  havoc  with  most  of  our  old  ‘universal  laws’.  These  laws  do  not  survive 
this  important  and  uniquely  valid  test,  and  so  become  mere  local  gossip  instead 
of  being  the  ‘universal  laws’  that  they  claim  to  be.  We  will  return  to  the  struc¬ 
tural  problem  of  invariant  formulations  later.  At  present  we  must  explain  some 
other  simple  considerations. 

On  any  surface  we  need  two  numbers  or  ‘co-ordinates  to  specify  the  posi¬ 
tion  of  a  point,  and  so  a  surface  is  called  a  two-dimensional  manifold.  Points 
in  three-dimensional  manifolds  require  three  numbers;  points  in  four-dimensional 
manifolds  four  numbers;  and  similarly  for  any  number  of  dimensions. 

For  our  purpose,  it  is  enough  to  speak  in  two  dimensions,  as  our  statements 
can  easily  be  generalized  to  any  number  of  dimensions.  If  we  want  to  localize 
a  point  on  a  surface  it  is  enough  to  divide  the  surface  into  meshes  by  any  two 
line-systems  which  cross  each  other.  By  labeling  the  lines  of  each  system  with 
consecutive  numbers,  two  numbers,  one  from  each  system,  will  specify  a  par¬ 
ticular  mesh.  If  the  meshes  are  small  enough  we  will  be  able  to  locate  any 
point  accurately. 

These  specifying  labels  or  numbers  require  that  we  know  what  kind  of 
mesh  we  are  using.  Distances  between  points  are  independent  of  mesh  systems. 

For  the  above  reasons  it  is  important  to  have  more  data  about  the  mesh 
system  we  are  using,  which  means  that  we  have  formulae  which  express  the 
distance  between  two  points,  which  is  independent  of  the  mesh  systems,  in 
terms  of  the  mesh  system. 

We  have  already  seen,  in  our  study  of  the  differential  calculus,  that,  as  a 
rule,  it  is  simpler  to  deal  with  very  short  distances,  and  that  it  is  easy  to  pass 
to  larger  distances  by  the  process  of  integration.  As  yet  we  have  used  only 
plane  rectangular  systems  of  meshes  in  our  illustrations,  but  this  restriction  is 
not  necessary.  If  we  use  oblique  co-ordinates  (Fig.  4),  the  formula  for  the  ele¬ 
mental  distance  is  ds2  =dxi2~2kdxidxi+dx22t  where  'k  =  cosine  of  the  angle 
between  the  lines  of  partition. 

The  polar  co-ordinates  (Fig.  5)  of  the  point  P  are  the  distance  r=OP,  of 
the  point  from  the  origin  0,  and  the  angle,  6  =  ZXOP,  between  the  line  OP 

620  VIII.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  MATHEMATICS 

and  the  axis  OX.  The  formula  for  the  elemental  distance  in  polar  co-ordinates 

is  ds 2  -dr2  +r2d82. 

Fig.  6  shows  the  co-ordinates  frequently  used  by  geographers;  namely, 
geographic  longitude  and  latitude,  where  the  distance  ds 2  =d£2+cos2/SdA2. 

Fig.  4 

Fig,  5 

It  should  be  noticed  that  these  formulae  for  different  systems  of  co-ordinates 
are  different.  To  make  it  still  more  obvious  to  ocular  inspection,  we  will  tabulate 
them  in  one  lettering,  thus: 

ds 2  *  dx i2  +dx 22  for  rectangular  systems 

ds 2  —  dx i2  +x\2dx22  for  polar  systems 

ds2  —  dx i2  2kdx\dxi  -\-dx 22  for  oblique  systems 

ds2  =dx i2  +cos2xidx22  for  latitude  and  longitude  systems.1 

It  must  be  noticed  that  the  values  for  the  variables  are  not  equal  in  these 
different  equations.  It  is  not  necessary  for  the  reader  to  know  in  detail  how 
these  formulae  are  obtained,  but  it  is  necessary  to  see  that  they  are  different , 
that  they  have  different  structure.  The  numbers  of  different  co-ordinate  systems 
we  can  use  are  infinite,  but  in  practice  we  use  only  a  few  well-known  types. 
There  are  also  definite  and  simple  formulae  for  passing  from  one  system  of 
co-ordinates  to  another. 

We  should  not  assume  that  in  practice  we  always  know  what  system  of 
co-ordinates  we  are  employing.  For  instance,  before  we  learned  that  our  earth 
is  'round',  we  did  not  know  whether  in  our  measurements  we  were  employing 
the  flat  co-ordinates  of  a  plane  or  spherical  co-ordinates.  We  made  some 
measurements  and  then  we  had  to  discover  what  kind  of  formulae  would  fit 
these  measurements. 

To  find  out  what  kind  of  co-ordinate  system  we  are  using,  we  select  two 
points,  let  us  say  ( X\ ,  ^2)  and  (#i  +dxf  xz  +dx)  very  close  together,  make  our 
measurements  of  dst  and  then  test  our  ds  to  find  which  formula  it  fits.  If  we 
find  for  instance  that  our  ds2  is  always  equal  to  dx i2  ~\~dx^  we  may  assume  for 
simplicity  and  our  purpose  that  our  co-ordinate  system  is  plane  and  rectangular. 

If  our  measurements  fit  any  of  the  first  three  formulae  (1),  we  may  assume 
for  simplicity  and  our  purpose,  that  we  are  dealing  with  a  plane  surface,  as 
each  of  these  systems  belongs  to  the  plane.  But  if  we  find  that  the  actual 
measurements  of  ds2  are  such  that  they  never  fit  these  first  three  formulae, 
but  only  the  fourth  one,  we  know,  that  our  surface  is  not  plane  but  curved 

ON  GEOMETRY 

like  a  sphere.  Try  as  we  may,  we  Bhall  be  unable  to  build  on  a  plane  any 
co-ordinate  system  which  will  fit  the  last  formula.  Thus  we  arrive  at  >ni»- 
portant  conclusion;  namely,  that  from  measurements  we  have  a  structural  hint 
M  to  the  kind  of  world  we  are  in. 

Section  B.  On  the  notion  of  the  ‘Internal  Theory  of  Surfaced. 

Let  us  imagine  some  two-dimensional  beings  confined  to  their  surface 
and  unable  to  have  a  look  at  that  surface  from  our  third  dimension.  For  them 
our  third  dimension  would  be  ‘unthinkable’,  and  therefore  the  surface  of  a 
sphere  like  our  earth  which  is  curved  in  the  third  dimension  would  also  be 
‘unthinkable’  or  ‘beyond  them’.  Should  they  conduct  some  measurements  m 
their  ‘world’  and  find  that  these  measurements  did  not  fit  any  of  the  first  three 
formulae  but  only  the  fourth,  they  would  have  to  reconstruct  radically  their 
'world  conception'  and  conclude  that  their  world  was  a  spherical  surface.  Our 
own  situation  does  not  differ  radically  from  the  situation  of  the  inhabitants 
of  this  hypothetical  two-dimensional  world. 

If  we  find  ourselves  so  restricted  as  not  to  know  whether  we  are  finally 
dealing  with  a  flat  or  spherical  surface,  we  can  select  a  point  0  and  with  a 
definite  radius  R  describe  from  this  point  a  circle  ABC.  Then  we  can  measure 
the  circumference  of  this  circle.  Now  we  know  from  geometry  that  m  the  plane 
the  circumference  of  the  circle  L  =  2tR 

where  R  is  the  radius  of  the  circle  and  0 _ 

r  *=3.1415  ...  If  our  surface  is  flat  ~ 

(ABCD)>  our  measurement  of  L  and  R 
will  satisfy  the  relation  expressed  in 

the  formula.  But  if  the  surface  is  rr  t  . -^C 

curved,  our  R  —  OA  will  be  larger  than  ^  ^ 

K  =AO',  and  we  shall  find  that  our  x 

is  not  3.1415  .  .  .  ,  but  smaller.  We  ^ - -- — 

see  once  more  that  the  metrical  proper -  Yig  7 

ties  of  our  world  throw  some  light' on  its 
structural  character. 

We  should  notice  also  that  the  curvature  of  a  two- 
dimensional  surface  is  in  the  third  dimension  and  that 
it  is  the  means  of  giving  us  data  about  the  surface 
without  our  leaving  the  surface  and  going  into  a  third 
dimension.  It  is  easy  to  convince  oneself  about  these 
facts  by  taking  12  wires  or  strings  of  equal  length  and 
constructing  the  figure  shown  in  Fig.  8.  If  we  build 
it  on  a  flat  surface  the  12  equal  wires  will  fit  exactly. 

But  if  we  try  this  experiment  on  a  curved  surface,  for  Fig.  8 

instance  on  a  pillow-,  or  saddle-shaped  surface,  the 

last  closing  wire  will  not  fit,  and  will  be  too  short  or  too  long  depending  on  the 
kind  of  surfaces  we  have. 

Fig.  8 

622  VIII.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  MATHEMATICS 

The  formulae  (1)  have  been  generalized  to 

ds2  =gudxi2  +2glidxldxi  +g«dr j*  (2) 

for  two  dimensions  and  to 

ds2  =  gudxi2  +gt2dxi2  +gz*dxi2  +g4*d*42  +2gudx1dxi 
-\-2g\tflxidxi  -{-Igudxidxt  +  2gttdx2dxt  -\-2gudx2dx4  +  2g%  idxgdx^  ' 

for  four  dimensions.  It  is  easy  to  see  that  ds2  -dxi2  +dxz2  is  obtained  from  (2)  by 
taking  gn  -1;  gi2  ~0  and  g2j  =  1.  This  applies  to  formula  (3)  opt  of  which  we 
can  have  any  of  the  other  formulae  by  equating  some  of  the  g’s  to  zeros,  or  to 
one  or  to  other  values.  Formula  (3)  is  called  ‘the  generalized  pythagorean  rule1, 
of  which  the  ordinary  form  as  given  previously  is  only  a  particular  case.  We 
see,  by  comparing  the  formulae  (1)  with  (2)  and  (3),  that  these  g’s  are  not 
equal  for  different  systems  of  co-ordinates,  and  that  they  are  factors  in  measure- 
determination  which  represent  the  geometry  of  the  surface  considered.  It  is 
customary  to  write  the  above  formulae  in  an  abbreviated  form:  thus, 
=  22  2 gmndxmdXn,  where  we  give  to  tn  and  n  the  values  1,  2,  3,  4,  or, 
(m,  n  *  1,  2,  3,  4)  and  where  the  symbol  22  means  summation. 

We  will  now  explain  briefly  the  above  generalizations  and  the  meaning 
of  the  g’s  given  in  the  expressions. 

In  the  beginning  of  the  nineteenth  century  the  mathematician  Gauss 
formulated  the  internal  theory  of  surfaces  without  reference  to  the  plenum  in 
which  they  are  embedded.  This  theory  perhaps  is  and  will  remain  a  model  on 
which  all  theories  should  be  built.  He  introduced  also  a  new  kind  of  co-ordinates 
which  have  become  of  paramount  importance,  and  which  since  Einstein  are 
called  gaussian  co-ordinates.  Gauss  investigated  the  theory  of  surfaces,  which 
are  in  general  curved,  embedded  in  three-dimensional  ‘space’.  In  1854  the 
great  mathematician  Riemann  generalized  the  two-dimensional  gaussian  theory 
to  a  continuous  manifold  of  any  number  of  dimensions.  Historically,  both 
Gauss  and  Riemann  can  be  considered  as  the  precursors  of  Einstein. 

Let  us  imagine  a  surveyor  to  have  the  task  of  mapping  a  thickly  wooded 
hilly  region.  Because  of  the  conditions  of  his  work,  he  can  not  use  optical 
instruments,  and  he  has  no  ‘straight  lines’  to  deal  with.  So  euclidean  geometry 
will,  in  general,  not  be  applicable  to  the  region  as  a  whole.  It  can  be  assumed, 
however,  that  euclidean  geometry  may  be  applied  to  very  small  regions  which 

can  be  considered  flat.  What  we  know  already 
about  the  differential  and  integral  calculus  shows 
us  that  such  approximations,  when  taken  on  a 
very  small  scale,  are  perfectly  reliable  and  jus¬ 
tifiable. 

The  surveyor  would  lay  out  on  his  ground  a 
network  of  smoothly  curving  lines,  in  two  fami¬ 
lies,  an  X  family  and  a  Y  family.  (Fig.  9.)  All 
the  curves  of  the  X  family  would  intersect  all 
the  curves  of  the  Y  family  but  no  X  curve 
would  intersect  another  X  curve,  nor  a  Y  curve 
another  Y  curve. 

ON  GEOMETRY 

Let  us  take  the  surveyor’s  network  and  label  the  curves  by  consecutive 
numbers  in  each  family.  The  essential  point  is  that  these  numbers,  (let  us  call 
them  the  X  and  Y  numbers)  do  not  represent  either  lengths,  or  angles  or  other 
measurable  quantities,  but  are  simply  labels  for  the  curves,  much  as  when 
we  label  streets  by  numbers. 

But  such  numbering  does  not  lead  us  far.  We  must  introduce  some  measure 
relations .  We  have  at  our  disposal  a  measuring  chain  and  the  arbitrary  meshes 
of  the  network  which  we  have  introduced.  The  next  step  is  to  measure  the 
small  meshes  one  after  another  and  plot  them  on  our  map.  When  this  is  done 
we  have  a  complete  map  similar  in  structure  to  our  region.  Because  of  the 
smallness  of  the  meshes  we  can  consider  them  as  small  parallelograms,  and 
such  parallelograms  can  be  defined  by  the  lengths  of  two  adjacent  sides  and 
one  angle. 

We  may,  however,  proceed  differently,  as  shown  on  Fig.  10. 

Let  us  select  one  mesh,  for  instance  the  one  bounded  by  the  curves,  3  and  4, 
and  by  the  curves  7  and  8,  Let  us  consider  a  point  P  within  the  mesh,  and 
let  us  denote  its  distance  from  the  point  O  (x  =3,  y  =  7)  by  This  distance 
could  be  directly  measured.  Let  us  draw  from  the 
point  P  parallels  to  our  mesh  lines  and  label  the 
intersections  with  mesh  lines  by  A  and  B,  respec¬ 
tively.  Let  us  also  draw  PC  perpendicular  to  the 
x  axis. 

The  points  A  and  B  then  also  have  numbers 
or  labels  or  gaussian  co-ordinates  in  our  network. 

The  co-ordinate  of  A  may  be  determined  by 
measuring  the  side  of  the  parallelogram  on  which 
A  lies  and  the  distance  of  A  from  O.  We  can  *gJ 
regard  the  relation  called  the  ratio  of  these  two  Fig.  10 

lengths  as  the  increase  of  the  x  co-ordinate  of  .  . 

A  towards  O.  We  shall  denote  this  increase  itself  by  choosing  0  as  the  origin 
of  the  gaussian  co-ordinates.  Similarly,  we  determine  the  gaussian  co-ordinate 
of  y  of  B  as  the  ratio  in  which  B  cuts  the  corresponding  side.  We  see  that 
these  two  ratios ,  which  for  brevity  we  call  x  and  y,  are  the  co-ordinates  of 

our  point  P.  ,  ,  f  .  . 

As  x  and  y  are  ratios  they  of  course  do  not  give  us  the  lengths  of  OA  and 
OB  but  the  lengths  are  given,  for  example,  by  ax,  and  by,  where  a  and  b  are 
definite  numbers,  to  be  found  by  further  measurements.  If  we  move  the  point 
P  about,  its  gaussian  co-ordinates  change  but  the  numbers  a  and  b  which  give 
the  ratio  of  the  gaussian  co-ordinates  to  the  true  lengths  remain  unchanged . 

We  find  the  length,  s ,  which  is  the  distance  of  the  point  P  from  0 ,  from 
the  right  triangle  OPC  by  the  pythagorean  rule:  s2  =  0P2  =OC*+CP*.  But 
OC-OA+AC  and  therefore  by  substituting  and  squaring  we  have 
s2  ssA02+20A‘AC-hAC2+CP2.  From  the  right  triangle  APC  we  have 
A&+CP*  =AP2,  whence  substituting  again  we  have  s2  =0A2+20A'AC^-APi. 
But  OA  =ax,  AP=OB  «&y,  and  as  AC  is  the  projection  of  AP=by,  it  also  has 

624  VIII.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  MATHEMATICS 

a  faced  ratio  to  it,  whence  we  may  put  AC~cy,  and  so  we  obtain  the  important 
ormula  s -a  x  +2  acxy  +b*y2,  in  which  a,  b,  c  are  ratios  given  by  fixed  numbers. 
Usually  this  formula  is  represented  differently,  a 2  is  designated  by  gn,  ac  by  gn 
and  b  by  fa;  whence  our  formula  becomes  2gllXy+gIiy*  in  which 

the  numbers  1 1, 12  and  22  are  simply  ordering  labels  without  quantitative  values 
mere  subscripts,  labels,  indices  .  ,  which  indicate  that  the  different  g's  have 

different  values.  We  see  that  the  above  formula  is  the  one  which  was  given 
previously  by  (2).  5 

The  g’s  with  different  labels  serve  just  as  sides  or  angles  for  the  determina¬ 
tion  of  the  actual  sizes  of  the  parallelograms  and  we  call  them  the  factors  of 
the  measure  determination.  They  may  have  different  values  from  mesh  to 
mesh,  but  if  they  are  known  for  every  mesh,  then,  by  the  last  formula  the 
true  distance  of  an  arbitrary  point  P,  within  an  arbitrary  mesh  from  the  origin 
can  be  calculated.2 

The  procedure  by  which  we  can  locate  any  point  on  the  surface  is  simple. 
If  our  point  P  is  between  the  two  curves  #=3  and  *=4  we  can  draw  nine 
curves  between  these  two  curves  and  label  them  3,1;  3,2;  .  .  .  ;  3  9  If  P  now 
lies  between  curves  3,1  and  3,2  we  can  draw  nine  curves  between  these  two 
curves  and  label  them  3,11;  3,12;.  .  .  j  3,19  ,  .  We  could  do  similarly  with  the 
y  curves  and  in  this  way  we  would  succeed  in  assigning  to  any  point  as  accurate 
a  pair  of  numerical  labels  as  we  pleased,  and  so  finally  have  the  gaussian 
co-ordinates  of  any  point.  We  used  nine  curves  simply  to  get  the  very  con¬ 
venient  decimal  method  of  labeling.  The  cartesian  co-ordinate  systems  which 
we  use  in  plane  geometry  obviously  represent  only  special  cases  of  gaussian 
systems. 

As  we  have  already  seen,  our  g's  are  ratios,  and  so  represent  numbers.  Such 
numbers  may  be  regarded  as  tensors  of  zero  rank  for  convenience  of  the  mathe¬ 
matical  treatment;  and  the  quantities  g„,  gxv,  g„,  may  be  treated  as  com¬ 
ponents  of  a  tensor.  Since  this  tensor  determines  the  measure  relations  in  any 
particular  region,  it  is  called  the  metric  fundamental  tensor.  Its  value  must  be 
given  for  the  region  in  which  we  want  to  make  our  calculations.  It  determines 
the  full  geometry  of  the  surface  in  a  given  region;  and,  conversely,  we  can 
a  so  determine  the  fundamental  tensor  in  a  given  region  from  measurements 
made  m  that  regmn,  without  any  previous  knowledge  of  how  our  curved  sur¬ 
face  is  embedded  m  ‘space’  at  the  place  in  question.  The  fundamental  tensor 
in  general  varies  continuously  from  place  to  place,  and  so  every  geometric 
manifold  may  be  regarded  as  the  field  of  its  metric  fundamental  tensor. 

Purely  mathematical  investigations  show  that  the  fundamental  tensor 
defines  a  number  called  the  ‘Riemann  scalar’,  which  is  completely  independent 
of  the  co-ordinate  system  and  leads  to  the  definition  of  the  curvature  tensor, 
which  can  be  connected  with  the  ‘matter  tensor’.3 

The  main  importance  of  the  introduction  of  such  arbitrary  curves  is  to 
produce  formulae  for  the  surfaces  which  remain  unaltered  for  a  change  of  the 
gaussian  co-ordinates— in  other  words,  which  remain  invariant.  This  was 
achieved  by  the  introduction  of  the  relations  called  ratios  which  are  pure 

ON  GEOMETRY 

numbers,  and  so  the  geometry  of  surfaces  becomes  a  theory  of  invariants  of 
a  very  general  type. 

On  curved  surfaces  there  are  in  general  no  straight  lines— there  are 
shortest  lines ,  which  are  called  ‘geodetic  lines’.  To  find  them,  we  divide  any 
arbitrary  lines  joining  two  points  into  small  elements,  which  we  measure,  and 
select  the  line  for  which  the  sum  of  these  elements  is  less  than  for  any  other 
line  between  the  two  points.*  Analytically  we  can  calculate  them,  when  the 
gfs  are  given,  by  the  aid  of  the  generalized  pythagorean  theorem.  The  geodetic 
lines,  and  also  the  curvature,  are  given  by  invariant  formulae,  which  represent 
intrinsic  characteristics  of  the  surface,  independent  of  any  co-ordinates.  All 
higher  invariants  are  obtained  from  these  invariants.4 

We  shall  not  attempt  to  give  an  explanation  of  the  tensor  calculus,  as  at 
present  there  is  no  elementary  means  of  presenting  a  brief  explanation;  short 
of  a  small  volume— at  least  the  writer  does  not  know  of  any.5 

The  name  ‘tensor’  originally  came  from  the  Latin  word  tendere-  to  stretch, 
whence  tensio  *  tension.  Nowadays,  however,  it  is  used  in  a  more  general  way; 
namely,  to  express  the  relation  of  one  vector  to  another,  and  not  necessarily 
to  imply  stress  or  tension.  As  an  example,  we  can  give  the  representation  for 
stresses  occurring  in  elastic  bodies,  which  originally  led  to  the  name.8 

As  we  have  already  seen,  when  we  deal  with  relations  of  vectors  our 
expressions  become  additionally  independent  of  units.  Such  equations,  inde¬ 
pendent  of  the  measure  code,  are  called  tensor  equations.7 

As  we  are  interested  in  equations  which  are  invariant  under  arbitrary 
transformations,  certain  functions,  called  tensors,  are  defined,  with  respect  to 
any  system  of  co-ordinates  by  a  number  of  functions  of  these  co-ordinates, 
called  the  components  of  the  tensor,  from  which  we  can  calculate  them  for  any 
new  system  of  co-ordinates.  If  two  tensors  of  one  kind  are  equal  in  one  system, 
they  will  be  equal  in  any  other  system.  If  the  components  vanish  in  one  system, 
they  vanish  in  all  systems.  Such  equations  express  conditions  which  are 
independent  of  the  choice  of  co-ordinates.  By  the  study  of  structural  laws  of 
the  formation  of  tensors  we  acquire  means  of  formulating  structural  laws  of 
nature  in  generally  invariant  forms.  Obviously,  such  methods  and  language 
are  uniquely  appropriate  for  physics  and  the  formulations  of  the  laws  of  nature. 
If  a  law  cannot  be  formulated  in  some  such  form,  there  must  be  something 
wrong  with  the  formulation  and  it  needs  revision. 

The  tensor  calculus  is  also  peculiarly  fitted  to  describe  processes  in  a  plenum. 
We  do  not  use  it  to  describe  the  metrical  conditions  but  to  describe  the  field 
which  expresses  the  physical  states  in  a  metrical  plenum. 

Eddington  gives  an  excellent  example  of  the  fact  that  it  is  definitely 
necessary  to  look  into  the  way  we  build  up  our  formulae  (structure)  and  the 
method  of  handling  them. 

*M  ore^ generally ,  the  geodetic  represents  a  track  of  minimum  or  maximum 
interval-length  between  two  distant  events,  either  of  them  being  umque  (one- 
valued)  in  a  given  case. 

626  VIII.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  MATHEMATICS 

The  problem  is  to  determine  whether  a  particular  kind  of  space-time  is 
possible.  We  must  investigate  the  different  g's  which  give  us  different  kinds 
of  space-time,  and  not  those  which  distinguish  different  kinds  of  mesh  systems 
in  one  space-time.  This  means  that  our  formulae  must  not  be  altered  in  any 
way  if  we  change  the  mesh  system. 

The  above  condition  makes  an  extraordinarily  simple  test  of  laws  that 
have  been  or  may  be  suggested.  Among  others,  Newton’s  law  is  swept  away. 
How  this  happens  can  be  shown  in  two  dimensions. 

If  in  one  mesh  system  (x,y)  we  have  ds2  =  gudx2+2glidxdy+g22dy2,  and  in 
another  system  (x  ,y  )  ds2  dx'2  -f-  dx' dy'  -j-gw'dy'2,  one  law  must  be 

satisfied  if  the  unaccented  letters  are  replaced  by  accented  letters.  Let  us 
suppose  that  the  law  gn  is  assumed.  We  change  the  mesh  system,  for 
instance,  by  spacing  the  y  lines  twice  as  far  apart,  that  is,  we  take  /  =y/2  and 
keep  x’-x.  Then  ds2=gndx2  +2gi*lxdy+gt2dy2  =gudx'2  +igl2dx’dy'  +4g22dy’2. 
We  see  that  £n'  =«n  and  gsj'-4gsl.  Whence  if  gu  is  taken  equal  to 
cannot  be  equal  to  £22'- 

A  few  examples  would  convince  us  that  it  is  extremely  easy  to  change  a 
formula  entirely  by  the  mere  change  of  mesh  systems.  It  seems  unnecessary 
to  emphasize  the  fact  that  'universal  laws',  to  be  ‘universal',  should  not  depend 
structurally  to  such  an  extent  on  the  accidental  and,  after  all,  unimportant 
choice  of  reference  systems.8  ' 

To  remedy  such  a  state  of  affairs,  impossible  in  mature  science,  the  tensor 
calculus  was  invented.  The  whole  general  theory  of  Einstein  seems  to  demand 
that  the  equations  of  physics  should  ultimately  be  expressed  in  tensor  forms; 
in  other  words,  that  ‘universal  laws'  should  cease  to  be  ‘local  gossip’;  a  demand 
which  must  be  granted,  and  on  this  point  the  Einstein  theory  is  beyond  criticism 
and  is  an  epochal  methodological  advance  of  an  irreversible  structural  lin¬ 
guistic  character. 

In  dealing  with  co-ordinate  systems  we  have 
heretofore  used  them  to  represent  only  ‘spatial' 
entities,  spreads  of  different  dimensions.  It  is 
desirable  to  become  acquainted  with  a  different 
use  of  co-ordinates,  in  which  one  of  them  will 
represent  ‘time’.  The  last  use  is  just  as  simple 
as  the  former,  but  the  graphs  which  we  obtain 
are  different. 

Let  us  take  the  simplest  example,  of  a  point 
P  moving  uniformly  along  a  straight  line  OX 
with  the  velocity  of  one  inch  per  second.  We 
could  represent  its  movement  in  one  dimension, 
as  in  Fig.  11,  and  say  that  our  point  P  is  at  Px 
after  one  second  (/  =  1),  at  Pa  after  two  seconds 
(/=*=  2)  .  ;  at  the  point  P„  after  n  seconds  (/=«). 

Section  C.  Space-time . 
ft?  3  5. 

Fio.-n. 

ON  GEOMETRY 

But  we  could  also  represent  this  movement  in  a  different  way.  We  could 
choose  two  mutually  perpendicular  axes  OX  and  OT  as  in  Fig.  12,  OX  repre¬ 
senting  the  ‘spatial*  actual  direction  of  the  movement  and  OT,  which  we  have 
heretofore  used  to  represent  a  second  ‘spatial*  co-ordinate,  now  representing 

the  ‘time*  co-ordinate.  . 

We  would  lay  off  on  the  X  axis  our  inches,  1,  2,  3, . . .  n,  and  on  the  T  axis 
our  seconds  1,  2,  3, .  . .  n.  In  our  two-dimensional  space-time  our  point  P  would 
be  at  the  point  O  (x  -0,  t  -0).  After  one  second  it  would  be  at  the  point  Pi 
(x  =  1,  t  —  1),  after  two  seconds  at  the  point  P2  (x  =  2f  t=2)  .  ;  after  n  seconds 
at  the  point  P„  (x=n,  t  =  n).  We  see  that  the  position  of  our  point  P  in  two- 
dimensional  space-time  would  be  represented  by  a  series  of  points  each  given 
by  two  data:  one  ‘spatial’,  the  other  a  corresponding  ‘time*.  If  the  intervals 
are  taken  indefinitely  small,  in  the  limit  our  ‘ moving ’  point  would  be  represented^ 
by  a  static  line  inclined  to  the  X  axis .  We  could  then  speak  either  of  our  ‘moving* 
point,  or  else  not  use  the  term  ‘moving’  but  speak  of  infinitely  many  static 
points ,  each  given  by  two  numbers,  one  representing  a  distance,  the  other 
‘time’.  Our  ‘moving*  point  would  become  a  static  world-line .  The  reader  should 
notice  that  in  this  case  we  have  structurally  changed  our  language  from  dynamic 
to  static,  and  raised  the  dimension.  Our  mathematical  ‘moving*  ‘point ,  which 
had  no  dimension  in  our  one-dimensional  ‘space’,  is  in  our  two-dimensional 
space-time  represented  by  a  static  one-dimensional  line. 

In  this  example  we  had  uniform 
translation.  We  did  not  introduce 
acceleration.  The  distances  were  pro¬ 
portional  to  the  ‘times’,  hence  our  line 
was  ‘straight*  and  inclined  to  the  X 
axis  at  a  constant  angle. 

Using  such  space-time  representa¬ 
tion  we  see  that  a  point  when  it  is  not 
‘moving’,  but  is  stationary,  is  repre¬ 
sented  by  a  line  parallel  to  the  ‘time 
axis  T ,  as  shown  at  A  on  Fig.  13.  Our 
point  A  is  getting  older,  so  to  speak,  but 
does  not  ‘move’.  In  the  next  case,  the  point  B  does  not  ‘move’  until  it  is  some 
seconds  old,  when  at  B'  it  begins  to  ‘move’  with  constant  velocity.  Point  C 
‘moves’  in  the  beginning  at  one  constant  velocity  until  Cf  where  it  acquires  a 
certain  different  velocity  and  the  direction  changes. 

In  Fig.  13,  D  represents  a  point  experiencing  a  series  of  sudden  changes 
of  velocities.  The  graph  is  a  succession  of  short  straight  lines  forming  a  broken 
line  or  open  polygon.  As  the  changes  of  velocity  occur  more  and  more  frequently 
the  sides  of  our  polygon  become  smaller  and  smaller;  and  in  the  limit,  as  the 
changes  of  velocity  become  continuous,  our  broken  line  becomes  a  smooth 

curve  E .  , 

Motion  with  continuously  changing  velocity  is  called  accelerated  or 

retarded  motion.  The  rate  of  change  of  velocity  is  called  acceleration  and  is 

Fig.  13 

628  VIII.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  MATHEMATICS 

represented  by  the  second  derivative  of  the  distance  with  respect  to  the  ‘time’- 

symbolically,  A  =dv /dt  =  d2s /dt%. 

It  is  important  to  notice  that  in  space-time  an  accelerated  motion  is  repre¬ 
sented  by  a  curved  line.  In  uniform  (constant  velocity)  motion  the  distances 
are  proportional  to  the  'times',  and  the  line  is  straight  and  its  equation  is  of 
the  first  degree.  In  accelerated  motion  the  distances  are  not  proportional  to 
the  'times',  the  lines  are  curved  and  the  'time'  element  dt  enters  in  the  second 
degree  at  least;  namely,  as  dt 2. 

For  example,  let  us  study  the  graph  of  the  motion  represented  by  the 
equation  x=At2/2  which  means  that  the  distance  x  is  proportional  to  the 

Let  OX  (Fig.  14)  be  the  'spatial'  axis, 
and  OT  the  'temporal'  axis.  We  lay  off 
on  our  T  axis  equally-spaced  points,  repre¬ 
senting  the  seconds  1,  2,  3,  4  .  ,  and  calcu¬ 
late  the  distances  x  for  each  of  these  values 
from  the  equation  x=At2/2  where  A 
represents  a  constant  acceleration. 

Let  us  assume  that  the  constant  ac¬ 
celeration  A  is  given  as  4  metres  per 
second  per  second.  The  equation  x^M1/! 
becomes  x~2 1\  Corresponding  to  the  values  f=0,  1,  2,  3,  4  .  ,  we  have  the 
values  x  -0,  2,  8,  18,  32  ,  .  If  we  plot  these  points,  and  assume  that  the  change 
is  continuous,  we  may  join  the  points  by  a  continuous  curve,  which  represents 
the  motion  of  the  point  as  a  curved  world-line. 

Similarly,  in  three-dimensional  space- time,  a  point  moving  uniformly  in 
the  plane  XY  would  be  represented  in  the  plane  XY  by  the  line  AB ,  and  in 
three-dimensional  space-time  by  the  static  line  AB\  where  the  'times’  are 

As  we  have  already  seen,  non-recti- 
linear  motion  may  be  considered  as  accel¬ 
erated  motion.  We  will  generalize  the 
above  to  the  case  where  any  curved  path 
is  traversed  with  constant  velocity.  In  this 
case  the  direction  of  the  velocity  is  changed. 
If  we  take  the  motion  of  a  point  which 
describes  a  circular  orbit  with  constant 
velocity,  it  is  easy  to  find  its  acceleration, 
which  is  called  in  this  case  centripetal 
acceleration. 

.  .  Let  us  consider  a  point  P,  moving  in 

a  circular  orbit  with  a  constant  velocity  v,  as  given  in  Fig.  16.  If  at  a  certain 
time’  it  is  at  At  after  a  short  interval  t,  it  will  be  at  B.  The  direction  of  the 
velocity  will  be  changed  from  AAf  to  BB'. 

proportional  to  the  distance. 

square  ol  the  ‘time  . 
T 

ON  GEOMETRY 

If  we  construct  the  triangle  DCE  by  drawing  CD  parallel  and  equal  to 
AA't  and  CE  parallel  and  equal  to  BB',  we  see  that  the  angle  ZDCE  is  equal 
to  the  angle  ZA'A"B'  because  the  sides  are  parallel,  and  it  is  also  equal  to  the 
angle  ZAOB  whose  sides  are  perpendicular  to  A  A'  and  BB'.  The  triangles 
ABO  and  CDE  are  similar  be¬ 
cause  they  are  isosceles  and 
the  angles  between  the  equal 
sides  are  equal.  Clearly  the 
side  DE~w,  represents  the 
supplementary  velocity  which 
transforms  A  A'  into  BB'.  We 
know  that  in  similar  triangles 
the  sides  are  proportional  so 
we  can  write  DE/  CD  —AB/  OA . 

By  inspection  of  our  figures  we 
seethatZXE  —w;  CD  —  v;OA  —r, 
the  radius  of  the  circle.  The 
chord  AB  may  be  taken  as  the 
arc  AB  of  the  circle,  provided 
the  ‘time’-interval  is  taken  sufficiently  small.  Let  us  write  chord  AB  =s.  We 
have  w/v  -s/r  or  w  =sv/r.  If  we  divide  both  sides  of  our  equation  by  t  we  have 
w/t-sv/tr .  But  w/t=A,  the  acceleration,  and  s/t  =v  hence  A  =v2/ r.  In  words, 
the  centripetal  acceleration  is  equal  to  the  square  of  the  velocity  in  the  circle 

divided  by  the  radius.  . 

The  above  formula  is  of  structural  importance  because  it  is  the  foundation 
for  the  empirical  proof  of  Newton’s  law  of  gravitation.  For  our  purpose  it  is 
important  for  other  reasons,  to  be  stated  later. 

There  are  two  more  diagrams  which  should  be  considered,  in  this  connec¬ 
tion.  Fig.  17  represents  the  plane  circular  motion  of  a  point  P  whose  orbit  in 
the  plane  XY  is  the  circle  PAB.  In  three-dimen¬ 
sional  space-time  the  plane  circular  orbit  of  J  - - 

motion  would  be  represented  by  the  static  '  s - 

cylindrical  helix  (or  screw-line)  with  axis  parallel 
to  the  ‘time’  axis  T .  (Fig.  17.)  We  should  note 

that  the  motion  is  dynamically  circular  in  the  XY  *  y 

plane,  yet  a  three-dimensional  space-time  repre-  / 

sentation  gives  us  a  stationary  helix.  /  _  ; 

Similarly  for  vibrational  movements  which  / 

could  be  represented  in  one  dimension  by  to-and-fro  /  a 

movements  on  the  X  axis  from  A  to  B  and  from  B  to  / 

A .  (Fig.  18.)  If  we  introduce  our  space-time  form  of  J L - - >  X 

representation  by  introducing  the  T  axis,  our  vibra-  Fic.  17 

tional  world-line  would  be  represented  structurally 

by  a  wave-line  along  the  T  axis.  In  particular,  if  the  vibrational  motion  is  simply 
harmonic,  a  proper  choice  of  the  ‘time’  unit  makes  the  wave-line  a  sine  curve.9 

630  VIII.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  MATHEMATICS 

Becoming  thoroughly  familiar  with  these  few 
simple  examples  takes  away  a  great  deal  of 
mystery  from  the  Minkowski-Einstein  and  the 
new  quantum  world.  We  see  that  after  all  there 
is  nothing  extraordinary  in  the  fact  that  in 
languages  of  different  structures  we  get  different 
x  forms  of  representations  and  pictures,  and  that 
in  a  world  where  accelerations  abound  we  may 
very  profitably  use  the  term  ‘curved’. 

When  we  come  to  speak  about  the  Einstein 
theory,  the  four-dimensional  space- time  world  of 
Minkowski,  and  the  new  quantum  mechanics, 
we  shall  have  considerable  use  for  these  few 
notions  and  illustrations. 

Section  D.  The  application  of  geometrical  notions  to  cerebral  localisation. 

In  the  present  work  we  are  dealing  in  the  main  with  structure  and  the 
justment  of  the  structure  of  our  languages  to  empirical  structures,  and  at 
is  point  it  will  be  of  use  to  suggest  some  of  the  consequences  which  follow 
from  what  has  been  said. 

The  question  of  cerebral  localization  is  a  difficult  and  vital  problem.  In 
tonner  days  it  was  supposed  that  the  brain  had  individualized  centres  with 
stnctly  defined  functions.  Attempts  were  made  to  ascribe  to  definite  cerebral 
parte  definite  functions  such  as  ‘memory’,  ‘intelligence’,  ‘morality’,  ‘talents’ 
in  the  meantime,  experimental  facte  disproved  such  structural  views,  and  as  a 
reaction  another  tendency  appeared;  namely,  to  deny  any  localization. 

Modern  researches  show  unmistakably  that  both  of  these  extreme  ten¬ 
dencies  are  at  variance  with  experimental  structural  facte.  It  appears  that  the 
lower  centres  play  a  more  important  role  according  as  the  terminal,  or  higher 
centres,  are  less  developed  and  that  there  is  considerable  variability,  at  least  in 
man,  not  only  from  the  morphological  and  histological  aspects  but  also  from 
e  functional  aspect.  It  was  found  impossible  to  generalize  from  the  particular 
development  of  centralization  and  functional  distribution  in  one  species  to  the 
distribution  in  another  species.  Localization  may  vary  even  in  one  individual 
under  different  circumstances.10  Metabolism,  and  slight  disturbances  in  the 
functioning  of  a  neuron,  were  also  found  to  have  a  most  far-reaching  influence, 
shown  in  its  relations  to  other  groups  of  neurons.  The  problems  of  localization 
are  far  too  complex  to  attempt  even  an  account  of  them,  the  more  so  since  the 
rea  er  will  find  excellent  accounts  of  them  in  the  large  literature  on  the  subject. 

e  general  conclusion  reached  by  practically  all  investigators  is  that  some 
localization  of  nervous  function  does  exist,  yet  it  has  a  certain  variability  which 
depends  on  an  enormous  number  of  factors. 

The  methods  explained  in  this  chapter  will  enable  us  to  suggest  a  method 
by  which  we  can  orient  ourselves  in  the  bewildering  complexity  of  the  function¬ 
ing  of  the  nervous  system. 

ON  GEOMETRY 

One  of  the  main  difficulties  is  that  the  structure  of  this  world  is  such,  that 
it  is  made  up  of  absolute  individuals,  each  with  unique  relationship  toward 
environment  (in  the  broadest  sense) ;  and  we  have  to  speak  about  it  in  terms  of 
generalities.  ‘Laws’  .  ,  formulated  in  the  old  two-valued  ways ,  can  never  account 
adequately  for  the  facts  at  hand,  being  only  approximations.  The  mathematical 
methods  which  have  already  been  explained  give  us  at  once  a  great  advantage. 
We  have  seen  that  if  we  have  a  function,  y  =/(*),  let  us  say,  and  take  the  graph 
of  this  function,  to  every  point  of  the  graph  there  corresponds  a  pair  of  values 
X  and  y.  We  have  seen  also  that  each  of  the  four  quadrants  I,  II,  HI,  IV  has 
a  characteristic  pair  of  signs.  In  quadrant 
I,  both  x  and  y  are  positive;  in  II,  x  is 
negative  and  y  positive;  in  III,  both  x and 
y  are  negative;  and  finally,  in  IV,  x  is  posi¬ 
tive  and  y  negative.  We  can  easily  see  that 
the  value  of  the  variables  may  be  thought 
of  as  variable  conditions  different  for  each 
individual,  and  that  definite  localizations 
correspond  to  them.  In  our  example  we 
had  to  do  with  a  function  of  one  inde¬ 
pendent  variable,  and  we  had  a  one¬ 
dimensional  line,  curved  in  two  dimen¬ 
sions.  When  we  had  a  function  of  two 
independent  variables  we  had  a  surface, 

which  in  general  was  curved  in  a  third  ,  .  , 

dimension.  By  analogy  we  may  pass  to  any  number  of  dimensions,  where  by 
dimension  we  do  not  mean  anything  mysterious,  but  roug  y  t  e  num  er  o 

variables  involved  in  the  problem.  , 

We  see  that  if  we  think  of  the  activity  of  the  nervous  system  in  terms  of  a 
mathematical  function  with  an  enormous  number  of  variables,  we  shall  not 
only  have  place  for  the  uniqueness  of  each  individual,  determined  by  the  va  ue 
of  the  variables  and  the  character  of  the  function,  but  that  this  would  a  so 
imply  a  localization ,  which  is  permanent  in  a  given  individual  at  a  given  time  ; 
which  again  implies  the  totality  of  ‘circumstances’  ,  .  Our  function  would  be 

Y 

N  =}{x  1,  X2,  *3,  .  .  *  *»)•  f  _  .  . ..  (  .. 

In  fact  it  is  hard  to  see  how  it  is  possible  to  analyse  the  activities  of  the 

nervous  system  in  any  other  way.  The  facts  are,  that  every  organism  is  an 
individual,  distinct  and  different  from  others,  and  so  we  must  have  means  to 
take  this  individuality  into  account.  Different  values  for  different  variables 
take  care  of  this  point.  Similarities  are  accounted  for  by  the  general  structural 
character  of  the  functions.  For  instance,  any  quadratic  equation  with  two  un¬ 
knowns  gives  us  a  conic  section.  An  equation  of  the  type  y2  =ax  represents  a 
parabola,  the  graph  of  any  equation  of  the  form  xy  =a  represents  a  hyperbola  ,  . 
For  every  definite  set  of  values  of  our  variables  the  implied  localization  is  also 
definite,  which  corresponds  to  the  fact  that  in  a  given  individual  at  a  given 
'time’  .  ,  the  localization  is  definite.  One  value  for  the  whole  function  can  be 

632  VIII.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  MATHEMATICS 

reached  by  giving  different  sets  of  values  to  the  different  variables.  For  in¬ 
stance,  in  the  function  z=*5x-2y-~  1,  if  x  =  l  and  y- 1,  then  s=  2;  but  we  can 
have  s  — 2  by  taking  x-2  and  y  —  3.5.  Or  if  one  of  the  conditions  be  non-ex¬ 
istent,  which  means  that  the  value  of  one  of  our  variables  is  zero,  for  instance, 
x  =0,  we  still  could  have  the  value  z  -2  by  taking  y  =  —  l.S.  This  fact  accounts 
for  the  many-to-one  correspondences  of  causal  factors,  typified,  for  instance, 
by  sunshine  or  cod  liver  oil  producing  a  similar  effect. 

It  should  be  understood  that  in  what  is  said  here,  the  numerical  values  do 
not  matter.  In  most  of  the  cases  we  are  not  advanced  enough  to  be  able  to 
deal  with  such  numerical  values.  What  is  to  be  emphasized  is  the  structure  of 
the  language  we  use.  The  method  should  enable  us,  instead  of  dealing  with 
generalizations  in  the  old  language,  which  somewhere  have  to  be  contradicted, 
to  use  a  language  of  mathematical  structure  which  shall  account  for  the  facts 
and  leave  room  for  the  great  individual  varieties  of  organisms  in  structure  and 
function. 

After  all,  we  should  not  be  surprised  that  the  theory  of  functions  and 
language  of  functions  is  structurally  appropriate  in  expressing,  and  so  in  under¬ 
standing,  the  functioning  of  the  nervous  system,  or  any  other  system.  Per¬ 
sonally  I  have  benefitted  greatly  through  this  method;  and  many  baffling 
structural  complexities  have  been  much  simplified. 

Structurally,  when  we  use  the  language  of  functions,  variables .  ,  we 
automatically  introduce  extensional  structure,  as  already  explained,  and  we 
have  at  our  disposal  methods  of  translation  of  different  orders  of  abstractions — 
dynamic  into  static,  and  vice  versa — which  is  a  neurological  structural  necessity 
for  being  rational  and  sane.  And  surely  science  should  try  to  be  rational.  It 
should  be  stressed  again  that  in  our  problem  numerical  values  matter  very 
little,  but  structure  and  method,  for  the  many  reasons  already  explained,  are 
of  paramount  importance.  Perhaps  even  the  value  of  numbers  is  due  mainly 
to  the  structural  fact  that  it  has  forced  upon  us  extensional  and  relational 
methods.  It  is  the  only  language  which  is  in  accordance  with  the  structure  and 
functioning  of  the  nervous  system,  and  so  helps  to  co-ordinate  these  activities 
instead  of  disorganizing  them. 

That  these  simple  structural  dependences  have  been  discovered  so  late  is 
really  astonishing.  The  only  explanation  I  can  give  of  this  is  that  we  have  been 
so  engrossed  in  generalizing  and  generalizations  that  we  lost  sight  of  the  fact 
that  in  life  we  deal  structurally  with  absolute  individuals ,  and  that  the  only 
language  which  preserves  the  extensional  structural  individuality  for  its  elements 
is  found  in  mathematics — specifically,  in  numbers. 

It  may  be  that  a  study  of  mathematical  structure  and  the  psycho-logics  of 
mathematics  will  give  results  of  unparalleled  human  values,  particularly  for 
our  sanity.  The  problems  of  sanity  are  problems  of  adjustment,  and  no  means 
of  adjustment  should  be  disregarded.  It  may  also  be  that  the  main  importance 
of  mathematics  will  be  found  some  day  to  be  more  in  the  mathematical  methods 
and  structure  which  it  has  originated,  methods  forced  upon  the  mathematician 

ON  GEOMETRY 

by  the  relational  character  of  the  entities  he  has  to  deal  with,  than  in  the  pos¬ 
sible  combinations  of  these  entities  themselves. 

At  any  rate,  we  must  sadly  admit  that  the  problems  of  mathematical 
methods  and  structure  and  the  psycho-logical  values  of  mathematics  have  so 
far  received  very  little  attention,  since  we  have  failed  to  realize  their  human 
Importance.  In  the  future  this  problem  will  be  further,  and  thoroughly,  in¬ 
vestigated. 

PART  IX 

ON  THE  SIMILARITY  OF  EMPIRICAL 
AND  VERBAL  STRUCTURES 

The  theory  of  relativity  has  resulted  from  a  combination  of  the  three 
elements  which  were  called  for  in  a  reconstruction  of  physics:  first,  delicate 
experiment:  secondly,  logical  analysis;  and  thirdly,  epistemological  con¬ 
siderations.  (457)  bertrand  russell 

The  essence  of  Einstein’s  generalization  is  its  final  disentanglement  of 
that  part  of  any  physical  event  which  is  contributed  by  the  observer  from 
that  which  is  inherent  in  the  nature  of  things  and  independent  of  all  ob- 

E.  T.  BELL 

Even  Leibniz  formulated  the  postulate  of  continuity,  of  infinitely  near 
action,  as  a  general  principle,  and  could  not,  for  this  reason,  become  recon¬ 
ciled  to  Newton’s  Law  of  Gravitation,  which  entails  action  at  a  distance 
and  which  corresponds  fully  to  that  of  Coulomb.  (547)  Hermann  weyl 

This  limitation  to  what  is  directly  observable  is  ultimately  based  on 
Mach’s  philosophy  and,  directly  inspired  by  Mach,  led  three  decades  ago 
to  the  propagation  of  the  so-called  theory  of  "Energetics,  which  sought 
to  recognise  only  quantities  of  energy  as  physically  given  and  observable 
quantities.  (481)  A*  sommerfeld 

CHAPTER  XXXV 

ACTION  BY  CONTACT 

The  difficulty  involved  is  that  the  proper  and  adequate  means  of  describ- 
ing  changes  in  continuous  deformable  bodies  is  the  method  of  dtfferenHal 
equations .  .  .  .  They  express  mathematically  the  physical  conception  of 
contiguous  action.  (45)  MAX  B0RN 

The  analysis  of  ‘matter’,  ‘space’,  and  ‘time’  from  the  point  of  view  of 
structure  and  of  orders  of  abstractions  has  led  us  to  far-reaching  conclusions. 
Let  us  summarize  the  semantic  results,  and  consider  some  of  the  immediate 
consequences. 

We  may  begin  by  recalling  the  difference  between  the  lower  order  and 
higher  order  abstractions.  The  lower  order  abstractions  are  given  to  us  by  the 
lower  nerve  centres.  They  are  ‘dynamic’,  ‘continuous’,  non-permanent,  shifting, 
unreliable,  and  above  all  un-speakable. 

They  have  a  character  of  immediacy,  because,  structurally  in  terms  of 
order,  they  are  closest  to  outside  events.  They  come  first  in  order  in  the  func¬ 
tioning  of  the  nervous  system.  We  always  associate  with  them  some  ‘objectivity’ 
as,  by  necessity,  the  eventual  definition  o f  an  ‘object’  starts  at  this  level. 

It  should  be  emphasized  over  and  over  again  that,  speaking  correctly, 
on  this  level  we  cannot  define  anything,  since  abstractions  on  this  level  are 
fundamentally  un-speakable .  We  may  look,  listen,  handle,  feel .  ,  but  cannot 
speak  and  therefore  cannot  define.  The  moment  we  define  our  objects,  we 
are  no  longer  on  the  level  of  lower  order  abstractions.  By  neurological  structural 
necessity  we  have  passed  to  the  higher  nerve  centres  (speech),  and  higher 
order  abstractions.  This  is  what  is  meant  when  we  say  that  this  lower  level 
is  unspeakable . 

Because  these  lower  order  abstractions  are  closer  to  the  outside  events, 
and  because  they  come  first  in  order ,  they  have  a  special  character  of  immediacy, 
with  which  we  must  start.  The  struggle  begins  when,  through  some  primitive- 
made  doctrines  or  structural  assumptions  (metaphysics),  we  try  to  avoid  going 
any  further  than  these  lower  order  abstractions.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  this  is  an 
impossibility,  because  of  the  very  structure  of  our  nervous  system.  However 
intensely  we  believe  that  it  is  possible  to  do  so,  and  however  ‘emotionally’  we 
attempt  to  do  it,  we  are  cherishing  delusions,  which  easily  become  morbid 
identifications,  delusions,  illusions,  and  often  hallucinations. 

This  level  being  unspeakable ,  the  only  way  to  function  on  this  level  is 
to  look,  listen  .,  but  to  be  silent  outwardly  as  well  as  inwardly.  This  last 
condition  represents  a  most  beneficial  semantic  state,  really  difficult,  perhaps 
impossible,  to  acquire  without  training. 

The  higher  order  abstractions  appear  to  be  products  of  the  activity  of 
the  higher  nerve  centres,  further  removed  from  the  external  events  and  lacking, 
therefore,  in  immediacy.  But  these  higher  abstractions  are  static  and  so  may 

638  IX.  ON  EMPIRICAL  AND  VERBAL  STRUCTURES 

be  analysed.  They  have  a  separable  unit  ‘quantum*  structure,  which  can  be 
treated  individually.  It  should  be  carefully  noticed  that  the  static  character 
of  these  higher  order  abstractions  is  the  origin  of  their  separable  quantum 
character,  conditioned  by  the  human  nervous  structure.  They  are,  if  properly 
treated,  reliable  and  are  uniquely  responsible  for  our  being  time-binders. 

Again,  by  the  structural  necessity  of  our  nervous  system,  we  deal  first 
with  lower  order  abstractions,  and  next  with  higher  order  abstractions.  It 
must  be  noticed  that  no  one ,  unless  he  is  (pathologically)  entirely  deprived  of 
the  higher  nerve  centres,  is,  or  can  be,  an  exception.  We  all  deal  with  lower 
abstractions  first,  and  with  the  higher  next,  no  matter  how  perfect  or  imperfect 
these  abstractions  may  be. 

The  general  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions,  the  lack  of  theories,  and 
therefore  of  structural  understanding  of  the  entirely  different  characters  of 
these  distinct  orders  of  abstractions,  leads  to,  and  must  result  in,  identification 
or  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions.  As  the  different  processes  are  going  on, 
whether  we  will  it  or  not,  in  every  single  one  of  us,  they  may  result  in  the 
delusional  ascribing  of  the  characteristics  of  the  higher  order  abstractions  to 
the  lower  order  abstractions,  as  for  instance,  permanence,  immutability . , 
somewhere  involving  ‘infinities*.  When  objectified,  we  have  such  semantic 
disturbances  as  fanaticism,  absolutism,  dogmatism,  finalism  .  ,  which  often 
become  morbid  semantic  states. 

A  similar  confusion  may  lead  to  the  delusional  ascribing  of  the  charac¬ 
teristics  of  the  lower  order  abstractions  to  the  higher  ones.  Under  such  delusions 
we  ascribe  to  the  higher  abstractions  fluidity,  shiftiness,  non-permanence, 
‘non-knowability*.  ,  which  results  in  pessimism,  cynicism,  disregard  for  science, 
bitterness,  fright,  hopelessness  and  other  equally  vicious  semantic  disturbances. 
These  in  turn  affect  by  structural  necessity  the  proper  working  of  the  entire 
organism,  which  always  works  as-a-whole. 

The  A  -system  and  other  older  systems  were  not  only  built  before  these 
facts  became  structurally  known  but  were  actually  based  on  such  confusion. 
Hence  their  viciousness.  By  building  a  language  and  a  method  of  this  nature 
they  perpetuated  and  made  effective  mechanically  through  the  structure  of 
language,  a  harmful  confusion.  This  language  being  not  in  accordance  with 
the  structure  and  functioning  of  the  nervous  system  and  the  world,  must 
produce  pathological  results  somewhere. 

We  have  already  seen  that  the  use  of  the  ‘is*  of  identity  is  unconditionally 
delusional.  Naturally,  attitudes  (affective,  lower  order  abstractions)  which 
can  assert,  (higher  order  abstractions)  that  so  and  so  on  objective  levels  ‘is’ 
so  and  so,  must  lead  to  pathological  results.  In  science  this  is  a  profoundly 
unsatisfactory  state  of  affairs  and  needs  structural  revision. 

Mathematicians,  though  in  the  main  unconscious  or  innocent  of  the 
structural,  semantic,  and  neurological  issues  involved,  nevertheless  have  solved 
this  problem  by  producing  methods  of  passing  from  one  order  of  abstractions 
to  another,  from  dynamic  to  static,  and  vice  versa.  The  influence  of  these  dis¬ 
coveries  has  also  affected  the  other  sciences  unconsciously .  Without  consciously 

ACTION  BY  CONTACT 

^cognizing  it,  the  modern  trend  of  science  is  to  banish  from  its  habits  and 
methods  the  application  of  the  ‘is’  of  identity.  . 

So  in  science  we  have  to  use  an  actional,  ‘behaviouristic’,  ‘functional , 
‘operational’  language,  in  which  we  do  not  say  that  this  and  this  ‘is’  so  and  so, 
but  where  we  describe  extensionally  what  happens  in  certain  order .  We  describe 
how  something  behaves ,  what  something  does ,  what  we  do  in  our  research  work  ,  . 

If  one  asks,  for  instance,  what  is  ‘length’,  what  is  ‘space’,  what  is  ‘time’,  what 
is  ‘matter’.  ,  the  only  correct  answer  would  be,  ‘As  you  asked  the  question 
verbally,  and  I  answer  it  verbally ,  the  above  terms  remain  terms ,  which  beside 
structure,  have  no  connection  whatsoever  with  the  external  world\  Yet 
undoubtedly  we  are  interested  in  this  external  world  and  we  should  like  to 
use  a  language  which  would  help  us  in  understanding  this  world  better.  What 
shall  we  do?  It  seems  that  if  we  produce  a  language  which  is  similar  in  structure , 
to  the  external  world,  somehow,  as  a  map  or  picture  is  similar  in  structure 
to  the  region  it  pictures,  we  should  have  a  uniquely  appropriate  language. 
How  can  we  do  it?  It  is  quite  simple  the  moment  we  discover  the  principle. 
First  of  all,  abandon  completely  the  A  ‘is’  of  identity,  and,  instead,  describe 
ordered  happenings  in  an  actional  and  functional  language.  Such  a  language 
shares  with  the  external  world  at  least  the  multi-dimensional  order  of  happen¬ 
ings,  and  it  gives  us  a  solution. 

It  is  easy  to  see  that  arguments  (verbal)  about  ‘matter’,  ‘space’,  ‘time’.  , 
will  never  become  anything  else  than  verbal.  All  uses  of  the  ‘is’  of  identity, 
must  lead  to  delusional  evaluation.  The  situation  is  radically  changed  when 
we  use  an  actional  or  functional  language,  when  we  describe  what  a  physicist 
does  when  he  finds  his  ‘length’  or  ‘second’  or  any  other  entity  he  is  interested  in. 

We  should  notice  here  that  the  above  procedure  involves  extremely  far- 
reaching  structural  and  semantic  consequences.  First  of  all,  we  abandon  the 
vicious  use  of  the  ‘is’  of  identity,  and  eliminate  the  semantic  disturbance  called 
identification.  We  introduce  automatically  the  full  psycho-logical  working 
mechanism  of  order ,  extensional  methods  and  discrimination  between  the  orders 
of  abstractions.  We  introduce  the  four-dimensional  and  differential  methods, 
we  build  up  static  units,  ‘quanta’,  and  so  introduce  measurement  and  its 
language  called  mathematics,  which  leads  to  structure  and  so  to  knowledge 
at  each  date. 

It  will  be  useful  to  recall  why  mathematics  and  measurements  are  somehow 
so  important  in  our  lives.  Our  nervous  system,  as  we  have  seen,  exhibits  dif¬ 
ferent  activities  on  different  levels.  On  one  level  the  abstractions  are  shifting, 
non-permanent;  on  the  other  static  and  permanent  in  principle.  This  is  expressed 
in  our  lives  in  a  longing  for  some  permanency,  some  security,  some  ‘absolutes’. 
Mathematics  formulated  this  tendency  first  and  with  full  success.  Mathematics 
has  not  only  formulated  full  and  successful  theories  of  ‘change’,  as,  for  instance, 
the  theory  of  functions  and  the  different  calculi,  but  also  full-fledged  and 
remarkable  theories  of  invariance  under  transformations.  These  new  theories 
of  invariance  are  actually  absolute  formulations  in  the  only  sense  in  which  the 

640  IX.  ON  EMPIRICAL  AND  VERBAL  STRUCTURES 

te^‘fbS?1Ute’  ,haS  a  meaning:  name,y-  relative,  no  matter  to  what;  all  of 
which  leads  to  the  only  content  of  knowledge — structure. 

The  whole  Einstein  theory  should,  in  this  sense,  be  called  the  ‘theory  of 
the  absolute  ,  and  can  be  expressed  as  the  simple  demand  that  ‘universal  laws’ 
should  be  formulated  m  an  invariant  form,  a  most  revolutionary  demand  and 
yet  so  structurally  natural  that  no  one  can  deny  it. 

When  we  mathematize  or  speak  about  potential  or  actual  measurements 
we  are  dealing  with  ordered,  extension al,  actional,  behaviouristic,  functional  and 
operational  entities,  and  so  we  build  up  a  language  which  at  least  has  a  similar 
structure  to  the  external  events.  Numbers  imply  units,  quanta,  but  also  order. 
It  seems  that  number  is  the  only  abstraction  upon  which  we  all  must  agree 
We  never  doubt  that  a  statement,  such  as  that  ‘I  have  in  my  pocket  five  pennies’, 
may  be  perfectly  definite  and  ascertainable  for  all.  The  specific  and  unique 
relations  called  numbers  seems  to  have  absolute  significance.  It  must  be  added 
that  the  existence  of  non-quantitative  branches  of  mathematics  does  not  alter 
what  is  said  here.  In  these  branches,  the  asymmetrical  relation  of  order  remains 
paramount  and  we  may  treat  numbers  from  either  of  their  two  aspects,  the 
cardinal  or  the  ordinal.  ’  e 

The  epoch-making  significance  of  the  Einstein-Minkowski  work  consists 
precisely  in  the  fact  that  they  were  the  first  to  apply  the  above,  though  without 
it  is  true,  formulating  the  general  principle.  The  lack  of  such  a  general  A 
epistemological  formulation  retards  considerably  the  understanding  of  their 
wor  ,  and  so  laymen  miss  the  enormous  structural,  and  semantic  beneficial 
effect  upon  the  proper  working  of  our  nervous  system  and  our  sanity. 

Before  giving  a  short  methodological  account  of  the  Einstein  theory  it 

T-L  e,.Wf  to  recaU  some  structural  and  semantic  conclusions  which  the 
differential  calculus  suggests. 

When  we  were  dealing  with  the  notion  of  a  variable,  we  saw  that  the 
variable  might  be  any  element  selected  out  of  an  ordered  aggregate  of  elements. 

e  can  select  elements  relatively  widely  separated  from  each  other,  as,  for 
instance,  the  numbers  1  and  2,  or  points,  let  us  say,  an  inch  apart.  It  is  obvious 
that  if  we  choose,  we  can  make  the  gaps  smaller,  and  postulate  an  infinity  of 
intermediate  steps.  When  we  make  our  gaps  smaller,  the  elements  are  ordered 
more  densely  and  closer  together.  In  the  limit,  if  we  choose  indefinitely  many 
elements  between  any  two  elements,  our  series  become  compact,  if  we  still 

have  a  possibility  of  gaps;  or  they  eventually  become  what  we  call  continuous, 
when  there  are  no  more  gaps. 

Without  legislating  as  to  whether  the  entities  we  use  in  physics  are  ‘con- 
tinuous  ,  ‘compact’,  or  ‘discontinuous’,  we  may  grant  that  the  maximum 
elucidation  of  the  above  terms  in  mathematics  is  very  useful.  We  can  easily 
see  that  in  terms  of  action  a  continuous  series  gives  us  action  by  contact,  since 
consecutive  elements  are  indefinitely  near  each  other.  As  the  differential  and 
integral  calculus  were  built  on  the  structural  assumption  of  continuity,  the  use 
of  the  calculus  brings  us  in  touch  not  only  with  our  x  but  also  with  its  indefinitely 
close  neighbour  x+dx.  We  see  that  the  calculus  introduces  a  most  important 

ACTION  BY  CONTACT 

structural  and  semantic  innovation;  namely,  that  it  is  a  language  for  describing 
action  by  contact,  in  sharp  contradistinction  to  the  structural  assumption  of 
action  at  a  distance. 

Let  us  illustrate  the  above  by  a  structural  example.  Consider  a  series  of 
equal  small  material  spheres  connected  with  each  other  by  small  spiral  springs 
as  shown  on  Fig.  1. 

12  3 

Fig.  1 

These  little  spheres  all  have  inertia,  because  of  which,  and  because  of 
the  little  springs,  they  resist  displacement.  If  we  displace  the  first  of  our  spheres 
either  in  the  transverse  or  longitudinal  direction,  it  acts  upon  the  second  sphere, 
which  in  turn  acts  upon  the  third  , .  We  see  that  the  disturbance  of  equilibrium 
of  the  first  little  sphere  is  transmitted  like  a  wave  to  the  next  sphere  and  so 
along  the  whole  series.  The  most  significant  point  in  the  analysis  of  such  a 
wave  of  excitation  is  that  it  is  not  transmitted  with  some  'infinite  velocity’,  or 
'infinitely  quickly’  or  in  'no  time’.  The  action  of  each  sphere  is  slightly  delayed 
owing  to  its  inertia,  that  is,  it  does  not  respond  'instantaneously'  to  an  impulse. 
It  must  be  noticed  that  the  displacement  is  not  due  to  a  velocity,  but  to  an 
acceleration,  which  is  a  change  of  velocity  and  requires  a  short  interval  of 
'time*.  The  change  in  velocity  again  requires  an  interval  of  ‘time’  to  overcome 
inertia  and  produce  displacement.  Similar  reasoning  applies  to  a  long  train  just 
being  started  by  the  engine.  The  cars  being  coupled  together  by  more  or  less 
elastic  means,  the  engine  may  be  moving  uniformly  and  some  of  the  last  cars 
still  be  stationary.  The  pull  of  the  engine  is  not  transmitted  instantaneously 
but  with  a  finite  velocity ,  due  again  to  the  inertia  of  the  cars. 

We  see  that  the  only  structurally  adequate  means  of  describing  changes  in 
continuous,  deformable  materials  is  to  be  found  in  differential  equations  which 
express  a  method  of  dealing  with  action  by  contact . 

We  have  already  seen  that  this  action  by  contact  involves  also  the  finite 
velocity  of  propagation,  a  fact  of  crucial  structural  and  semantic  importance. 
In  the  history  of  science  we  can  distinguish  three  periods.  The  first  was  naturally 
the  period  of  action  at  a  distance,  the  best  exemplified  by  the  work  of  two 
great  men,  Euclid  and  Newton.  In  it  we  find  of  course,  a  superabundance  of 
'infinities’.  With  the  advent  of  the  differential  calculus,  and  the  introduction 
of  differential  equations  in  the  study  of  nature,  the  notion  of  action  at  a  distance 
became  more  and  more  untenable.  We  had  a  period  of  pseudo-contiguous 
action,  which  indeed  involved  differential  equations;  but  the  velocity  of  propa¬ 
gation  was  not  introduced  explicitly,  and  so  there  remained  an  implicit  structural 
assumption  of  'infinite  velocity’  of  propagation.  As  an  example  of  such  pseudo- 
contiguous  action  we  can  cite  the  older  theories  of  potential,  which  give  differen¬ 
tial  equations  for  the  change  in  the  intensity  of  the  field  from  place  to  place, 

642  IX.  ON  EMPIRICAL  AND  VERBAL  STRUCTURES 

but  which  do  not  contain  members  that  express  a  change  in  ‘time’,  and  hence 
do  not  take  into  account  the  transmission  of  electricity  with  finite  velocity.1 

The  modern  theories,  as  for  instance,  the  Maxwell  theory  of  electromag¬ 
netism,  and  the  Einstein  theory,  are  based  on  action  by  contact .  These  theories 
not  only  use  the  differential  method,  but  they  also  introduce  explicitly  the 
finite  velocity  of  propagation. 

The  invention  of  differential  geometry  with  the  recent  contribution  of 
Weyl,  which  we  have  already  mentioned,  transforms  the  geometry  of  Euclid 
from  a  language  of  action  at  a  distance  into  contact  geometry,  or  a  language 
of  indefinitely  near  action. 

It  should  be  mentioned  perhaps  that  the  riemannian  differential  geometry 
is  more  general  than  all  the  £  geometries  which  preceded  it,  and  includes  them, 
as  well  as  the  £  geometry,  as  special  cases.  Perhaps,  as  Weyl  points  out,2  the 
investigation  of  the  famous  fifth  postulate,  which  was  the  beginning  of  £ 
geometry,  was  accidental  in  importance  and  the  main  structural  value  of  the 
£  geometries  lies  precisely  in  the  application  of  the  differential  methods  to 
geometry  which  was  originated  by  the  great  work  of  Riemann.  This  work, 
we  see,  has  carried  us  from  metaphysical  action  at  a  distance  to  a  physical 
action  by  contact.  In  passing  from  the  older  mechanics  to  electromagnetic 
events  a  very  striking  analogy  appears,  which  explains  the  finite  velocity  of 
propagation. 

In  mechanics,  when  we  have  waves  in  an  elastic  medium,  the  finite  velocity 
of  propagation  is  due  to  the  delay  which  occurs  due  to  the  inertia  of  materials. 
Now  inertia  is  determined  by  acceleration  {dts/dP),  which  represents  the  rate 
of  change  of  the  velocity  ( v=ds/dt ),  velocity  itself  being  a  rate  of  change  of 
displacement.  We  see  that  this  retardation,  or  negative  acceleration,  is  repre¬ 
sented  by  a  double  differentiation. 

Something  analogous  occurs  in  electromagnetic  events.  The  rate  of  change 
of  the  electric  field  (de/dt)  determines  the  magnetic  field;  and  then  the  rate  of 
change  (dh/dt)  of  the  latter  determines  the  electric  field  at  a  neighbouring 
point.  The  advance  of  the  electric  field  from  point  to  point  is  thus  conditioned 
by  two  differentiations  with  respect  to  'time’,  which  is  quite  analogous  to 
acceleration. 

It  is  due  to  this  double  differentiation  with  respect  to  'time'  that  the 
formulation  of  electromagnetic  waves  are  structurally  possible.  If  the  partial 
effects  were  to  occur  without  loss  of  'time’,  no  propagation  of  the  electric  waves 
would  occur.  The  maxwellian  'field  equations’  not  only  express  the  above- 
mentioned  relations,  but  introduce  structurally  the  finite  velocity  of  propaga¬ 
tion  which  makes  the  Maxwell’s  electromagnetic  theory  structurally  a  contact 
theory. 

The  Einstein  theory  is  also  structurally  a  contact  theory,  and  it  may  be 
said  that  it  was  originated  by  this  contact  tendency,  and  has  carried  it  to  the 
limit,  as  we  shall  see  later.  The  gaussian  theory  of  surfaces,  whose  extension 
to  any  number  of  dimensions  was  made  by  Riemann,  also  represents  action 
by  contact.  This  theory  does  not  state  the  laws  of  surfaces  on  a  large  scale, 

ACTION  BY  CONTACT 

but  only  their  differential  properties,  the  coefficients  of  the  measure  determina¬ 
tion,  the  invariants  which  we  can  form,  and  the  curvature  and  its  measure. 
The  form  of  a  surface  and  its  characteristics  can  then  be  calculated  by  a  process 
similar  to  the  solution  of  differential  equations  in  physics. 

We  are  now  in  a  position  to  understand  why  the  newer  physics  and  the 
j systems,  which  are  built  entirely  on  the  foundations  of  action  by  contact, 
found  the  E-system  unsatisfactory.  The  .E-system  was  built  on  the  structural 
assumption  of  action  at  a  distance,  and  we  had  to  select  the  E  geometries  as 
originated  by  Gauss,  Lobatchevski,  Riemann,  and  others,  which  gave  to  physics 
the  necessary  geometry  of  action  by  contact. 

But  the  question  of  action  at  a  distance  versus  action  by  contact  has 
also  an  experimental  aspect  which  makes  the  latter  theory  more  satisfactory. 

Faraday  (1791-1867)  was  not  a  learned  academician,  and  he  was  much 
freer  from  scientific  prejudices  than  any  of  his  contemporaries.  From  a  book¬ 
binder’s  apprentice  he  became  through  his  genius  one  of  the  founders  of  modern 
physics.  His  method  of  experimenting  was  to  try  every  possible  experiment 
and  note  what  happened. 

In  1838  Faraday  made  an  important  structural  discovery;  namely,  that 
the  mutual  action  between  two  electrically  charged  bodies  depends  upon  the 
character  of  the  intervening  medium.  Faraday  established  by  this  experiment 
that  the  capacity  of  a  spherical  condenser  changes  when  another  material  is 
used  as  the  separating  medium,  rather  than  air.  He  found  that  the  capacity 
became  twice  as  large  when  the  medium  was  paraffin,  three  times  as  large  for 
shellac,  six  times  as  large  for  glass,  and  about  eighty  times  as  large  for  water. 

This  experiment  became  the  foundation  of  the  new  theory.  The  old  ‘action 
at  a  distance*  theory  postulated  that  the  electrostatic  field  was  merely  a 
geometrical  structure  without  physical  significance,  while  this  new  experiment 
showed  that  the  field  had  physical  significance.  Every  charge  acts  first  upon 
its  immediate  surroundings,  and  it  is  only  through  the  medium  of  these  that 
the  action  is  propagated.  The 
discovery  of  displacement  cur¬ 
rents  necessitated  an  extension 
of  his  point  of  view  to  all 
distances.3 

Faraday  was  so  impressed 
by  this  discovery  that  he  aban¬ 
doned  the  older  theories  of 
action  at  a  distance  and  formu¬ 
lated  a  structurally  new  theory 
of  contiguous  action  for  electric 
and  magnetic  events.  Any  one 
can  convince  himself  of  the  fact  that  the  fields  represent  very  actual  physical 
conditions  by  taking  a  sheet  of  paper,  sprinkling  some  iron  dust  upon  it  and 

644  IX.  ON  EMPIRICAL  AND  VERBAL  STRUCTURES 

putting  a  magnet  under  the  paper.  He  will  find  that  the  particles  of  iron  dust 
arrange  themselves  in  a  very  definite  structure  as  shown  in  Fig.  2. 

Faraday  also  discovered  that  the  forces  between  two  magnetic  poles  like¬ 
wise  depend  on  the  medium  that  happens  to  be  between  them.  He  concluded 
correctly  that  the  electric  as  well  as  the  magnetic  forces  are  produced  by  a 
state  of  tension  in  the  intervening  medium. 

These  two  examples  will  suffice  as  illustrations,  but  it  can  be  said  in  general 
that  all  modern  physics  gives  ample  proofs  of  the  correctness  of  Faraday's 
structural  point  of  view.  Some  physicists,  for  instance  Helmholtz,  built  special 
devices  to  test  the  correctness  of  this  theory.  As  a  matter  of  fact  the  success 
of  the  whole  electromagnetic  theory  of  Maxwell,  which  is  structurally  built  as 
a  contact  theory,  in  which  the  velocity  of  propagation  is  considered  finite,  is 
in  itself  one  of  the  best  proofs  of  the  correctness  of  the  theory. 

The  finite  velocity  of  light  was  discovered  by  Olaf  Romer  in  1676  and  has 
since  been  repeatedly  verified.  This  velocity  is  usually  denoted  by  c  and  is 
known  to  be  approximately  300,000  kilometres  per  second,  that  is, 
c=3xl010cm./sec.,  or  186,000  miles  per  second. 

In  1856  Weber  and  Kohlraush  calculated  a  certain  constant  which  appears 
in  the  electromagnetic  theory,  and  discovered  that  the  constant  had  the 

dimension  of  velocity,  and  that  its  numerical  value  was 

3  Xl010cm./sec.,  which  is  the  exact  value  for  the  velocity  of  light.  This  fact 
led  Maxwell  to  associate  light  with  electromagnetic  waves,  a  view  justified  by 
experiments.  In  1888  Hertz  not  only  established  once  more  the  interrelation 
of  optics  and  electrodynamics  but  found  that  the  velocity  of  propagation  of 
electromagnetic  waves  is  finite  and  exactly  equal  to  the  velocity  of  light.4 

Outside  the  exact  sciences  the  principle  of  action  by  contact  is  making  but 
slow  progress,  perhaps  because  of  A  s,r  and  the  lack  of  structural  formulations 
of  the  general  issues  at  hand.  We  are  happy  to  find  a  notable  exception  in  the 
biological  work  of  Professor  C.  M.  Child,  who  has  laid  down  a  foundation  for 
A  biology  and  his  system  is  structurally  based  on  action  by  contact.  This 
A  biology  has  been  applied  to  neurology  by  Professor  C.  J.  Herrick.  This 
present  work,  being  a  ^-system,  must  follow  the  methodological  and  structural 
advances  explained  here,  and  the  A  biology  and  neurology  founded  by  Child 
and  Herrick. 

It  is  interesting  to  follow  up  the  structural  merging  of  geometry  and  physics. 
There  are  certain  Smiths  and  Browns  who  call  themselves  physicists.  There 
are  some  rooms  with  various  instruments,  which  are  called  physical  labora¬ 
tories.  The  activities  of  the  physicists  which  interest  us  are  twofold.  First, 
these  scientists  come  to  their  laboratories,  manipulate  their  instruments,  note 
the  positions  of  some  pointers,  manipulate  the  instruments  again,  note  posi¬ 
tions  again  ,  .  This  represents  the  unspeakable  level  of  activity.  Whatever 
happens  happens,  but  there  is  no  speaking  to  be  done  on  that  level. 

ACTION  BY  CONTACT 

Later  the  scientist  describes  his  experiments  in  words.  Obviously  there  are 
two  entirely  different  stages  in  building  physics,  which  usually  we  do  not  dis^ 

tinglQui*te  obviously  the  unspeakable  level  cannot  be  called  'physics’  and  so 
we  must  apply  the  term  to  the  higher  order  abstractions  on  the  verbal  level; 
namely,  to  the  reasoned  verbal  account  of  what  the  experimenter  saw,  or  felt, 
or  experienced,  in  general  abstracted  on  the  lower  levels;  summarized,  general¬ 
ized  .  ,  in  higher  orders. 

Physics  represents  then  a  verbal  discipline.  Being  verbal,  it  needs  a  lan¬ 
guage.  What  language  shall  we  select?  As  we  want  to  have  a  science  called 
physics,  we  shall  naturally  try  to  use  the  most  structurally  correct  language  in 
existence,  so  by  necessity  we  must  look  in  the  direction  of  mathematics. 

In  mathematics  we  find  originally  two  entirely  different  disciplines.  One 
we  may  call  arithmetic;  the  other,  geometry.  Becoming  acquainted  with  these 
two  originally  separated  languages,  we  find  that  the  actual  experiments  and 
the  stimuli  for  many  experiences  of  importance  to  us,  are  outside  our  skins;  so 
we  try  to  choose  the  one  of  these  two  languages  which  is  the  more  closely  re¬ 
lated  in  structure  to  the  lower  abstractions— that  is,  to  what  we  see,  feel ,  . 
Naturally  we  have  an  inclination  toward  the  geometrical  languages,  dealing 
with  'lines’,  'surfaces’,  'volumes’ . ,  terms  for  which  we  find  immediate  and 
quite  obvious  applications.  By  further  investigation  we  find  that  of  late  both 
languages  have  become  so  developed  in  structure,  that  either  can  be  translated 
perfectly  into  the  other.  This  fact  makes  geometry  the  link  between  the  higher 
order  abstractions  and  the  lower  order  abstractions.  We  have  seen  that  physics , 
as  well  as  geometry,  must  be  considered  verbal  disciplines  and  their  fusion 

becomes  a  very  natural  fact.  ^  (  .  , 

It  is  true  that,  as  yet,  ‘time’  appears  as  the  bothersome  factor,  but  time 
may  very  well  be  represented  geometrically,  except  that  our  diagrams  and 
figures  look  a  little  different.  For  instance,  a  flat  circular  orbit  in  two-dimensional 
'space’  becomes  a  helix  in  three-dimensional  space-time,  a  vibrational  motion 
in  one-dimensional  'space’  becomes  a  wave-line  in  two-dimensional  space-time  ,  . 
'Time’,  when  properly  represented,  becomes  simply  another  geometrical 

dimension.  ,  .  ,  . 

It  should  not  be  forgotten  that  mathematicians  obtain  most  of  their  struc¬ 
tural  inspirations  from  physics  and  build  up  mathematical  theories  to  supp  y 
the  structural  needs  of  the  physicist.  We  see  an  excellent  example  of  this  in  the 
R  geometries.  In  the  days  of  Euclid,  when  physics  hardly  existed,  we  had 
‘emptiness’,  ‘action  at  a  distance’,  and  such  notions  as  were  quite  satisfactory 
for  the  needs  of  surveyors  and  builders.  With  the  development  of  astronomy 
and  physics,  curved  lines  became  more  and  more  structurally  important,  and 
the  haziness  of  the  definition  of  'straight  line’  also  became  apparent.  The 
notion  of  ‘emptiness’  also  became  slowly  structurally  untenable.  Such  geometers 
as  Gauss,  Lobatchevski,  and  others,  began  to  demand  that  the  axioms  o 
geometry  be  tested  by  experiment.  With  the  introduction  of  ‘curvature  ,  the 
‘straight  line’  became  only  a  special  case  of  a  curve  with  zero  curvature. 

646  IX.  ON  EMPIRICAL  AND  VERBAL  STRUCTURES 

The  invention  of  the  differential  calculus  also  had  a  tremendous  structural 
influence.  It  introduced  continuity  as  a  basic  assumption  in  the  vast  structure 
of  science,  and  cleared  the  way  for  psychologically  trained  scientific  workers  in 
structural  continuity,  and  therefore  in  action  by  contact. 

The  discovery  that  light  appears  as  electromagnetic  waves  and  the  finite 
velocity  of  both,  made  the  notion  of  ‘absolute  emptiness'  structurally  un¬ 
tenable;  and  so  E  geometry  with  its  action  at  a  distance,  ‘emptiness’  and  neglect 
of  gravitation  and  electricity,  became  very  unsatisfactory.  Indeed  if  our  uni¬ 
verse  were  Et  light  could  not  reach  us. 

Leibnitz,  who  invented  the  differential  calculus  independently  of  Newton 
formulated  a  postulate  of  action  by  contact,  and  therefore  could  not  become 
reconciled  to  Newton’s  Law  of  Gravitation  which  was  structurally  a  law  of 
action  at  a  distance,  corresponding  fully  to  Coulomb’s  law  in  electricity.  The 
atter  law  states  that  the  force  exerted  by  two  electrically  charged  bodies  upon 
each  other  is  inversely  proportional  to  the  square  of  the  distance  between  them 
and  acts  m  the  direction  of  the  line  joining  them.6  * 

f  JHe  lntrodu(;tlon  bV  Faraday  of  the  structural  notion  of  a  ‘field’,  instead 
of  the  notion  of  electrical  charges  acting  at  a  distance,  introduced  the  notion  of 
a  strain  of  the  electrical  field,  which  appears  structurally  as  ‘lines  of  forces’. 
Here  we  already  have  a  ‘fulness’  of  ‘lines’  and  a  big  step  toward  the  structural 
fusion  of  physics  with  geometry  has  been  taken. 

he  transition  from  E  to  riemannian  geometry  corresponds  structurally 
to  the  transition  from  physics  based  on  action  at  a  distance  to  physics  based 
on  action  by  contact.  The  fundamental  metrical  theorem  of  E  geometry  is  the 
Pythagorean  rule,  which  expresses  the  fact  that  the  square  of  the  distance  be¬ 
tween  two  points  is  a  quadratic  form  of  the  co-ordinates  of  th«  points.  If  we 
regard  this  theorem  as  strictly  valid  only  in  the  case  of  points  which  are  very 
near  each  other,  we  pass  at  once  from  E  geometry  to  differential  geometry. 

y  doing  so  we  gain  a  notable  structural  advantage,  as  we  dispense  with  the 
necessity  of  defining  our  co-ordinates  more  precisely;  because  the  Pythagorean 

law,  when  expressed  m  differential  form,  is  invariant  for  arbitrary  transfer- 
mations.6 

Semantically,  Riemann  was  the  immediate  predecessor  of  Einstein,  al¬ 
though  Einstein  was  not  directly  influenced  by  him.  In  differential  geometry 
we  ought  to  start  with  indefinitesimaily  near  points,  and  depend  for  the  analysis 
of  greater  distances,  areas  and  volumes,  on  integration.  The  difficult  notion  of 
straight  line  has  to  be  replaced  by  the  notion  of  the  shortest  line  (geodetic), 
which  is  easily  defined  by  differential  methods  and  found  empirically.  In  the 
o  er  method,  the  length  of  a  curve  was  to  be  found,  in  general,  by  the  process 
of  integration.  The  length  of  a  ‘straight  line'  between  two  points  was  supposed 
to  be  defined  as  a  whole,  and  not  as  the  limit  of  a  sum  of  indefinitely  little  bits 
Riemann  considered  that  a  ‘straight  line'  does  not  differ  in  this  respect  from  a 
curve.  Measurements  which  are  always  performed  by  means  of  some  instru¬ 
ment  are  physical  operations,  and  their  results  depend  for  their  interpretation 

action  by  contact 

upon  the  theories  of  physics.  Dealing  with  geodetics  is  therefore  preferable  to 
dealing  with  ‘straight  lines’.7 

We  see  that  the  problem  was  ripe  for  a  final  stroke  of  genius.  Einstein’s 
structural  discovery  of  the  dependence  of  ‘space’  and  time  ,  and  Minkowski  s 
success  in  giving  a  geometrical  interpretation  to  the  Einstein  theory  accom¬ 
plished  the  probably  irreversible  fusion. 

Three-dimensional  kinematics  becomes  four-dimensional  geometry,  three- 
dimensional  dynamics  can  be  considered  as  four-dimensional  statics . 

We  see  immediately  the  human,  psycho-logical,  semantic  and  neurological 
importance  of  this  fact.  Our  nervous  system  by  its  structure  produces  ab¬ 
stractions  of  different  orders,  dynamic  on  some  levels,  static  on  others.  The 
problems  of  sanity  and  adjustment  become  problems  of  translation  from  one 
level  to  another,  for  which  the  structural  advances  in  science  supply  us  with 
methods  of  solution. 

It  should  be  noticed  that  the  semantic  gain  due  to  the  above  facts  is  con¬ 
siderable,  and  that  being  structural,  it  is  practical  as  well  as  theoretical.  The 
fact  that  geometry  has  lost  its  old  restricted  status,  which  formerly  applied 
principally  to  what  could  be  ‘intuitively  visualized’  and  has  been  further  ab¬ 
stracted  to  apply  to  what  can  be  ‘conceived’,  has  merged  geometry  with  the 
rest  of  mathematics.  This  merging  represents  a  great  structural  and  semantic 
step  forward,  and  makes  possible  the  treatment  of  geometrical  problems  by 
purely  analytical  means.  It  liberates  geometry  from  the  restrictions  of  lower 
order  abstractions.  By  using  ‘geometrical  intuition'  (lower  order  abstractions) 
we  find  again  a  great  help  in  analysis. 

In  the  cyclic  nerve  currents,  our  so-called  ‘intuitions’  (lower  order  ab¬ 
stractions)  are  not  structurally  isolated  from  our  ‘conceptions'  (higher  order 
abstractions),  but  both  are  intimately  connected  and  influence  each  other. 
Modern  advances  are  not  only  in  perfect  accord  with  the  ‘organism-as-a-whole’ 
principle,  but  indeed  give  us  excellent  proofs  that  this  principle  is  sound.  ‘Psy¬ 
chologists’  miss  a  great  deal  by  disregarding  this  important  and  unique  form  of 
human  behaviour  which  we  call  mathematizing. 

CHAPTER  XXXVI 

ON  THE  SEMANTICS  OF  THE  EINSTEIN  THEORY 

It  is  precisely  here,  in  an  improved  understanding  of  our  mental  relations 
to  nature,  that  the  permanent  contribution  of  relativity  is  to  be  found. 

We  should  now  make  it  our  business  to  understand  so  thoroughly  the 
character  of  our  permanent  mental  relations  to  nature  that  another  change 
in  our  attitude  such  as  that  due  to  Einstein,  shall  be  forever  impossible. 

(55)  p.  W.  BRIDGMAN 

It  is  not  my  aim  to  expound  the  Einstein  Theory  as  such.  There  are  many 
excellent  and  competent  books  written  on  this  subject.  I  have  already  explained 
and  stressed  several  structural  points  which  in  the  last  analysis  are  the  founda¬ 
tion  of  Einstein’s  work.  Many  'thinkers’  through  the  ages  have  felt  vaguely  the 
dangers  of  the  structure  of  language  and  the  viciousness  of  objectification,  that 
is,  of  the  delusional  ascribing  of  objective  values  to  verbal  forms.  This  vague 
feeling,  of  course,  is  useful  in  individuals,  but  it  is  a  private  benefit,  which 
cannot  be  made  public  without  some  sort  of  formulation.  The  stroke  of  genius 
of  Einstein  was  that  he  produced  a  non-elementalistic,  linguistic  system  of  new 
structure.  Einstein,  being  a  physicist,  decided  rightly,  as  we  understand  now, 
to  be  entirely  actional,  behaviouristic,  functional,  and  operational,  and  to  stop 
gambling  on  words.  The  older  el  linguistic  problems  of  ‘matter’,  ‘space’,  and 
‘time*  were  in  such  a  mess,  due  to  the  objectification  of  verbal  structures,  that 
it  was  useless  to  talk  any  more  in  the  old  way.  He  decided  to  describe  what  a 
physicist  does  when  he  measures  ‘space’  and  ‘time’,  and  to  abandon,  perhaps 
unconsciously,  the  ‘is’  of  identity. 

It  seems  unnecessary  to  stress  the  simple  fact  that  when  we  measure  a 
piece  of  wood,  for  example,  we  mark  it  off  with  another  piece  of  material  which 
we  have  accepted  arbitrarily  as  our  ‘unit  of  length’.  The  coincidence  of  our 
‘unit’  with  the  intervals  between  the  marks  is  again  judged  by  an  extremely 
complex  electromagnetic-neural  process,  which  was  quite  disregarded  until 
Einstein.  Our  judgement  is  conditioned  by  the  light  rays  travelling  with  finite 
velocity  which  excite  our  nervous  system  through  the  retina,  this  excitation  in 
turn  also  travelling  with  finite  velocity.  We  see  that  the  apparently  simple 
measurement  of  a  ‘length’  is  really  an  extremely  complex  process,  in  which  the 
finite  velocity  of  light  and  of  the  nerve  currents  plays  a  very  important  role. 
Naturally,  if  we  were  to  assume  an  ‘infinite’  velocity  of  the  propagation  of  light, 
our  verbal  speculations  about  ‘space’  and  ‘time’  might  be  perhaps  entertaining, 
but  they  would  nevertheless  be  fundamentally  and  structurally  wrong. 

Similar  remarks  apply  to  the  measurement  of  ‘time*.  What  do  we  mean 
when  we  say  that  a  train  has  arrived  at  the  station  at  9  o’clock?  We  mean  no 
more  and  no  less  than  that  the  arrival  of  the  train  coincided  with  the  arrival 
of  the  pointer  of  a  clock  at  a  point  marked  9  on  the  clock  face.  In  other  words, 

SEMANTICS  OF  THE  EINSTEIN  THEORY 

we  saw  ‘simultaneously’  the  arrival  of  the  train  and  the  pointer  of  the  clock 

reaching  the  mark  9.  r ,  A  n 

Our  judgement  about  the  results  of  measurements  of  time  depends  on  the 
seen  coincidence  of  events— in  this  case,  of  the  arrival  of  the  train  with  the 
arrival  of  the  pointer  of  the  clock  at  the  mark  9.  Similar  considerations,  which 
applied  to  the  measurements  of  lengths’,  apply  also  to  the  measurements  of 

We  see  with  Einstein  that  if  we  want  to  make  any  headway  we  shall  have 
to  investigate  the  two  key  terms;  namely,  ‘velocity’  and  ‘simultaneity  . 

The  newtonians  take  a  particular  delight  in  accusing  Einstein  of  being  a 
‘psychologist’  and  not  a  physicist.  We  have  already  stressed  the  physical  sub¬ 
jectivity  of  physical  instruments.  What  is  said  there  applies,,  not  only  to  t  e 
retina  of  the  eye,  but  also  to  a  photographic  camera,  or  to  a  microscope  or  tele¬ 
scope,  or  any  other  instrument.  Before  an  energetic  packet,  be  it  a  light-impulse 
or  a  bullet,  is  able  to  accomplish  any  result  it  must  first  reach  its  mark  and  so 
the  finite  velocity  of  propagation  must  be  taken  into  consideration,  which  is  a 
hard,  established,  empirical  structural  fact.  So  the  criticisms  of  the  newtonians 
are  simply  shallow  and  unscientific  (1933).  They  disregard  most  important 
empirical  physical  facts,  and  so  simply  defend  a  semantic  disturbance  without 

aiding  science  (1933).  .  t  j 

With  the  einsteinians,  we  treat  the  eye  on  the  same  footing  as  we  would 
treat  the  camera  or  any  other  physical  instrument.  Even  the  newtonians  must 
admit  that  when  they  photograph  some  happening  on  the  sun,  for  example,  t  e 
happening  actually  occurred  (approximately)  eight  minutes  fee/ore  the  photo¬ 
graphic  plate  was  affected.  The  eight  minutes  is  the  ‘time’  taken  by  the  light 
to  reach  the  earth  from  the  sun. 

Let  us  analyse  the  term  ‘velocity’  first.  We  find  ourselves  here,  as  in  any 
other  human  problem,  on  two  distinct  levels  of  abstraction,  and  we  must  dis¬ 

criminate  between  them.  ..  ,  t 

Let  us  take  up  the  verbal  level  first.  We  see  that  before  we  can  talk  about 
our  terms  ‘space’  or  ‘time’,  ‘length’  or  ‘seconds’,  we  have  to  know  a  great  deal 
about  the  term  ‘velocity’.  How  do  we  define  the  term  velocity  ?  We  define 
it  as  ‘space  divided  by  time’,  v=s/t.  We  see  that  on  the  verbal  level  the  situation 
is  perfectly  hopeless  and  no  result  can  be  expected  from  verbal  gambling,  ft 
may  be  added  that  older  notions  were  based  on  objectification,  or  confusion 
between  the  two  levels  of  abstraction,  and  the  affective  belief  in  the  magic  of 
words,  identification  playing  most  of  the  structural  havoc. 

How  about  the  instrumental  level,  the  silent  level  of  the  lower  order  ab¬ 
straction?  On  this  level,  we  find  that  physicists  in  their  actions,  behaviour, 
operations .  ,  have  elaborated  a  fairly  definite  technique  for  finding  the  data 
they  require.  So  we  see  that  there  is  no  choice,  we  must  start  on  this  level. 

But  starting  on  this  level  is  not  all,  and  not  enough.  We  must  somehow 
talk  about  these  doings  and  operations.  Hence  we  must  select  a  language  which 
in  its  structure  will  reflect  the  structure  of  these  actions  and  operations.  1  here- 
fore  we  must  abandon  the  ‘is’  of  identity  and  describe  in  the  asymmetrical 

650  IX.  ON  EMPIRICAL  AND  VERBAL  STRUCTURES 

language  of  order  the  happenings  recorded  by  an  instrument  or  by  our  lower 

nerve  centres. 

Without  going  into  details  we  may  summarize  the  results  as  achieved  by 
the  physicists.  Experiments  by  the  physicists,  as  indicated  by  the  coincidences 
of  pointers  on  different  instruments,  have  seemingly  established  the  fact  that 
the  velocity  of  light,  as  defined  by  behaviouristic,  operational  instrumental 
means,  is  a  constant ,  c  =  3-1010  cm./sec.,  independent  of  the  relative  velocity  of 
the  observers.  By  the  'observers’  we  mean  again  the  readings  on  the  instru¬ 
ments  which  the  observer  carries  with  him.  Now  this  result  contradicts  flatly 
the  established  verbal  expectations  which  we  reached  on  verbal  levels  through 
the  elementalistic  structure  of  language  and  the  semantic  disturbance,  of 
ascribing  objective  existence,  to  the  terms  ‘space’  and  ‘time’. 

•  Til6  jltUati.°"  '?  aCUte‘  Sha11  we  follow  our  semantic  disturbances  and 
reject  hard  empirical  structural  facts,  or  shall  we  accept  the  experimental  facts 
and  eliminate  semantic  disturbances? 

As  usual,  the  answer  is  implied  by  the  method  of  putting  the  question. 
We  accept  the  experimental  facts  and  revise  our  semantic  disturbances.  In 
this  case  a  psychiatrist  might  be  a  useful  co-worker  with  the  physicist. 

The  einsteinian  revolution  is  structurally  and  semantically  so  fundamental 
that  every  intelligent  person  should  be  acquainted  with  it.  It  will  therefore  be 
as  well  to  consider  some  of  its  details. 

In  classical  mechanics  we  had  the  classical  mechanical  principle  of  rela¬ 
tivity;  namely,  that  all  mechanical  equations  have  one  form  for  two  co-ordinate 
systems  moving  uniformly  with  respect  to  each  other.  The  above  has  a  very 
simple  empirical  meaning.  If  we  travel  in  a  train,  let  us  say  at  a  velocity  of 
50  miles  an  hour,  all  our  activities  in  the  train  have  one  familiar  relative  velocity 
as  if  the  tram  were  at  rest.  If  we  throw  a  ball  with  a  velocity  of  20  miles  an 
hour  to  another  passenger  on  the  train  in  the  direction  of  the  movement  of  the 
train,  the  ball  will  not  reach  the  other  passenger  with  the  velocity  of  20  miles 
an  hour  plus  the  additional  50  miles  an  hour  velocity  of  the  train  but  will  reach 
him  with  the  velocity  as  if  the  train  were  standing  still.  Not  so,  however,  if  the 
ball  were  thrown  to  an  observer,  standing  on  the  tracks.  The  ball  might  hurt 

.umLbnCa?e  ItLwould  have-  relative  to  him,  the  velocity  of  20  miles  an  hour  of 
the  ball  plus  the  velocity  of  50  miles  an  hour  of  the  train,  or  in  all,  a  velocity 
of  70  miles  an  hour.  1 

Quite  probably,  even  our  remote  ancestors  who  used  artificial  means  of 
transportation  on  land  or  water  did  not  overlook  the  structural  fact  that  me¬ 
chanical  events  happen  in  just  one  way,  whether  the  system  is  at  rest  or  in 
relative  motion.  With  the  advent  of  verbal  formulations  of  physics  and  me¬ 
chanics,  such  happenings  were  formulated  verbally;  and  so,  slowly,  the  language 
of  old  structure  with  its  consequent  objectifications  was  built. 

Now  on  verbal  grounds,  which  seemed  to  be  justified  by  experimental, 
macro-mechanical  facts,  we  concluded  that  one  law  should  prove  valid  in  the 
case  of  electrodynamic  and  optical  events. 

SEMANTICS  OF  THE  EINSTEIN  THEORY 

To  reformulate  the  above  in  simple  symbols,  let  us  imagine  two  parallel 
co-ordinate  systems,  O'  and  0",  of  which  the  second  moves  with  a  velocity  u 
relative  to  the  first  in  the  common  x  direction.  If  we  denote  the  co-ordinates 
of  the  first  system  by  single  primes,  and  the 
co-ordinates  of  the  second  system  by  double  V*  Y" 
primes,  then,  as  usual,  the  co-ordinates  of  a 
point,  P,  in  the  second  system  would  be  con¬ 
nected  with  its  co-ordinates  in  the  first  system  \ 

by  the  equation  x"=x'—utt  which  means  that  ^"j V 

the  x"  co-ordinate  is  less  than  the  x*  co-ordinate  „  i 

by  the  amount  that  our  second  co-ordinate  0«  ■ 

0"  V' 

system  has  moved;  namely,  by  a  =ut.  We  gave  ^  ^ 

the  diagram  in  two  dimensions  because  it  is  simpler, 

and,  as  we  have  assumed  that  the  displacement  is  parallel  to  the  x  axis,  the 
other  co-ordinates  remain  unaltered,  y"  =yf,  z"  -zf.  'Time'  by  the  older  as¬ 
sumptions,  being  ‘objective*  and  ‘absolute*  would  be  ‘the  same’;  namely,  /"  =tf 
(‘absolute  time*).  The  classical  law  of  relative  motion  states  that  if  the  equation 
of  motion  in  the  first  system  is  f  {x',  y',  s',  /)  =0,  this  function  must  also  be 
zero  when  xf  is  replaced  by  its  new  value;  namely,  (x'  —ut)  =x"  so  that 
0-0. 

Let  us  see  if  the  above  conditions  hold  true  when  we  deal  with  the  propa¬ 
gation  of  light  in  spherical  waves .  - 

OB2=OA2+AB2  Z 

OB2  =*2+y2 
OP2  =  OB2  +  BP2 
OP2  =x2+y2H~s2 
c2t2=x2+f+z2 

If  we  select  a  three  dimensional  co¬ 
ordinate  system  0,  the  distance  s  of  the 
point  P  from  O  is  equal,  by  the  Pytha¬ 
gorean  rule,  to  s2~x2+y2+z2,  If  we 
assume  that  a  light  ray  is  travelling  from  q 
0  to  P,  the  distance  s  could  then  be 
represented  by  the  product  of  the  velocity  Fig*  2 

of  light  c  by  the  ‘time*  or  ct.  The  square  of  this  distance  would  then  be  c2t2  -s2. 
We  have  x2  -by2  +s2  =c2t2,  or  x2  +y2  ~hz2  -  c2t2  -  0. 

We  can  easily  convince  ourselves  that  if  the  last  equation  for  light-waves 
holds  good  in  the  first  co-ordinate  system  it  cannot  hold  in  the  second. 

Writing  the  last  equation  in  our  primed  letters,  we  have  x'2  +y'2  ~\rP2  —  cH2  =  0. 
If  we  pass  to  our  second  system  of  co-ordinates  moving  uniformly  in  the  X 
direction  with  the  velocity  u  relative  to  the  first  system,  our  y',  s',  /,  do  not  alter 
by  assumption,  but  only  x”=x'  —  ut.  We  would  have  by  substituting  xf  —ut 
for  and  retaining  the  primed  values  for  y",  s",  t: 

(x' -ut)2  +y'2  +z'2 -c2t2  =x'2  -  2x'ut  +u2t2  -by'2  +z'2 -cH2 
=x'2+y'2+z'2-c2t2+(u2t2-2x'ut ). 

■ 

(i) 

652  IX.  ON  EMPIRICAL  AND  VERBAL  STRUCTURES 

But,  by  assumption,  x'*+y’*+zr* -c*t* -0,  and  therefore  equation  (1) 
cannot  be  zero  unless  (u2t2—2x'ut)  **0.  This  last  condition  would  mean  that 
our  second  system  of  co-ordinates  is  also  at  rest.  We  see  that  for  Hght-waves 
the  older  mechanical  principle  of  relativity  does  not  hold,  as  the  equations  are 
altered  when  we  pass  from  one  system  of  co-ordinates  to  another  which  moves 
with  uniform  velocity  relative  to  the  first. 

To  indicate  this  more  obviously,  we  will  express  it  in  formulae.  Consider 
two  co-ordinate  systems  O'  and  O",  in  which  the  second  moves  with  a  uniform 
velocity  in  the  X  direction  relative  to  the  first.  If  for  the  light-waves  the  equa¬ 
tion  x  2 -by  2+2/2  —c2t2  —  0  holds  in  the  first  system,  a  similar  equation  for  the 
second  moving  co-ordinate  system,  x"2+y"2+z"2 -c2t2  =0,  cannot  be  true.  In 
other  words,  x/2+y'2+z'2 -cH2^  x”2+y'/2+z"2 -c2t2;  whence  we  have  an 
inequality ,  fundamentally  contradicting  the  classical  principle  of  relativity. 

This  extraordinary  and  unexpected  inequality,  because  it  contradicted 
structurally  the  classical  mechanical  principles  of  relativity,  which  apparently 
had  been  well  established  experimentally,  created  a  baffling  semantic  situation 
which  was  profoundly  unsatisfactory. 

What  could  we  do  about  it?  Should  we  abandon  the  older  principle  of 
mechanical  relativity;  or  should  we  have  two  different  laws,  one  for  the  older 
gross  macroscopic  mechanical  relativity,  and  another  for  optical  and  electro¬ 
dynamic  events;  or  should  we  investigate  the  fundamental  structural  assump¬ 
tions  which  underlie  our  formulae,  and  see  if  the  discrepancy  is  not  due  to  some 
prejudice  or  some  structural  dogma  which  we  have  overlooked  for  centuries? 

If  a  solution  of  the  last  kind  should  be  found  it  would  naturally  be  most 
satisfactory.  The  admission  of  two  relativities,  one  for  the  mechanical  events, 
the  other  for  the  optical  events,  would  be  against  the  whole  trend  of  science! 
which  requires  the  unification  of  theories. 

Such  a  structural  revision;  namely,  the  rooting  out  of  the  old  unjustified 
dogma  which  made  all  the  trouble,  was  the  work  of  Einstein's  genius.  In  this 
epoch-making  discovery  he  was  assisted  in  the  beginning  by  the  famous 
Michelson-Morley  experiment,  since  performed  repeatedly  with  similar  results, 
seemingly  proving  that  the  velocity  of  light  is  a  constant  no  matter  what  the 
relative  motion  of  the  observer.  If  we  take  the  equation  for  the  spherical 
propagation  of  light- waves  x2+y2+z2—  c2t2  -0  or  x2+y2-\-z2  ==c2/2; 

V#2 +y2 -(-s2 

tnerl  c~  "  in  one  system  of  co-ordinates, 

_  j  vV* +✓*+*'*  . 

ana  c=s  ~  m  another  system  of  co-ordinates, 

are  equal,  which  stated  in  another  form  would  mean  that 
x2  -by2  +z2  -cH2  =x'2  -by'2  +z'2  - cH 2. 

The  experiment  says  this  relation  is  true;  the  arguments  already  advanced  show 
it  cannot  be  true.  So  we  have  to  hunt  for  some  error  or  compensation. 

With  Einstein  s  explanation,  the  finding  of  the  error  is  simplicity  itself. 
In  the  older  mechanical  relativity  our  ‘space’  and  ‘time’  were  objectified ,  we 

SEMANTICS  OF  THE  EINSTEIN  THEORY 

endowed  them  with  objective  values  of  definiteness  and  rigidity,  we  dealt  with 
‘absolute  space*  and  with  ‘absolute  time’,  which  was  ‘unchanging’  and  ‘the 
same  for  all’.  In  the  older  assumptions  our  velocities  varied .  If  A  had  a  velocity 
of  5  centimetres  per  second,  for  instance,  and  B  was  overtaking  A  with  a  ve¬ 
locity  of  7  centimetres  per  second,  the  relative  velocity  between  A  and  B  would 
be  7-5  =2  cm.  per  second.  The  units  of  *  space*  and  ‘ time *  were  definite ,  immutable 
and  did  not  and  could  not  vary ,  which  followed  directly  from  the  assumptions  of 
an  ‘objective*  ‘absolute  space*  and  ‘absolute  time  . 

In  the  case  of  light,  we  came  in  contact  with  a  velocity  which  did  not  vary 
for  any  observer  no  matter  what  his  relative  motion.  The  velocity  c  was  found 
to  be  constant,  so  the  natural  assumption  to  make  is  that  our  ‘ space*  and  * time * 
vary  for  different  observers. 

In  the  above  equations  as  they  stand,  ‘absolute  time’,  t  =/,  the  ‘same’  for 
all  observers  is  assumed,  which  made  such  equality  impossible.  Assuming  dif¬ 
ferent  ‘times*  for  different  observers,  t  for  the  first,  and  t'  for  the  second,  such 
a  compensation  transforms  our  inequality  into  an  equality,  as  demanded  both 

by  the  experiment  and  by  the  theory.  Instead  of  writing 

*2  +y2  +z2  „c2t2  =x'2  +y/2  +z'2  _c2^  (*«*), 

which  cannot  be  true ,  we  write, 

*»+y*  +s2  -  cV  -*'2  +/2  +z'2  -c2f'2  — 0,  (t tf) 
which  can  be  true.  We  should  notice  that  in  the  first  equation  we  have  on  both 
sides  t,  which  makes  the  equation  impossible,  whereas  in  the  second  equation 
we  have  on  the  left-hand  side  t  and  on  the  right-hand  side  a  different  t ;  namely ,  tf. 

The  above  considerations  mean  that  there  is  a  definite  structural  discrepancy 
between  the  old  language  and  the  empirical  world,  requiring  a  fundamental 
structural  linguistic  revision.  This  revision  has  been  accomplished,  and  is  known 
as  the  Einstein  theory.  It  is  not  implied  that  Einstein’s  work  is  final,  but  that 
it  shows  clearly  the  structural  errors  of  the  old  elementalism  to  which  we  can 
never  return. 

In  other  words,  in  the  older  mechanics  we  had  definite  and  permanent 
‘time’  (absolute)  and  varying  relative  velocities.  Dealing  with  light-waves  we 
find  experimentally  that  the  velocity,  c,  of  light  does  not  vary  with  the  relative 
motions  of  the  observers  and  we  must  assume  a  variable  time  to  preserve  our 
equations. 

An  obvious  objection  can  be  raised  to  this:  why  alter  our  habitual  notions 
of  ‘time’?  Can  we  not  keep  the  old  $.r  and  find  some  other  method  of  compen¬ 
sation,  less  bothersome  and  less  revolutionary?  The  older  physicists  and  Einstein 
give  a  long  and  convincing  list  of  perfectly  sufficient  reasons  for  such  a  change, 
yet  their  arguments  always  leave  us  somehow  in  doubt,  with  the  feeling  of  a 
lurking  possibility  that  the  old  can  be  preserved. 

What  has  already  been  said  in  this  work  about  structure  and  semantic 
disturbances  and  the  fact  that  the  terms  ‘matter’,  ‘space’,  and  ‘time’  are  not 
objects ,  which  they  cannot  be,  removes  perhaps  for  good  and  all,  the  last  doubt 
as  to  the  revolutionary  and  epoch-making  significance  and  value  of  the  struc¬ 
tural  linguistic  discoveries  of  Einstein.  On  these  grounds  alone  the  return  to 

654  IX.  ON  EMPIRICAL  AND  VERBAL  STRUCTURES 

the  old  is  impossible.  The  old  is  due  to  objectification  of  the  structural  peculi¬ 
arities  of  the  old  el  language,  and  to  semantic  disturbances,  which  at  the  present 
low  level  of  our  development  is  inevitably  the  result  of  copying  lower  animals 
in  our  'thinking',  a  pathological  process  for  'man'. 

It  will  be  well  to  explain  at  this  point  why  I  said  that  the  Michelson-Morley 
experiment  only  assisted  Einstein,  and  only  seemingly  proved  the  constant 
velocity  of  light.  Historically,  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  beginning  of  the 
theory  of  Einstein  was  suggested  by,  and  had  its  physical  basis  in  this  ex¬ 
periment.  In  reality,  as  the  whole  of  this  present  work  about  structure  shows, 
the  two  issues  are  quite  independent.  The  fact  of  the  finite  velocity  of  light  has 
never  been  challenged,  on  the  contrary  it  is  becoming  more  and  more  solidly 
established,  both  empirically  and  theoretically,  simply  because  an  ‘infinite 
velocity1  has  no  meaning. 

With  the  structural  results  of  this  present  work,  and  the  establishment  of 
the  fact  of  the  finite  velocity  of  light,  the  whole  Einstein  theory  has  a  perfectly 
solid  structural,  linguistic  foundation  (1933).  Nevertheless  it  is  extremely 
gratifying  that  the  latest,  very  important,  and  painstaking  work  of  Doctor 
Roy  J.  Kennedy  seems  once  more  to  add  fundamental  experimental  support 
to  the  correctness  of  the  Einstein  theory,*  From  the  point  of  view  of  structure, 
Einstein  merely  eliminated  some  primitive,  perhaps  even  animalistic,  remains 
of  objectification  which  still  lingered  in  the  structure  of  our  language  of  ‘matter’, 
‘space*,  and  ‘time’.  These,  being  animalistic,  were  unfit  for  humans;  vitiating 
not  only  our  daily  lives  but  science  as  well.  (Eddington  in  The  Mathematical 
Theory  of  Relativity ,  p.  196,  uses  the  term  ‘pre-human’  in  a  similar  connection.) 

It  must  be  recalled  that  the  definition  of  velocity  is  connected  in  a  circular 
way  with  ‘space’  and  ‘time’.  That  is,  in  the  definition  of  the  relation  of  velocity, 
0 V=s/i ),  ‘space*  and  ‘time’,  the  definition  of  any  one  of  our  three  terms  depends 
upon  our  definition  of  the  other  two;  whence  there  are  many  possible  ways  of 
verbal  adjustment. 

As  we  saw,  the  mechanical  verbal  principle  of  relativity  with  which  we  are 
all  familiar  was  not  structurally  able  to  account  satisfactorily  for  a  similar 
relativity  of  optical  and  electrodynamic  events.  The  older  formulae  of  trans¬ 
formations  were,  as  already  given,  x'  =x-ut,  y'  «*y,  z'  =z,  t  =t.  These  formulae 
are  called  the  Galileo  transformations  in  honour  of  the  founder  of  mechanics; 
and,  as  we  have  seen,  structurally  they  are  not  general  enough. 

If  we  consider  the  equation  x2 +y2 -\~z2  —c2t2  =0  and  x'2  -f/2  +z'2  —  c2t'2  =  0, 
we  find  that  the  galilean  transformations  do  not  satisfy  them.  Lorentz  and 
Einstein  have  found  another  set  of  transformations  which  satisfies  uniquely  the 
above  equations.  These  formulae  of  new  structure  are  called  the  Lorentz- 
Einstein  transformation,  and  are  given  by  the  following  equations :  x'  =j3  (x  —vt), 
y'  =?,  z'  =z,  tf  =/3  (t—vx/c2);  where  v  is  the  relative  velocity  of  one  system  with 

*See  ‘The  Velocity  of  Light’,  in  Nature,  Aug.  20,  1932,  by  R.  J.  Kennedy,  and 
his  latest  paper  (No.  261)  in  the  Bibliography. 

SEMANTICS  OF  THE  EINSTEIN  THEORY 

respect  to  the  other,  c,  as  usual,  represents  the  velocity  of  light,  and  the  factor 

/9=1/V  (1  -»7eJ). 

The  most  striking  characteristic  of  these  formulae  is  that  if  we  assume 
that  c,  the  velocity  of  light,  is  ‘infinite’,  all  the  expressions  containing  e11  would 
become  zero,  c2  entering  only  in  the  denominators  of  fractions.  In  such  a  limiting 
case  /S  =  1  /V  (1-0)  =  1/1-1  and  x'  =  (x  -ut),  j  =y,  s'  =s,  t'  =f  which  are  the 

older  galilean  transformations.  , 

Thus  there  appears  the  astonishing  fact  that  all  the  pre-einsteinian  physics 
and  mechanics  which  involved  the  structural  assumption  of  the  galilean  trans¬ 
formation,  had  a  tacit  structural  assumption  of  the  infinite  velocity  of  light. 
This  assumption,  known  since  1676  to  be  false  as  to  facts,  remained  unnoticed 
before  Einstein. 

As  c  =3Xl010  cm. /sec.,  c2^9xl020  is  a  very  large  number,  whence  the 
fractions  vx/c 2  and  v2/c2  are  very  small,  and  0  differs  very  little  from  unity. 

If  we  apply  the  Lorentz-Einstein  transformation  instead  of  the  older 
galilean  transformation  to  mechanical  problems,  the  changes  are  so  small  that 
they  can  hardly  be  detected  by  experiments,  the  terrestrial  velocities  v  or  vx 
being  so  small  in  comparison  with  the  square  of  the  velocity  of  light. 

The  galilean  transformations  are  experimentally  shown  to  be  structurally 
invalid  for  optical  and  electrodynamic  events.  The  Lorentz-Einstein  transfor¬ 
mations  satisfy  structurally  the  optical  and  electrodynamic  events,  and  also 
apply  to  the  older  mechanical  problems.  We  see  that  the  Lorentz-Einstein 
transformations  are  more  general ,  as  they  include  the  galilean  transformations 
as  a  particular  case  when  we  assume  c  -oo. 

In  a  few  instances,  where  we  deal  with  large  velocities,  the  values  of  the 
fractions  containing  the  square  of  the  velocity  of  light  become  appreciable  and 
allow  experimental  testing.  As  yet  all  such  experiments  have  verified  the 

Einstein  theory.  t 

We  should  repeat  again  that  the  achievement  of  Einstein  was  the  building 

of  a  linguistic  system  similar  in  structure  to  the  world,  which  eliminated  a  patho¬ 
logical  pre-human  factor  of  objectification  of  terms.  Such  structural  elimination 
was  bound  to  bring  some  sanity  to  our  theories;  and  this  fact  is  independent  of 
experiments  in  physical  laboratories.  However,  it  is  gratifying  to  find  that  ex¬ 
periments  support  (1933)  the  Einstein  theory.  It  was  particularly  gratifying 
in  the  beginning,  when  physicists  and  Einstein  himself  believed  that  his  theory 
would  stand  or  fall  by  experiment.  Today  we  see  that  this  theory  represents 
such  an  enormous  general,  structural,  epistemological,  psycho-logical,  and 
methodological  non-elementalistic  advance,  that  no  matter  what  the  experiments 
show  or  may  show  in  the  future  we  cannot  return  to  a  language  of  the  old,  el, 
obviously  wrong,  structure  of  the  pre-einsteinian  days.  As  usual,  the  negative 
results  are  the  important  ones.  No  matter  what  experiments  may  show  we  shall 
never  again  accept  the  silent  structural  assumption  of  ‘infinite  velocity  for 
light,  when  we  know  positively  that  the  velocity  is  finite.  We  shall  never  again 
treat  terms  of  ‘matter',  ‘space',  and  ‘time’  as  objects— lower  order  abstractions, 
when  we  know  that  they  represent  terms — higher  order  abstractions.  When 

656  IX.  ON  EMPIRICAL  AND  VERBAL  STRUCTURES 

once  this  is  realized,  we  cannot  ascribe  'finiteness’  or  ‘infiniteness’,  'definiteness’, 
‘rigidity*.  ,  to  terms ,  verbal  forms,  forms  of  representation.  From  this  point  of 
view  we  may  consider  the  Einstein  theory  as  an  irreversible  gain.  If  it  had 
achieved  only  the  elimination  of  various  structural  prejudices  and  dogmas,  it 
has  done  well;  and  at  least  this  much  Einstein  has  already  achieved. 

The  structural,  verbal,  cortical  quest  for  invariance  in  our  formulations 
also  becomes  apparent.  The  older  mechanics  were  invariant  under  the  galilean 
transformation,  equations  preserved  their  form  in  different  systems  of  co¬ 
ordinates.  In  the  special  theory  of  relativity  the  new  laws  are  invariant  under 
the  Lorentz-Einstein  transformation.  In  this  special,  or  restricted,  theory  of 
relativity  only  uniform  relative  motion  was  taken  into  account.  If  we  generalize 
the  principle  of  relativity  to  any  kind  of  relative  motion  we  pass  from  the 
restricted  to  the  general  theory,  which  demands  that  the  laws  of  physics  should 
be  formulated  in  a  generally  invariant  form  for  any  arbitrary  transformations. 

For  this  structural,  cortical  reason  it  is  necessary  to  express  all  the  laws  of 
physics  in  tensor  equations,  which  satisfy  such  conditions  of  general  invariance. 
If  this  cannot  be  done,  there  must  be  something  wrong  with  our  language,  as 
such,  and  with  our  verbal  laws.  We  require  structural  revision  of  those  laws  so 
as  to  be  able  to  express  them  in  tensor  equations.  The  newtonian  law  of  gravi¬ 
tation  and  the  older  form  of  the  law  of  conservation  of  energy  are  perhaps  the 
most  remarkable  examples.  They  do  not  survive  such  minimal,  and  yet  entirely 
justified,  structural  requirements  as  those  of  the  general  theory  of  Einstein,  and 
therefore  they  cannot  be  structurally  satisfactory. 

We  have  already  seen  that  the  equation  jc2  -j-y2  -fz2  =  c2t2  or  x2  f  y2  -fz2  — c2/2  =  0 
represents  the  equation  of  the  spherical  propagation  of  light  with  the  finite  veloc¬ 
ity  c .  The  discovery  that  the  velocity  of  light  is  a  universal  constant  for  all 
observers,  and  the  above  equation,  led  historically  to  the  re-discovery  by  Einstein 
of  the  Lorentz  transformation  which,  as  we  have  seen,  has  assumed  such  over¬ 
whelming  structural  importance.  The  meaning  of  these  facts  is  worth  considering. 

^  In  Chapter  XVII  we  analysed  briefly  the  elementalistic  language  of  ‘matter’, 
space  ,  and  ‘time  ,  and  came  to  the  conclusion  that  to  eliminate  objectification 
we  must  abandon  the  semantic  disturbance  and  the  use  of  the  term  ‘is*  of 
identity.  Instead,  we  must  use  an  actional  functional  language  to  describe 
ordered  functioning,  behaviour,  or  operations.  By  necessity  we  were  led  to  a 
‘contact’  method.  We  also  discovered  that  in  accepting  the  above  structural 
methods  we  were  compelled  to  discriminate  between  different  orders  of  ab¬ 
straction,  since  what  we  see,  feel,  and  experience  is  not  what  we  say  about  it. 
We  found  that  on  the  ‘objective’  level  of  our  actual  activities,  (manipulating 
instruments .  ,)  which  represent  the  silent  unspeakable  level,  we  could  never 
find  a  situation  in  which  the  old  language  of  ‘matter’,  ‘space’,  and  ‘time’  could 
be  used  without  coming  violently  into  conflict  with  the  properly  analysed 
facts.  We  came  to  the  conclusion  that  this  language  was  not  structurally  satis¬ 
factory,  for  verbally ,  ‘space’,  ‘time*,  and  ‘matter*  were  supposed  to  be  quite 
clear-cut  and  separate  entities,  while  in  actual  experience  we  never  could  find 
such  separated  objective  entities.  It  became  obvious  that  the  structure  of  the 

SEMANTICS  OF  THE  EINSTEIN  THEORY 

old  language  of  'matter1,  ‘space*,  and  ‘time’  was  different  from  the  structure  of 
the  outside  world  as  we  now  know  it.  We  found  ourselves  in  a  situation  where 
we  had  to  choose  either  to  keep  the  old  language  which,  as  it  differed  from  them 
in  structure,  could  never  give  a  coherent  account  of  facts  at  hand,  or  else  to 
build  up  a  new  language  with  structure  similar  to  that  of  the  outside  world,  in 
order  to  have  the  possibility  of  coherent  conversation  about  it. 

The  invention  of  such  a  new  language  is  of  course  an  extremely  difficult 
undertaking.  In  fact,  it  requires  some  genius  to  invent  new,  more  structurally 
similar,  forms  of  representation  for  the  old  facts.  Lorentz,  Einstein,  and  Min¬ 
kowski  prepared  and  finally  produced  such  a  structurally  new  language.  The 
difficulty  was  that  verbally  we  had  already  separated  what  empirically  could 
not  be  separated.  The  problem  was  to  amalgamate  somehow  the  old  struc¬ 
turally  elementalistic  language  of  ‘space*  and  ‘time’  into  a  noh-elementalistic 
language.  The  key  to  such  an  amalgamation  is  found  in  the  light-wave  equation 
which  gives  us  the  structural  information  about  the  world,  x2+^+z2 —cH2, 

This  equation  represents  an  equality.  The  left-hand  side  is  expressed  in 
‘spatial’  terms  only — the  distance  between  two  points  O  and  P,  The  right-hand 
side  expresses  the  ‘spatial’  length,  but  in  a  ‘temporal*  term.  We  see  that  here 
we  have  means  of  translation,  and  a  possibility  of  amalgamation  of  two  ele¬ 
mentalistic  languages,  which  were  not  supposed  to  be  intertranslatable. 

The  Lorentz-Einstein  transformation  formulae  are  x'  =£  (x—  vt),  y'=y, 
zf  -zt  tr  - j8  (t—vx/c2)  where  v  is  the  relative  velocity  of  the  two  systems  of  co¬ 
ordinates,  c,  the  constant  velocity  of  light,  and  0  -  l/v  (1  ~v2/c2). 

The  formulae  for  x '  and  t*  which  typify,  on  the  left-hand  side,  xr  a  ‘spatial’ 
length  and  tf  a  ‘time’,  are  of  particular  interest.  We  see  that  on  the  right-hand 
side  of  the  expressions  the  value  of  the  ‘spatial’  xf  is  given  by  0  ( x  —vt)  which 
involves  ltime\  The  value  of  ‘time’,  t(  is  given  by  j8  (/—  iw/c2),  which  involves 
the  ‘spatial’  length  x.  So  we  see  that  our  amalgamation  is  complete,  and  separa¬ 
tion  impossible.  The  above  formulae  express  structurally  the  simple  experi¬ 
mental  fact  that  ‘space’  and  ‘time*  cannot  be  separated.  At  this  point  we  are 
not  ready  to  discuss  ‘matter*.  This  will  be  considered  further  on  in  this  work 
(see  Chapters  XL  and  XLI). 

The  above  formulae  have  also  a  very  important  physical  and  experimental 
meaning,  as  they  introduce  the  ‘contact’  methods  into  our  language.  Our 
actual  measurements  of  ‘space’  and  ‘time’  are  strictly  connected  with  readings 
on  some  instruments,  and  involve  therefore  coincidences  between  pointers  and 
‘simultaneity’.  In  all  instances  the  finite  velocity  of  propagation  of  signals  must 
be  taken  into  consideration.  When  our  instrument,  or  the  eye,  is  affected  by 
signals  there  is  always  a  delay  due  to  the  finite  velocity  of  the  propagation  of 
the  signals;  These  delays  are  part  and  parcel  of  our  experiment,  and  so  our 
formulae  must  contain  terms  explicitly  involving  this  finite  velocity  of  propaga¬ 
tion.  This  innovation  involves  not  only  a  most  profound  structural  epistemo¬ 
logical  and  semantic  revolution  but  supplies  the  very  factor  that  enables  us  to 
formulate  more  structurally  satisfactory  languages  (theories),  which  Lorentz, 
Einstein,  and  Minkowski  have  produced. 

658  IX.  ON  EMPIRICAL  AND  VERBAL  STRUCTURES 

We  have  been  contrasting  finite  and  ‘infinite’  velocities.  Let  us  say  frankly 
that  ‘infinite’  velocity  is  a  polite  way  of  speaking  about  blunders  of  observation. 
‘Infinite’  velocity  is  meaningless.  Velocity  is  defined  as  v  -s/t  and  if  t  is  taken 
as  zero  or  in  other  words,  if  one  of  the  fundamental  factors  in  our  definition  is 
lacking,  our  definition  ceases  to  define  the  term  in  question — in  this  case,  velocity. 
So  when  the  term  ‘time’  is  lacking,  we  have  no  velocity ,  by  definition;  so,  to 
speak  or  speculate  about  ‘infinite’  velocity  is  simply  making  noises,  and  not 
saying  anything.  The  negative  of  this  noise ;  namely,  saying  that  velocity  is  not 
‘infinite’,  or  in  a  positive  sense,  that  velocity  is  ‘finite’,  is  on  a  different  verbal 
footing,  although  it  remains  a  polite  invitation  to  stop  talking  non-sense. 

It  should  be  noticed  carefully  that  the  general  theory  of  Einstein  is  a  high 
structural  generalization  of  the  special  theory;  and  that  both  of  them  are 
generalizations  of  the  classical  mechanical  principle  of  relativity.  It  is  founded, 
not  on  the  introduction  of  any  extraordinary  structural  assumptions,  but  on 
the  elimination  of  some  unjustified  and  false-as-to-facts  structural  assumptions, 
such  as  that  of  the  ‘infinite’  velocity  of  light. 

Both  the  theory  of  Einstein,  and  the  theory  presented  in  this  work  are  long 
overdue.  The  Einstein  theory  could  have  been  formulated  as  soon  as  we  dis¬ 
covered  the  finite  velocity  of  light,  in  1676.  It  should  be  noticed  that  this  last 
discovery  was  also  overdue,  as  it  did  not  require  experiments  to  establish  the 
finite  velocity  of  light.  It  was  sufficient  to  establish  the  meaningless  character 
of  ‘infinite’  velocity,  which  on  symbolic  grounds,  could  have  been  accomplished 
much  earlier,  and  to  conclude,  that  the  velocity  of  light  must  be  finite.  This 
example  shows  the  hampering,  blocking,  semantic  effect  which  different  mean¬ 
ingless  verbal  structures  have  on  us.  To  express  this  high  and  satisfactory 
structural  generalization,  Einstein  had  to  select  the  most  general  and  struc¬ 
turally  appropriate  language  in  existence.  He  chose  at  some  stage  of  his  work 
the  language  of  E  and  four-dimensional  geometries  in  general  and  that  of  the 
differential  geometry  and  the  tensor  calculus  in  particular.  In  the  latest  field 
theory,  Einstein  and  Mayer  introduce  a  new  more  general  and  very  revolutionary 
mathematical  language  where  vectors  and  tensors  in  an  w-dimensional  spread 
may  have  m  components. 

At  present  it  appears  that  two  other  very  general  mathematical  disciplines 
will  be  used  increasingly  in  the  future.  One  of  them  is  the  theory  of  groups ;  the 
other  is  analysis  situs .  In  the  latter  we  study  only  these  characteristics  of  figures 
that  are  unaffected  (invariant)  by  continuous  deformation  produced  without 
tearing.  Two  structural  points  are  relevant  for  us  in  this  connection:  namely, 
that  the  analysis  situs  is  fundamentally  a  differential  and  also  an  ordinal  dis¬ 
cipline,  based  on  asymmetrical  relations.  In  the  next  chapter,  as  an  illustration 
of  the  actional,  behaviouristic,  functional,  operational,  differential,  contact 
method  a  short  account  will  be  given  of  the  way  Einstein  structurally  treated 
‘simultaneity’.  The  elimination  of  the  old  structural  dogma  about  ‘simul¬ 
taneity’  resulting  from  the  semantic  disturbance  of  objectification  of  ‘time’,  is 
one  of  the  outstanding  achievements  of  Einstein  and  is  historically  the  begin¬ 
ning  of  his  theory. 

CHAPTER  XXXVII 

ON  THE  NOTION  OF  ‘SIMULTANEITY* 

So  we  see  that  we  cannot  attach  any  absolute  signification  to  the  concept 
of  simultaneity,  but  that  two  events  which,  viewed  from  a  system  of  co¬ 
ordinates,  are  simultaneous,  can  no  longer  be  looked  upon  as  simultaneous 
events  when  envisaged  from  a  system  which  is  in  motion  relatively  to  that 

/I.'*  A.  EINSTEIN 

In  the  older  days  we  accepted  as  self-evident  the  structural  assumption 
that  there  is  sense  in  such  a  statement  as  that  an  event  A  on  the  sun  was  Simul¬ 
taneous’  with  an  event  B  on  the  earth.  We  assumed  also  that  the  ‘moments  of 
our  consciousness’  had  a  universal  ‘meaning’.  We  tacitly  assumed,  for  instance, 
that  when  we  saw  or  photographed  an  event  on  the  sun,  that  it  happened  just 
the  moment  we  saw  it.  Such  structural  assumptions  were  rudely  disturbed  by 
the  discovery  of  the  finite  velocity  of  light.  Today  we  know  that  when  we  see 
or  photograph  an  event  on  the  sun,  that  event  happened  approximately  eight 
minutes  earlier,  as  it  takes  about  eight  minutes  for  the  light  from  the  sun  to 
reach  our  earth.  We  begin  to  realize  that  the  moments  of  our  perceptions  have 
no  universal  significance. 

We  inquire  first  what  we  mean  structurally  by  simultaneity.  We  do  not 
need  to  go  into  details.  The  application  of  functional  and  contact  methods, 
even  in  the  rough,  will  assist  us.  We  can  speak  in  terms  of  instruments.  For 
instance,  we  can  build  a  special,  very  fast  moving  picture  camera,  C,  with  two 
lenses  D  and  E,  at  two  opposite  sides,  and  a  calibrated  film,  F,  running  rapidly 
through  the  middle  of  the  camera  as  shown  in.  Fig.  1.  If  we  focus  our  double 
camera  on  two  flashes,  A  and  B,  occurring  at  ‘equal  distances  ,  L,  from  the  film, 

we  say  that  the  flashes  occur  simultane¬ 
ously  by  definition  if  the  pictures,  a  and 
b  of  the  flashes  A  and  B,  appear  exactly 
opposite  each  other  on  the  film,  or  if  we 
have  one  picture.  If,  under  the  condi¬ 
tions  of  the  experiment,  where  the  dis¬ 
tances  between  the  origins  of  the  flashes 
and  the  film  are  equal,  and  our  film  is 
moving  very  rapidly,  the  pictures  of  the 
flashes  do  not  occur  exactly  opposite 
each  other,  but  one  picture  is  separated 
from  the  other,  then  we  have  two 
pictures,  and  conclude,  by  definition , 

r 

Fig.  1 

that  the  flashes  are  not  simultaneous. 

We  introduce  this  hypothetical  instrument  to  show  that,  in  discussing 
physics,  and  the  theory  of  Einstein  in  physics,  we  do  not  speak  of  ‘psychology’ 
or  personal  ‘subjectivity’,  but  that  we  do  deal  with  the  inherent  physical  sub- 

660  IX.  ON  EMPIRICAL  AND  VERBAL  STRUCTURES 

jectivity  of  the  instruments  and  the  finite  velocity  of  propagation.  When  we 
discuss  the  psycho-logical  or  methodological  or  semantic  significance  of  science 
and  scientific  method,  we  deal  with  different  subjects. 

When  we  use  the  term  ‘observer'  we  mean  an  observer  so  equipped  that  he 
can  do  whatever  is  demanded  of  him. 

What  was  said  about  the  definition  of  ‘simultaneity*  by  the  aid  of  the 
camera,  applies  also  to  ourselves. 

The  problem  of  prime  importance  before  us  is  to  find  out  if  ‘simultaneity*, 
as  defined,  has  an  ‘absolute’  and  universal  significance,  or  if  it  is  perhaps  a 
private  and  relative  notion. 

We  will  carry  out  the  analysis  in  two  ways,  the  first  by  example,  which 
will  be  instructive,  though  perhaps  not  completely  conclusive;  the  other,  by 
the  use  of  the  Lorentz-Einstein  transformation. 

Let  us  perform  our  last  experiment,  which,  with  modern  methods  seems  to 
be  feasible,  in  a  slightly  more  complicated  form. 

We  can  select  a  dark  night  in  which 
flashes  will  photograph  well  even  at 
considerable  distances.  We  can  place 
powerful  projectors  at  A  and  B,  and  we 
place  our  camera  so  that  the  film  will 
come  exactly  at  C,  midway  between  A 
and  B.  We  can  start  the  mechanism  of 
the  rapidly  moving  film  and,  by  an 
electrical  contact  made  at  C,  we  can 
produce  a  short  flash  from  each  of  the 
two  projectors.  Because  of  the  assump¬ 
tions,  AC— CB,  and  equal  velocity  of 
the  propagation  of  electrical  currents 
and  light-waves  in  all  directions  we  shall 
have  by  the  structural  definitions  which 
condition  the  experiment,  one  picture 
in  Fig.  2,  say  at  the  spot  of  our  moving 
film  marked  by  5.  The  rays  of  light  from 
A  and  B  would  arrive  ‘simultaneously* — 
that  is,  ‘at  the  same  time’ — and  would 
affect  our  moving  film  in  one  spot .  Our 
definition  was  for  a  stationary  observer, 
and  under  the  conditions,  the  experi¬ 
ment  was  fairly  definite — all  the  under¬ 
lying  structural  assumptions,  of  course, 
being  taken  for  granted. 

Now  consider  an  observer,  as  shown  in  Fig.  3,  moving  uniformly  in  the 
direction  from  A  to  B. 

Let  us  assume  that  he  is  also  equipped  with  a  similar  sort  of  moving  picture 
camera  as  the  stationary  observer,  and  that  just  before  he  passes  the  point  C 

SIMULTANEITY 

the  electrical  impulse  to  the  projectors  is  sent.  Let  us  assume  further  that  the 
mark  5  on  his  moving  film  is  exactly  at  the  focal  point  of  the  camera  as  C  is 
passed.  The  electrical  impulses  travelling  from  C  to  A  and  B  would  travel  the 
distance  AC  =BC(  produce  the  flashes  A  and  B  which  again  would  travel  with 
finite  velocity  in  all  directions.  During  the  interval  these  impulses  and  light¬ 
waves  are  travelling,  our  observer  is  moving  from  A  toward  B,  and  spot  5  on  his 
moving  film  is  no  more  at  the  focus  of  the  camera.  Obviously  he  will  meet  the 
light-wave  from  B  first,  at  C',  let  us  say,  when  mark  6  on  his  film  is  at  the  focus 
(Fig.  3).  After  another  short  interval  when  he  reaches  C "  and  mark  7  on  his 
film  is  at  the  focus,  the  light-wave  from  A  overtakes  him  (Fig.  4). 

So  we  see  that  what  was  ‘simultaneous’  (by  definition)  and  produced  one 
impression  on  the  moving  film  of  the  stationary  observer,  was  not  ‘simultaneous  , 
(again  by  definition),  for  the  moving  observer,  as  his  film  registers  two  pictures. 

As  both  observers  use  similar  instruments  and  one  set  of  definitions,  ob¬ 
viously  both  are  entitled  to  claim  that  their  records  on  the  film  are  conclusive. 
So  the  first  can  claim  that  the  flashes  were  ‘simultaneous’,  the  second  can  claim 
that  they  were  not  ‘simultaneous’.  The  reverse  is  equally  true.  If  the  moving 
observer  had  one  picture,  and  claimed  ‘simultaneity’,  the  stationary  observer 
would  have  two  pictures,  and  deny  ‘simultaneity’. 

But  when  two  observers  are  equally  justified  in  making  two  opposing  claims 
where,  by  their  very  meanings,  there  is  only  one  possible,  we  must  conclude 
that  the  claim  itself  is  meaningless.  We  see  that  ‘absolute  simultaneity  is  a 
fiction  and  impossible  to  ascertain,  as  it  would  depend  on  some  impossible 
'absolute  motion’,  or  ‘infinite  velocity’  of  propagation  of  signals.  .  ^ 

The  analytical  form  of  showing  the  impossibility  of  ‘absolute  simultaneity 
is  very  simple,  and  follows  directly  from  the  Lorentz-Einstein  transformation. 

Let  us  imagine  two  observers,  one  in  an  S  system  of  co-ordinates  (s,  y,  z,  0 
and  another  in  an  S'  system  of  co-ordinates  (#',  /,  z',  t')  moving  relatively  with 
the  velocity  v. 

Let  us  assume  two  events  happening  in  the  unprimed  system  at  the  point 
(#i,  yi,  si)  at  the  ‘time’  k,  and  the  other  at  the  point  ( x2 ,  yz,  )  at  the  ‘time  k. 
According  to  the  Lorentz-Einstein  transformation  the  ‘times’  at  which  the  two 
events  occur  relatively  to  the  primed  system  are  given  by  the  formula^ — 
h'  =0  (h -x& /c2),  k'  =0  (k -x2v A2),  where  as  usual  0  =  l/v  1  -v2 /cK 
If  we  assume  that  in  our  unprimed  system  S  the  two  events  were  simul¬ 
taneous',  which  means  that  they  ‘occurred  at  the  same  time’,  h  would  be  equal 
to  k,  that  is,  h=k,  or  h-k=Q.  Let  us  find  the  difference  between  the  two 
primed  ‘times'  in  the  moving  system  5',  and  see  if  this  difference  is  zero,  which 

would  mean  that  the  primed  times  are  equal.  . 

Returning  to  our  formulae  which  give  us  the  values  for  the  primed  system 

(1) 

‘times’,  we  express  their  difference  as 

k'-k'  =0  (h-xiv/c2)  -0  (k-x2v/c2)  =0  (i h-k+x2v/c2-xiv/c  ). 

But  we  assumed  h -k  =0;  therefore  h' -t2  «0  {x2vfc2 -xy/c2).  . 

This  last  formula  shows  clearly  that  //  ~k'  cannot  be  zero ;  or  in  other  words, 

ti  cannot  be  equal  to  t2  unless  x\  —  x2. 

662  IX.  ON  EMPIRICAL  AND  VERBAL  STRUCTURES 

The  two  events  which,  for  an  observer  in  the  unprimed  system,  happen 
'simultaneously',  (/i  =t$ ,  or  t\  —  h  ”0)  at  different  places,  (or  xi  not  equal  to  x2, 
Xx9^  Xi)t  cannot  be  'simultaneous*  for  the  moving  observer  in  the  primed  sys¬ 
tem  S',  but  will  happen  at  different  'times'  (ti  is  not  equal  to  ti ,  or  t\  -ti  j*  0). 

It  is  extremely  instructive  to  consider  further  what  happens  in  measuring 
‘times*  and  'lengths'  in  systems  which  are  moving  relatively  to  each  other. 

If,  in  the  equation  (1)  above,  we  assume  xx  =x2,  this  means  that  both  events 
occur  at  one  place  in  the  stationary  unprimed  system  S. 

By  changing  the  signs  and  cancelling  the  terms  with  Xx  and  x2,  which  are 
equal  and  of  opposite  signs,  we  have  ti-ti=P  (h~h)  whence,  substituting 
for  ft  its  value  I/'n/  1  —v2/c2,  we  obtain 

k'~h'=vi-!*/c2 

This  last  formula  brings  out  a  few  remarkable  issues.  In  terrestrial  velocities 
the  square  of  the  velocity  of  the  motion  v 2  of  the  observer  in  the  primed  system 
S’  is  very  small  as  compared  with  the  square  of  the  velocity  of  light  c2,  so  the 
fraction  v*/c2  is  small,  Vl  -i fi/c2  differs  very  little  from  unity  but  the  whole 
denominator  is  less  than  unity,  and  so  ti  —t\  is  not  equal  to  t%  —t\t  but  greater. 

In  other  words,  the  interval  of  'time'  between  the  two  events  appears 
larger  to  the  observer  in  the  primed  moving  system  than  to  the  observer  in  the 
stationary  unprimed  system.  In  general,  among  all  systems  in  a  state  of  uni¬ 
form  relative  motion,  that  one  in  which  two  events  occur  at  one  place ,  is  char¬ 
acterized  by  the  fact  that  the  'time'  interval  between  the  two  events  appears 
shortest  to  an  observer  in  this  system.  The  shortest  interval  means  that  to  an 
observer  in  the  system,  the  events  run  their  course  most  rapidly.  A  process 
which,  with  reference  to  a  given  system,  occurs  in  one  place,  appears  to  run  its 
course  most  rapidly  to  an  observer  in  that  system,  but  more  slowly  to  a  moving 
observer  in  any  other  system. 

The  more  rapid  the  relative  motion,  the  slower  the  process  will  appear, 
and,  in  the  limit,  if  an  observer  could  move  with  the  velocity  of  light,  vt=c2f 
the  denominator  of  our  equation  would  become  1 — 1=0  and  ti —ti  would 
become  'infinite'  and  all  events  would  be  at  a  standstill. 

As  the  formulae  for  length,  x  and  x't  involve  the  ‘times'  and,  as  we  see, 
the  intervals  of  'time'  are  dependent  on  the  relative  velocities,  by  a  similar 
process  of  reasoning  we  find  that  the  standards  of  length  are  also  relative,  and 
that  the  length  L’  in  the  primed  system  is  represented  by  V  =  La/  1  —v2/c2. 
In  other  words,  to  an  observer  who  sees  the  rod  in  motion,  it  will  appear 
'shortened',  and  among  all  systems  in  a  state  of  uniform  relative  motion,  the 
one  in  which  the  rod  is  at  rest  is  distinguished  from  all  others  by  the  fact  that 
in  it  the  rod  appears  longer  than  in  any  other  system.  For  instance,  a  metre 
rod  lying  on  the  earth  in  the  direction  of  its  motion  would  appear  to  an  observer 
on  the  sun  to  be  shortened  by  S  X 10”7  cm.  In  the  limit,  when  v  =c,  the  fraction 
£2  =  L  1  —  1  *=0  and  U  =0,  which  means  that  to  an  observer  moving  with  the 
velocity  of  light,  a  three-dimensional  body  would  appear  as  two-dimensional, 

SIMULTANEITY 

or  a  two-dimensional  figure  as  one-dimensional.  The  co-ordinates  y  and  s,  as 
we  have  seen,  do  not  enter  into  consideration  as  they  are  equal  in  both  systems 
moving  relatively  in  the  X  direction,  and  the  ‘time’  co-ordinates  are  inde¬ 
pendent  of  them. 

If  a  body  at  rest  appears  to  the  observer  in  the  unprimed  system  as  a 
sphere,  it  will  appear  as  an  oblate  spheroid  to  an  observer  in  the  primed  system. 

We  see  that  structurally  not  only  ‘simultaneity*  and  ‘time’  are  not  ab¬ 
solute  but  also  that  length,  and  therefore  shape ,  is  relative. 

We  have  seen  that  the  ‘shortest*  and  ‘longest*  values  are  important  char¬ 
acteristics  of  the  motion.  This  suggests  why  in  the  general  theory  of  Einstein 
we  are  interested  in,  and  introduce,  geodetics. 

It  should  be  mentioned  here  that  the  Lorentz  transformation  has  been 
reached  by  difficult  considerations  involving  Maxwell’s  electromagnetic  field 
equations,  unrelated  to  the  Einstein  theory.  Einstein  found  the  Lorentz  trans¬ 
formation  by  the  simplest  consideration  connected  with  his  theory.  The  finding 
of  such  important  equations  by  two  methods,  entirely  different  structurally, 
must  be  considered  as  a  convincing  proof  of  the  fundamental  importance  of 
such  formulae,  the  more  so  since  they  follow  from  very  simple  and  fundamental 
structural  principles  which  in  themselves  cannot  be  denied  because  they  are 
negative  in  character.  Negative  statements  are  on  a  different  footing  in  the 
new  systems;  they  follow  structurally  from  a  A  orientation,  just  as  the  older 
positive  dogmas  were  the  structural  results  of  aristotelianism  and  the  delusional 
results  of  identification. 

The  facts  mentioned  concerning  the  measures  of  length  and  the  behaviour 
of  clocks  do  not  present  any  paradoxes.  They  simply  say  that  these  discrepancies 
are  mutual  and  inevitable,  as  any  measurement  is  only  a  measurement  when 
it  can  be  registered  by  an  instrument,  or  seen,  or  recorded  in  some  way.  If  the 
measuring  rods  and  clocks  are  moving  relatively  to  us,  what  we  see  or  what 
our  instruments  record  is  not  what  is  happening  on  the  moving  system,  which 
no  one  can  see  or  record  from  outside  the  system.  What 
reaches  us  is  simply  what  the  light-waves  or  other  signals 
moving  with  finite  velocity  (and  therefore  retarded  by  a 
motion  away  from  us)  bring  to  us.  As  all  existing  methods 
of  communication  and  all  known  signals  have  finite  veloci¬ 
ties,  these  structural  differences  which  are  conditioned  by 
the  inherent  characteristics  of  the  world  should  be  taken 
into  consideration  in  modern  science. 

If  we  draw  a  square  ABCD  (Fig.  5)  and  an 
aviator  E  were  to  pass  this  square  sign  with  a  velocity 
of  161,000  miles  a  second*  in  the  direction  AB , 

*1  deliberately  select  such  a  velocity  so  as  to  make  the  contraction  given  by  the 
formula  V  —  L V 1  —  tf/c*  —  1/2.  With  this  aim  we  must  make  the  fraction  repre- 
sented  by  zi’/c’ =  3/4,  then  1-3/4  =  1/4  and  /l/4=J/2;  We  findthe  jquareof 
our  velocity  v  by  taking  3/4  of  the  square  of  the  velocity  of  light  —  %<r  ana 
find  u  =  £Vr3  =  161,000  miles  a  second. 

664  IX.  ON  EMPIRICAL  AND  VERBAL  STRUCTURES 

he  would  see— and  any  instrument  carried  by  him  would  register  it — the  sides 
of  our  square  (AB=BC  =  CD  =DA)  in  the  direction  of  his  flight,  namely  AB 
and  CD ,  as  ‘contracted’  to  half  their  length.  If  he  turned  at  right  angles,  the 
sides  AB  and  CD  would  ‘expand’  and  the  other  sides,  which  are  at  right  angles, 
BC  and  DA ,  would  ‘contract’.  For  us  the  sides  AB  and  BC  are  equal ,  for  him 
one  appears  twice  the  other.  To  him  our  square  appears  oblong. 

Under  such  natural  structural  conditions  it  is  a  fundamental  fallacy  to 
ascribe  to  ‘lengths'  or  ‘shapes’  or  ‘times’  any  ‘absolute’  significance.  If  we  grasp 
the  structural  fact  that  ‘length’  and  ‘duration’  are  not  things  inherent  in  the 
external  world,  nor  are  ‘matter’,  ‘space’,  and  ‘time’,  but  that  they  appear  as 
relations  between  events  and  some  specified  observer,  and  forms  of  representa¬ 
tions,  then  all  paradoxes  would  disappear. 

A  suggestion  which  concerns  visualization  may  be  helpful.  If  we  realize 
the  structural  fact  that  words  are  not  the  objects  they  represent,  we  shall  always 
discriminate  automatically  between  what  we  see,  feel .  ,  on  the  level  of  lower 
order  abstractions,  and  what  we  say  on  the  level  of  higher  order  abstractions. 
When  we  have  conquered  that  single  difficulty  we  could  never  then  identify 
the  two  different  orders  of  abstractions.  We  would  evaluate  the  terms  ‘matter’, 
space  ,  and  ‘time’  as  forms  of  representation,  and  non-objects,  and  we  would 
describe  events  in  a  functional,  operational,  behaviouristic  language  of  order. 
If  we  realize  and  feel  the  finite  velocity  of  propagation  of  all  processes,  we  may 
visualize  all  that  has  been  explained  here.  Diagrammatizing  and  even  follow¬ 
ing  with  one’s  hand,  the  visualized  order  of  occurrences,  helps  enormously.  Try 
to  visualize  how  the  aviator  in  the  last  example  is  flying  away  and  how  much 
more  slowly  the  light  impressions  from  the  earth  are  reaching  him  or  his  in¬ 
struments,  and  the  difficulties  will  soon  vanish. 

We  shall  also  be  greatly  helped  in  our  power  of  visualization  when  we 
become  acquainted  with  the  structure  of  the  Minkowski  four-dimensional 
world.  An  explanation  of  this  appears  in  the  next  chapter. 

CHAPTER  XXXVIII 

ON  THE  ‘WORLD’  OF  MINKOWSKI 

Moreover,  the  really  fundamental  things  have  a  way  of  appearing  to  be 
simple  once  they  have  been  stated  by  a  genius,  who  was  in  thiacase  Min- 
kowski.  (43U  G-  Y-  BAINICH 

We  have  already  freely  used  the  structural  term  ‘dimension’  and  only 
hinted  at  its  meanings.  Before  we  approach  the  Minkowski  world  we  must 
summarize  roughly  what  for  our  purpose  we  should  know  about  dimensions. 

There  is  nothing  mysterious  about  the  term  'dimension*.  First  of  all,  the 
dimensionality  of  a  manifold  is  not  inherent  in  the  manifold  as  such.  It  is  a 
characteristic  of  order  and  so  of  structure.  A  manifold  can  be  ordered  in  different 
ways,  so  that  it  follows  that  one  manifold  may  have  different  dimensionality, 

depending  on  how  we  order  it.  ... 

A  manifold  which  has  linear  order  and  structure  is  called  one-dimensional. 
A  two-dimensional  manifold  is  then  a  linearly  ordered  manifold  of  linearly 
ordered  manifolds , . 

IT., .ally  we  speak  about  oUr  ‘space’  of  daily  experiences  as  a  three- 
dimensional  manifold,  but  this  is  true  only  with  reference  to  points,  and  not 
true  with  reference  to  lines  or  spheres.  The  manifold  of  all  spheres  in  space 
is,  for  instance,  a  four-dimensional  manifold;  so  also  is  a  manifold  of  lines. 

Let  us  explain  the  line-dimensionality  of  our  ‘space’  in  terms  of  lines. 
A  line  can  be  given  by  two  points— one,  let  us  say,  in  the  floor  of  our  room, 
the  other  in  the  ceiling.  Each  of  these  points  is  given  by  two  co-ordinates; 
it  has  two  degrees  of  freedom;  and  so  our  ‘space’  is  a  four-dimensional  (2x2) 
manifold  in  lines .  This  means  that  to  distinguish  any  line  in  our  ‘space’  from 
any  other  line  we  would  have  to  have  four  data .  Similarly,  if  we  deal  with 
spheres,  a  manifold  made  up  of  spheres  requires  four  data,  three  for  locating 
the  centre  and  one  giving  the  radius  of  the  sphere.  The  above  examples,  of 
course,  do  not  exhaust  the  structural  possibilities.1 

The  term  ‘dimension’  does  not  apply  solely  to  what  we  call  ‘space’.  The 
term  applies  to  any  manifold  which  we  can  order  in  some  particular  way. 
Manifolds  or  aggregates  abound  everywhere  in  our  lives.  The  domain  of 
colours,  for  instance,  is  a  manifold;  and  so  is  the  domain  of  tone,  or  of  re¬ 
membrances  ,  .  No  manifold  in  itself  has  any  dimensionality.  To  ascribe 
dimensionality  to  the  manifold  we  must  first  order  it  and  the  number  of  its 
dimensionality,  or  its  ascribed  or  discovered  structure,  may  differ  according 
to  the  principle  of  ordering  used. 

In  discussing  dimensionality  we  have  two  purposes.  First,  to  dispel  t  e 
semantic  fright  about  this  simple  term;  and,  second,  to  suggest  means  for 
visualization,  which  for  our  purpose  are  of  great  neurological  importance. 

When  we  say  that  the  world  is  structurally  a  four-dimensional  manifold, 
we  mean  only  that  according  to  our  experience  and  the  structure  of  our  nervous 

666  IX.  ON  EMPIRICAL  AND  VERBAL  STRUCTURES 

system  the  world  of  our  experience  is  represented  by  a  fourfold  order.  We  can 
order  the  events  as  to  the  right  and  to  the  left,  forward  and  backward,  up  and 
down  and  sooner  and  later.  In  our  experience  this  fourfold  order  is  completely 
united,  and  cannot  be  separated  unless  we  deliberately  choose  to  neglect  some 
of  these  orderings. 

Nor  does  it  mean  that  all  these  dimensions  are  ‘identical’.  We  are  accus¬ 
tomed,  for  instance,  to  consider  the  three  dimensions  of  ‘space’  as  ‘identical’ 
or  at  least  equivalent.  Is  this  true  in  life?  Can  we  disregard,  for  instance,  the 
structural  difference  between  vertical  and  horizontal?  If  we  did,  quite  probably 
as  Eddington  remarks,  we  should  come  to  an  untimely  end,  and  break  our 

Obviously  if  we  visualise  our  plenum,  as  made  up  of  lines  or  particles  bv 
necessity  we  visualize  structurally  a  four-dimensional  manifold.  It  should  be 
noticed  that  a  four-dimensional  ‘absolute  void’,  or  ‘absolute  nothingness’ 
besides  being  non-sense,  cannot  be  visualized  at  all,  because  it  could  have 
no  structure. 

We  see  that  all  metaphysical  ‘fourth  dimensions’  are  not  only  non-sense 
but  usually  indicate  a  pathological  semantic  disturbance.  The  intensity  of 
such  disturbances  is  often  high,  because  it  is  entirely  impossible  for  a  sane 
person  to  deal  with  such  meaningless  noises.  The  victim  is  obsessed  with 
attempts  to  do  the  impossible,— a  semantically  hopeless  and  painful  task. 

Such  objectifications  of  terms  are  very  dangerous  and  science  should  try, 
y  proper  emphasis,  to  eliminate  them.  Outside  of  science  the  term  ‘dimension’ 
has  no  meaning  and  ought  to  be  definitely  abandoned  in  our  speculations, 
for  the  sake  of  sanity. 

The  notion  of  ‘time’  as  a  ‘fourth  dimension’  is  by  no  means  new.  It 
appeared  in  a  vague  form  centuries  ago.  The  notion  however  was  not  formu¬ 
lated  properly,  and  therefore  was  unworkable.  Instead  of  helping  science 
it  only  hindered  it.  ’ 

Inspired  by  Einstein’s  work,  the  mathematician  Minkowski,  whose  work 
had  been  mainly  in  the  theory  of  numbers,  began  to  work  at  the  theory  of 
manifolds  of  any  number  of  dimensions.  In  1908  he  delivered  his  famous  and 
semantically  epoch-making  address  on  Space  and  Time  which  fused  geometry 
and  physics  structurally.  In  this  address  he  insisted  that  the  connection  between 
space  and  time’  as  given  by  the  Lorentz-Einstein  formulae  is  not  accidental 
but  exhibits  that  inner  connection  or  structure  to  which  we  had  not  naid 
enough  attention.2  v 

In  our  experience,  ‘space’  and  ‘time’  can  never  be  entirely  separated,  as 
already  explained,  and  so  Minkowski  combined  them  into  a  higher  entity  which 
is  called  the  Minkowski  world’.  In  the  world  of  experience  the  datum  appears 
to  be,  not  a  place  and  a  point  of  ‘time’,  but  the  event  or  the  world  point— that  is 
a  place  at  a  definite  date . 

The  graphic  picture  of  a  moving  point  is  a  world-line .  Rectilinear  uniform 
motion  corresponds  then  to  a  straight  world-line;  accelerated  motion,  to  one 
that  is  curved. 

ON  THE  'WORLD'  OF  MINKOWSKI 

The  event  is  the  most  elementary  notion.  We  shall  use  it  from  now  on  in 
this  work  in  the  sense  of  a  four-dimensional  volume  of  space-time  which  is 
small  in  all  four  dimensions.  We  do  not  posit  whether  events  themselves  have 
structure  or  not,  but  it  is  preferable  to  assume  that  they  have  no  space-time 
structure,  which  means  that  the  event  has  no  parts  which  are  external  to  each 
other  in  space-time.  The  order  of  events  is  fourfold,  as  previously  shown. 

The  aggregate  or  manifold  of  all  point-events  is  then  called  the  world. 
The  point-events  are  given  by  four  numbers  representing  the  co-ordinates, 
three  giving  the  ‘space’  co-ordinates,  and  the  fourth  the  ‘time’  co-ordinate. 

The  term  ‘space-time  continuum’  or  ‘space-time  manifold’  is  used  often 
and  implies  that  the  numbers  x ,  y,  3,  /,  are  to  vary  continuously. 

In  such  a  space-time  continuum  all  happenings  are  structurally  the  inter¬ 
sections  of  world-lines,  and  if  we  could  describe  the  world-lines  of  all  points 
of  the  universe  we  would  have  a  full  account  of  the  universe,  ‘past’  and  ‘future*. 
We  see  that  all  physics,  with  the  rest  of  our  problems,  must  then  be  considered 
as  a  chapter  of  the  general  structural  and  semantic  study  of  continuous  mani¬ 
folds  of  four  dimensions. 

But  we  are  already  acquainted  with  such  theories.  For  instance,  the 
internal  theory  of  surfaces  may  be  considered  as  a  part  of  the  subject  in  two 
and  three  dimensions.  We  have  seen  that  different  surfaces  are  characterized 
by  the  expression  for  the  line  element  d$2  -=gi\dxi  +2gi2dxidx2+g<z2dx227  or  by 
that  group  of  transformations  which  leaves  the  line  element  invariant.  We 
know  already  that  in  the  E  as  well  as  riemannian  geometries  we  have  similar 
expressions  and  characteristic  transformations. 

If  physics  is  to  be  considered  a  branch  of  the  theory  of  four-dimensional 
manifolds,  we  should  naturally  look  for  some  such  transformations.  The  mani¬ 
fold  represents  the  world,  the  generalized *  theory  of  relativity  gives  the  desired 
answer.  Minkowski  proposed  a  postulate,  which  he  calls  the  postulate  of  an 
absolute  world ,  or  the  world-postulate  which  asserts  the  invariance  of  all  the  laws 
of  nature  in  relation  to  linear  transformations,  for  which  the  function 
3C2+y2+32  —cH2  is  invariant. 

The  reader  is  already  familiar  with  the  expression  x2  +  y2*  which  gives 
the  invariant  length  in  E  geometry  in  two  dimensions,  and  x2  -by2  +s2  which 
gives  it  in  three  dimensions.  It  would  be  natural  to  expect  that  in  four  dimen¬ 
sions  we  should  have  an  expression  of  the  type  x2+y2-\-z2+t2  but  in  this  case 
our  expression  is  x2  -by2  +22  —c2t2.  It  should  be  noticed  that  the  above  different 
types  of  expressions  haye  different  origins.  The  first  two  arise  in  pure  geometry, 
and  the  last  has  its  roots  in  physics.  The  problem  was  to  bring  an  experimental 
expression  into  harmony  with  a  familiar  geometrical  expression.  Minkowski 
introduced  the  expression  ict^u* ,  where  i  is  as  usual  the  square  root  of  minus 
one,  (t=V- 1).  Then  of  course  ~cH2  becomes  {id)2  =u?. 

*1  use  the  term  ‘generalized’  to  embrace  the  unified  field  theory  and  eventually 
the  quantum  theory,  although,  for  our  purpose,  I  utilize  only  the  special  and  gen¬ 
eral  theory. 

668  IX.  ON  EMPIRICAL  AND  VERBAL  STRUCTURES 

If  we  change  the  lettering,  and  denote  x~ui ;  y-w,;  then  our 

expression  x*+y*+z*-cH*  becomes  +«*■+««»  W,  a  simple  formula  for 
distance  in  four-dimensional  geometry.  It  would  not  be  profitable  for  us  to 
speculate  upon  this  substitution;  it  was  introduced  merely  for  the  sake  of 
mathematical,  verbal  treatment  and  can  be  easily  translated  back  into  the 
usual  terms  of  c  and  t. 

We  have  already  seen  that  the  expression  x 2  -f-y2  -\-z2  —  cH2  =  x'2  -j-y'2  -{-s'2  —  c2t'2 
is  invariant  under  the  L-orentz-Einstein  transformation.  This  fact  of  invariance 
is  fundamental,  and  it  is  well  to  convince  ourselves  that  it  is  so.  The  Lorentz- 
'  see  page  xii  Einstein  transformation  was  x’=0(x-vt),  f-y,  s'-*,  ,'=£(, -vx/cy  where 

P  =  1/V1  -*/<*.  As  the  co-ordinates  y  and  z  are  equal  in  both  systems,  we 
can  disregard  them,  and  verify  that  cH’2 -x’2  -cH2 -x2.  Let  us  substitute  for  f 
and  xf  the  values  given  by  the  Lorentz-Einstein  transformation.  We  have  then : 

<?t’2 ~c2fP{t -vx/c2)2 -fP{x -vt)2  =c2t2f}2  +yji_2^te  _gW 

c 4  c2 

+2(Pxvt’*C2(2(i2(l  -V>/c2)  -**02(1  -v*/c2)  ^  -*/<?  =cHi 

1  —v2/c2  1  —v2/c2  1 

since  =  — Similarly  it  is  easy  to  show,  if  we  take  an  event-particle, 

as,  for  instance,  a  momentary  spark,  which  has  the  co-ordinates  xi,  y\,  zlt  th  in 
one  system  of  co-ordinates,  say  5,  and  let  another  event-particle  occur  in  that 
system  at  x2,  y2,  z2,  t2,  that  the  formulae  remain  invariant.  If  we  designate 
the  distance  between  the  two  events  by  r,  its  value  would  be  given  bv 
r2  -  (x2 5 +  (y2 -yi)2 + -  Zl)\ 

In  a  different  system,  S',  moving  uniformly  relatively  to  S,  r'2  would  in 
generai  not  be  equal  to  r2,  but  the  expression  r2-c2{h-h)2  would  be  equal 

to  r,2-c2{ti -t{)2,  r2-c2(t2-t1)2  =  r'2-c2(t2'-t1')2. 

The  above  expression  is  called  the  interval  and  expresses  a  most  funda¬ 
mental  structural  characteristic;  namely,  that  the  interval  is  invariant  for  all 
systems  in  uniform  relative  motion.  This  result  is  quite  general  and  independent 
of  the  relative  orientation  .of  the  axes,  or  of  the  angle  the  velocity  has  to  the 
axes.  The  interval  plays  in  the  theory  of  Einstein  a  similar  role  which  the 
Pythagorean  rule  played  in  the  E  geometry. 

Because  of  the  finite  velocity  of  our  measuring  signals,  our  formulae  must 
involve  finite  velocity.  Therefore  the  interval  is  the  only  actual  measurement 

which  we  can  ever 
make  in  practice. 
Hence  its  funda¬ 
mental  semantic 
importance. 

Fig.  1  Eddington 

j.  .  ...  gives  a  very  fine 

diagram  in  explaining  how  intervals  are  measured.  I  reproduce  it  here¬ 
with  (Fig.  1). 

ON  THE  'WORLD'  OF  MINKOWSKI 

The  expression  ci ,  where  c  is  the  velocity  of  light,  300,000  kilometres  per 
second,  gives  us  the  distance  travelled  by  light  in  the  ‘time’  U  It  is  natural  to 
regard  the  velocity  of  light,  which  is  a  constant  and  translates  easily  into  the 
language  of  length,  as  a  unit  of  ‘time’.  In  the  Minkowski  world  it  is  customary, 
because  of  its  convenience,  to  regard  1  second  as  the  equivalent  of  300,000 
kilometres  and  measure  lengths  or  ‘times’  in  seconds  or  kilometres  indis¬ 
criminately. 

Let  us  imagine  a  scale  graduated  in  kilometres,  and  clocks  whose  faces 
are  also  graduated  in  kilometres  (1/300,000  of  a  second).  If  the  clocks  are 
set  correctly  and  we  look  at  them  from  A  the  sum  of  the  reading  of  any  clock 
and  the  scale  division  beside  it  is  one  for  all  because  the  scale  reading  gives 
the  correction  for  the  ‘time’  taken  by  light,  travelling  with  unit  velocity,  to 
reach  A. 

If  we  lay  the  scale  in  line  with  the  two  events  and  note  the  clock  and  scale 
readings,  h  and  *i,  of  the  first  event,  and  the  corresponding  readings,  t%  and  x2t 
of  the  second  event,  then  s2  —  (h—h)2  —  (*a  —#i)2  where  5  represents  the  interval 
mentioned  above. 

If  we  set  the  scale  moving  in  the  direction  AB  then  the  divisions  would 
have  advanced  to  meet  the  second  event  and  the  difference  (x2  “*i)  would  be 
smaller.  But  this  is  compensatedy  because  (t2  —h)  also  becomes  altered.  When  A 
is  advancing  to  meet  the  light  coming  from  any  of  the  clocks  on  the  scale  the 
light  arrives  too  quickly,  and  the  reading  of  the  clock  appears  smaller. 

The  net  result  is,  roughly,  that  it  does  not  matter  what  uniform  motion 
is  given  to  the  scale,  the  final  results  for  the  interval  5  are  always  equal.3 

We  can  now  understand  the  vital  importance  of  the  minus  sign  with  the 
‘time’  co-ordinate.  In  fact,  if  in  our  equations  all  the  signs  were  plus,  using 
the  ‘space’  and  ‘time’  of  one  observer,  one  value  of  5  would  be  obtained;  but 
using  the  ‘space*  and  ‘time’  of  another  observer,  a  different  value  would  be 
obtained.  With  the  minus  sign  for  the  ‘time’  co-ordinate,  we  see  that  we  can 
have  values  of  s  which  are  equal  for  all  observers.  If  the  distances  increase, 
the  ‘time*  element  increases  also,  and  so  the  difference  may  not  be  changed, 
but  with  the  positive  sign  this  would  not  be  the  case. 

We  see  that  the  interval  5  represents  something  which  concerns  only  the 
events  under  consideration.  The  corresponding  entity  in  ordinary  geometry 
is  distance ,  which  is  independent  of  the  accidental  choice  of  co-ordinates.  The 
minus  sign  makes  the  geometry  of  space-time  non-euclidean. 

To  familiarize  ourselves  with  what  has  been  already  explained  about 
simultaneity  and  the  geometry  of  space-time,  we  will  work  it  out  once  more, 
but  now  by  the  Minkowski  method. 

It  will  be  enough  to  use  two  dimensions,  one  represented  on  the  X  axis, 
the  other  on  the  T  axis.  Let  us  consider  three  points  A,  B,  C,  at  rest  in  our 
system  O  on  the  X  axis  (Fig.  2).  In  our  space-time  they  will  be  represented 
by  three  parallels  to  the  T  axis.  Let  C  be  midway  between  A  and  B  so  that 
AC  =  CB.  Let  us  assume  that  light  signals  are  sent  in  both  directions  from  C 
at  the  moment  t  =0.  We  assume  that  the  system  is  ‘at  rest’,  which  means  that 

670  IX.  ON  EMPIRICAL  AND  VERBAL  STRUCTURES 

the  light  signals  propagate  themselves  to  the  right  and  to  the  left  with  equal 
velocities.  Hence  we  can  represent  them  by  straight  lines  equally  inclined 
t°  the  X  axis.  These  lines  are  called  light-lines’. 

T 

Fig.  2 

The  points  A',  B'  which  are  the  inter¬ 
section  of  the  ‘world-lines'  of  the  points  A 
and  B  with  the  light-lines-give  us  the  ‘times’ 
at  which  the  signals  arrive.  It  follows  from 
the  drawing  that  A*Bf  is  parallel  to  the  X 
axis,  which  means  that  A'  and  B'  are  ‘simul¬ 
taneous’  (equal  ‘times’). 

Let  us  now  take  another  case  in  which 
our  points  A ,  B,  C,  move  uniformly  with  an 

...  ,  .  eQual  velocity  (Fig.  3).  Their  world-lines 

will  also  be  parallel  to  each  other  but  inclined  to  the  axis.  In  the  drawing  the 
light-lines  will  be  represented  by  similar  lines  but  their  intersections  with  the 
world-lines  of  A  and  B  will  not  be  on  a  parallel  to  the  X  axis,  and  so  they  will 
not  be  simultaneous. 

We  should  notice  that  an  observer 
who  moved  with  the  system  in  the  direc¬ 
tion  OX*  would  be  perfectly  entitled  to 
claim  that  A'  and  B'  are  simultaneous  to 
him.  His  co-ordinate  system  would  be 
OXfT't  in  which  the  points  A'  and  W 
are  on  a  parallel  to  his  X '  axis  as  he  is  at 
test  in  his  system  OXfT* .  The  world¬ 
lines  A,  B,  C,  are  parallel  to  the  V  axis 
because  the  points  are  supposed  to  be  at 
rest  in  this  system  and  hence  the  x’s 

have  equal  values  for  all  *’s. 

An  important  point  should  be  noticed;  namely,  that  we  have  only  one 
space-time  and  that  the  indefinitely  numerous  ways  different  observers  par- 
fabon  their  ‘space’  and  ‘time’  represent  merely  the  indefinitely  many  ways  in 
which  it  can  be  partitioned.  If  we  keep  the  whole  of  it  under  consideration  we 
see  that  we  cannot  divide  it  into  ‘space’  and  ‘time’,  as  any  subdivision  has  both 
aspects.4 

The  Minkowski  method  of  representation  makes  the  change  in  our  measure¬ 
ments  of  length,  as  given  by  the  Lorentz-Einstein  transformation,  very  obvious. 

A  measuring  rod  is  not  purely  a  ‘spatial’  configuration,  as  in  the  actual 
world  such  a  thing  does  not  exist,  but  it  is  a  space-time  configuration. 

Every  point  of  the  rod  exists  at  each  moment  of  ‘time’.  We  see  that  in 
space-time  we  cannot  represent  our  rod  as  a  segment  on  the  X  axis  but  must 
represent  it  structurally  as  a  strip  in  the  XT  plane.  We  assume  here  for  sim- 
plicity  that  the  rod  is  one-dimensional  (Fig.  4). 

_  ^  r<^|  is  at  rest  in  a  system  is  represented  by  a  strip  parallel  to  the 

T  axis.  If  it  is  moving,  its  strip  is  inclined  to  the  Taxis.  The  ‘contraction’  does 

ON  THE  ‘WORLD’  OF  MINKOWSKI 

not  affect  the  strip  at  all  but  it  is  rather  a  section  cut  out  of  the  X  axis.  In 
actual  experience,  it  is  only  the  strip  as  a  manifold  of  world  points  which  has 
physical  reality,  and  not  the  cross  sections,  which,  as  we  see,  are  not  equal  on 
different  axes.  The  ‘contraction’  is  not  a 
change  in  ‘physical  reality’  but  merely  a  con¬ 
sequence  of  our  way  of  regarding  things.  We 
see  that  the  notorious  argument  as  to  whether 
the  ‘contraction’  is  ‘real’  or  ‘apparent  is 
based  on  a  misunderstanding.  Born  gives  an 
excellent  example.  If  we  slice  a  cucumber  in 
different  directions  it  is  fallacious  to  argue 
that  the  smallest  slice  which  is  perpendicular 
to  the  axis  is  the  ‘real’  one  and  the  larger 
oblique  slices  only  ‘apparent’.  Similarly  in 
the  Einstein  theory,  a  rod  has  various  lengths 

according  to  the  motion  of  the  observer.  ( 

One  of  these  lengths,  the  static  length,  is  the  greatest,  but  it  is  no  more  real 
than  any  other.  Similar  remarks  can  be  made  about  ‘time’. 

Attention  should  be  given  to  one  extremely  important  semantic  point 
concerning  the  Minkowski  four-dimensional  world.  We  already  know  that  for 
our  nervous  systems  the  passing  from  dynamic  to  static,  and  vice  versa,  is  a 
most  vital  structural  problem.  The  first  step  of  this  translation  has  already 
been  given  in  the  notion  of  the  ‘variable’.  The  calculus  earned  it  a  step  further. 
In  the  Minkowski  world  we  reach  the  complete  solution  of  the  problem. 

As  Keyser  points  out  in  his  Mathematical  Philosophy ,  we  had  two  verbal 
methods  of  dealing  with  ‘time’.  One  was  the  method  of  Newton,  the  method 
of  the  structural  importation  of  ‘time’.  From  the  objective  dynamic  world  of 
the  lower  order  abstractions,  ‘time’  is  imported  into  the  static  world  of  the 
higher  order  abstractions.  We  import  it  with  ‘motion’,  we  say  things  ‘move  . 
Such  language  is  structurally  unsatisfactory,  even  on  the  earlier  level  of  our 
development.  It  hampers  analysis,  and  is  contrary  to  the  structure  and  function 
of  the  human  nervous  system.  It  breeds  tremendous  metaphysical  impasses, 
and  is  ultimately  based  on  semantic  disturbances  due  to  identification. 

If  we  introduce  dynamic,  shifting  entities  into  static  higher  order  abstrac¬ 
tions,  rationality  is  impossible  and  we  drift  toward  mysticism.  . 

A  very  real  semantic  problem  appears  here.  We  want  to  give  the  best 
possible  account  of  the  structurally  dynamic  world  around  us;  yet  our  higher 
order  abstractions  are  structurally  static ,  and  for  their  proper  working  they 
must  use  static  means.  Here  seemed  to  be  an  impasse  which  for  milleniums 
had  defied  solution.  ‘Philosophers’  of  different  schools  were  preaching  and 
teaching  that  we  should  never  be  able  to  be  ‘rational’  and  understand  this 
world  and  ourselves.  Anti-intellectual  schools  began  to  flourish,  to  the  be¬ 
wilderment  of  all.  , 

The  issue,  after  all,  was  simple,  the  moment  some  one  discovered  and 
stated  it.  We  did  not  need  to  change  either  the  world  around  us  or  ourselves; 

672  IX.  ON  EMPIRICAL  AND  VERBAL  STRUCTURES 

we  simply  had  to  discover  a  structurally  new  method  of  dealing  with  the  old 
problems  without  changing  them. 

The  new  method  is  given  by  Einstein  and  Minkowski.  Instead  of  making 
the  static  world  of  higher  order  abstractions  dynamic,  which  cannot  be  done 
at  all  without  producing  semantic  disturbances,  they  invented  structural 
methods  for  dealing  with  the  dynamic  world  by  static  means.  The  key  was 
found  in  the  handling  of  the  troublesome  factor,  ‘time’.  Minkowski  decided  to 
put  ‘time’  in  its  proper  place  by  introducing  the  structurally  new  four-dimen¬ 
sional  world. 

In  the  case  of  particle  P,  we  habitually  used  to  say  that  the  point  P  at 
an  instant  t  was  at  a  ‘space’  point  ( x ,  y,  s).  At  the  instant  t*  it  was  at  the  point 
(*',  y',  s')  , .  We  always  needed  four  numbers,  which  gave  us  the  where  and 
when  in  respect  to  some  frame  of  reference. 

As  we  have  seen,  Minkowski  decided  to  look  structurally  at  this  tetrad 
of  four  numbers  (x,  y,  z,  t)  ‘as-a-whole’.  In  other  words,  he  placed  himself  on 
a  higher  level  of  abstraction.  He  took  under  consideration  the  older  results, 
combined  them,  and  called  the  combination  by  one  single  name,  the  ‘world 
point’.  Such  a  world  point  has  also  four  numbers  (not  3  plus  1,  but  just  4). 
A  world  made  up  of  such  points  is  a  four-dimensional  world  in  which  all  the 
points  co-exist.  The  flux  of  the  lower  order  abstractions  and  ‘time’  is  abolished. 
There  is  no  more  ‘motion’  in  a  ‘flow  of  time’.  In  such  a  world  the  term  ‘where’ 
has  completer  structural  meanings,  it  has  absorbed  the  when.  If  we  ask,  where 
in  such  a  world  the  particle  P  is,  we  answer,  at  the  point  (x,  y,  zf  /).  Where  h 
the  particle  P'?  At  the  point  (*',  y',  /,  *'). 

We  see  that  the  particles  of  such  a  world  are  never  'the  same ’ ;  they  do  not 
‘change*  or  ‘pass’;  they  co-exist,  and  all  is  static .  In  this  way  the  three-dimen¬ 
sional  dynamics  become  four-dimensional  statics. 

It  should  be  noticed  that  we  are  now  dealing  with  a  language  of  new  struc¬ 
ture,  uniquely  befitting  the  structure  and  function  of  our  nervous  system.  Of 
course  we  have  altered  nothing  in  the  world  around  us.  The  example  of  the 
moving  picture  and  the  static  film  as  given  before  is  an  excellent  example 
of  this  structural  innovation. 

The  fact  that  in  this  new  world  nothing  repeats  itself  because  it  has  a 
different  date,  unless  the  time-lines  are  closed,  has  very  far-reaching  conse¬ 
quences,  of  which  we  have  already  spoken  and  which  we  will  analyse  in  more 
detail  later  on. 

CHAPTER  XXXIX 

GENERAL  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE  EINSTEIN  THEORY 

For,  beyond  the  bounds  of  science,  too,  objective  and  relative  reflection 
is  a  gain,  a  release  from  prejudice,  a  liberation  of  the  spint  from  standards 
whose  claim  to  absolute  validity  melts  away  before  the  critical  judgment 
of  the  relativist.  (45)  MAX  B0RN 

It  is  extremely  instructive  to  follow  the  elements  of  identification  as  they 
appear  in  the  evolution  of  the  Einstein  theory. 

We  know  that  the  results  of  the  Michelson  experiment  which  disclosed  that 
light  is  propagated  in  all  directions  with  equal  velocities  for  all  observers, 
irrespective  of  their  relative  velocities,  could  not  be  reconciled  with  the  older 
mechanics.  These  results  disturbed  the  physicists  profoundly  and  attempts 
were  made  to  solve  this  apparent  impasse.  In  what  follows  we  shall  have  to 
analyse  incidentally  the  activities  of  some  of  our  great  scientists,  men  who 
have  added  enormously  to  our  knowledge,  and  this  fact  should  be  appreciated. 
What  we  have  to  say  is  not  intended  as  criticism— far  from  it— but  simply  as  a 
structural  and  a  semantic  analysis. 

The  feeling  that  we  objectify  unduly  and  that  we  should  not  use  a  language 
of  ‘is*  of  identity,  but  that  we  should  use  an  actional,  behaviouristic,  functional, 
operational  language  and  methods,  is  not  new  in  science,  although  the  need 
was  not  formulated  structurally,  it  is  true,  and  therefore  it  never  became  a 
workable  foundation.  The  main  successes  in  these  fields  were  rather  accidental, 
and  were  the  personal  prerogatives  of  those  few  men  whose  psycho-logical 
make-up  urged  them  to  achieve.  Objectification,  which  as  we  know,  is  a  se¬ 
mantic  ascribing  of  objective  existence  and  values  to  terms,  was  bound  to  make 
its  appearance  somewhere. 

This  struggle  against  identification  is  apparent  in  all  science,  but  it  will 
suffice  to  point  out  the  most  striking  example  in  the  relation  of  the  works  of 
Lorentz  and  Einstein.  Lorentz  objectified,  Einstein  did  not.  We  here  come 
across  a  tremendous  semantic  fact  which  has  to  do  with  the  interpretation  of 
mathematical  formulae.  Lorentz  on  elaborate  and  difficult  grounds,  connected 
with  Maxwell’s  field  equations,  produced  what  is  usually  called  the  Lorentz 
transformation.  He  gave  it  an  objectified  interpretation.  Einstein  introduced 
an  entirely  different  fundamental  interpretation  of  the  structural  principle  in¬ 
volved.  The  formulae  look  alike  but  they  now  have  different  and  very  simple 
meanings. 

Hertz,  whose  epoch-making  discoveries  made  wireless  possible,  advocated 
long  ago  what  is  termed  the  phenomenological  point  of  view,  which  in  our 
language  is  approximately  the  actional,  behaviouristic,  operational,  functional 
language  and  method.  In  his  writings  he  implicitly  refused  to  use  the  vicious 

674  IX.  ON  EMPIRICAL  AND  VERBAL  STRUCTURES 

term  ‘is’  of  ‘identity’,  and  so  to  objectify  his  terms,  which  refusal  in  picturesque 
language  he  expressed  as  a  refusal  to  legislate  about  ‘essences’. 

The  old  E  and  N  language  of  ‘absolute  space’  and  ‘absolute  emptiness’ 
were  for  a  long  while  structurally  unsatisfactory.  Physicists  felt  that  somehow 
they  could  not  deal  with  it,  but  it  never  occurred  to  them  that  this  ‘absolute 
nothingness’  is  objectively  meaningless,  and  that  therefore  no  one  can  possibly 
deal  with  it.  Not  knowing  that,  they  politely  called  this  non-sense  a  ‘meta¬ 
physical  question’  and  evaded  issues  by  leaving  the  solution  in  the  hands  of 
‘philosophers’,  never  to  be  solved. 

By  now  I  hope  that  the  reader  is  quite  aware  that  meaningless  problems 
cannot  be  solved  by  any  one,  and  that  there  are  no  such  things  as  meto-physical 
questions.  There  may,  however,  be  a  question  about  enlarging  the  domain  of 
physics. 

Being  forced  to  abandon  this  ‘absolute  emptiness’,  physicists  went  to  the 
other  extreme  and  postulated  some  kind  of  ‘material’  ether.  Let  us  note  that 
such  a  postulate  involves  structurally  the  ‘is’  of  identity  and  objectification. 
Lorentz  in  opposition  to  Hertz  postulated  an  ‘ether’  which  was  ‘motionless’  in 
‘absolute  space’.  Note  that  here  we  have  a  perfect  example  of  structural  ob¬ 
jectification  of  terms.  ‘Absolute  space’  is  for  him  semantically  some  kind  of 
‘absolute  emptiness’,  which,  not  being  satisfactory  for  the  physicist,  is  filled 
with  some  ‘material’,  ‘motionless’  ether.  ‘Motionless’  is  itself  an  objectification 
of  language,  as  such  a  term  has  here  no  physical  or  objective  meanings  at  all. 

In  pursuing  the  speculations  on  objectified  terms  (semantic  disturbances) 
it  was  natural  to  expect,  as  the  earth  is  not  at  rest  with  respect  to  the  sun,  the 
other  planets  .  ,  that  some  ‘ether  wind’  or  ‘ether  drift’  should  appear  which 
would  make  the  constant  velocity  of  light  impossible  for  observers  moving 
with  different  relative  velocities.  But  these  structural  expectations  were  not 
fulfilled.  The  velocity  of  light,  as  shown  by  many  experiments,  was  a  constant 
for  all  observers.  The  ‘motionless  material  ether’  also  became  structurally 
impossible,  as  might  be  expected,  if  we  stop  objectifying  terms. 

In  1892  FitzGerald  suggested  an  objectified  theory,  assuming  ‘absolute’ 
‘length’  and  ‘time’  superior  to  measurement ,  which  involve  identification  and 
do  not  allow  the  use  of  the  actional,  behaviouristic,  operational,  functional 
attitudes,  language,  and  methods.  FitzGerald  assumed  that  every  body  ‘moving’ 
with  the  velocity  v  in  the  ‘ether’  is  shortened  in  the  direction  of  motion.  It 
should  be  noted  that  every  mention  of  ‘shortening’  or  ‘contraction’,  presupposes 
some  ‘ absolute '  standards  of  ‘rest’  or  ‘motion’  or  ‘length’,  which  do  not,  and 
cannot,  exist  outside  of  our  skin,  but  are  only  semantic  disturbances,  inside 
our  skin,  which  occur  when  we  identify  and  ascribe  objective  existence  and  value 
to  terms. 

How  deeply  and  completely  these  objectifications  permeate  our  daily  and 
scientific  lives  is  best  shown  again  in  the  case  of  Lorentz.  Even  in  1917,  in  his 
Haarlem  lectures,  he  expressed  structural  hopes  that  a  ‘material’,  ‘substantial’ 
ether  can  be  preserved,  that  ‘space’  and  ‘time’  can  be  sharply  separated,  and 
that  ‘simultaneity’  can  have  an  absolute  meaning. 

REFLECTIONS  ON  THE  EINSTEIN  THEORY  675 

In  the  Theory  of  Relativity  of  Whitehead,  and  in  Borne  others  writers  who 
deal  with  the  theory  of  Einstein,  and  particularly  in  all  critics  of  Einstein,  we 

find  a  similar  objectification  of  terms. 

They  still  feel  the  older  E  and  JV  ‘absolute  emptiness’,  ‘absolute  space , 
‘absolute  time’,  to  which  terms  they  ascribe  structural  objectivity.  In  such  works 
the  term  ‘contraction'  is  used  frequently. 

Let  me  recall  the  mechanism  of  objectification.  If  we  do  not  reject  ex- 
plicitly  and  implicitly  the  ‘is’  of  identity,  we  automatically  identify  different 
orders  of  abstractions  and  ascribe  objective  characteristics  to  terms.  Thus  the 
term  ‘time’  which  represents  a  label  for  a  feeling  inside  our  skin,  is  given  an 
objective  evaluation.  If  ‘objective’  it  must  have  a  ‘property’  of  ‘simultaneity’, 
a  semantic  process  taken  over  from  comparing  two  objective  sticks  when  the 
two  ends  are  made  to  coincide.  On  the  objective  external  level,  we  never  deal 
with  ‘time’  but  we  simply  compare  processes.  When  we  select  an  arbitrary  unit- 
process  on  the  objective  level,  whatever  we  might  say  that  it  ‘is’,  well,  it ts  not, 
and  the  difficulty  is  found  exclusively  in  the  use  of  the  ‘is’  of  identity. 

If  we  abandon  entirely  the  ‘is’  of  identity,  we  stop  objectification,  we  do 
not  ascribe  objective  existence  and  values  outside  our  skin,  to  terms  and  semantic 
reactions  inside  our  skin.  But  then  of  course  we  have  to  change  the  structure  of 
our  language;  as  otherwise  the  old  s.r  will  continue  to  play  tricks  on  us.  An 
actional,  operational,  functional  language  of  order  is  the  structural  solution  of 

our  semantic  difficulty.  .  t  u 

If  we  objectify  ‘space*  into  ‘absolute  space',  we  must  objectify  it  as  ab¬ 
solute  emptiness'  for  only  such  an  ‘absolute  space’  can  be  at  ‘absolute  rest , 
that  is,  static  in  the  E  or  JV  sense.  Similarly  only  objectified  ‘time’  can  have 
the  ‘property’  of  ‘absolute  simultaneity’.  .  . 

If  we  realize  that  these  ‘absolutes’  are  only  the  semantic  objectifications  of 
terms,  (where  the  activities  of  the  lower  nerve  centres  are  structurally  ascribed 
to  the  activities  of  the  higher  nerve  centres  and  vice  versa),  we  begin  to  dif¬ 
ferentiate  between  different  order  abstractions,  and  to  keep  them  differentiated. 
In  terms  of  our  structurally  new  language  we  become  ‘conscious  of  abstracting  , 
and  then  habitually  and  unconsciously  use  the  behaviouristic  language  and 

methods  of  order.  ,  ,  , 

If  we  picture  this  ‘absolute  emptiness’  or  ‘absolute  nothingness  (which 
cannot  be  done  successfully,  as  it  has  no  meaning),  and  try  to  compare  it  with 
a  plenum,  or  ‘fulness’  (a  cloud  of  smoke,  for  instance),  we  see  at  once  that  only 
this  ‘absolute  emptiness’  can  be  static,  homogeneous .  ,  a  condition  that  is 

impossible  with  a  dynamic  fulness.  ....  , 

Perhaps  we  can  now  appreciate  the  tremendous  semantic  significance  of 
the  Einstein  theory,  which  introduces  structurally  a  non-objectified ,  human, 
sane  attitude  of  proper  evaluation  toward  this  world.  We  should  not  be  sur- 
prised  to  find  that  a  A -system  which  is  an  inevitable  general  structural  con¬ 
comitant  of  the  E  and  N  systems  of  geometry  and  physics  should  formulate  as 
a  general  structural  and  semantic  issue  what  the  E  and  N  systems  have  done  in 
their  special  fields,  without  such  general  formulation. 

676  IX.  ON  EMPIRICAL  AND  VERBAL  STRUCTURES 

From  our  structural  point  of  view  there  is  no  retreat;  the  Einstein  work  is 
irreversible.  In  the  younger  scientists  of  today  the  non-objectified  attitude 
toward  terms  of  ‘space’  and  ‘time’  is  already  an  accomplished  semantic  fact, 
entirely  independent  of  what  future  experiments  may  show.  For  experiments 
can  never  justify  identification,  and  so  can  have  no  detrimental  effect  upon 
this  fundamental  and  most  beneficial  structural,  linguistic,  and  semantic  revo¬ 
lution.  Our  A  task  was  to  formulate  these  issues  in  general  so  as  to  make  us 
conscious  of  them;  and  I  assume  that  it  is  at  this  semantic  point  that  the  tre¬ 
mendous  value  of  Einstein’s  work  will  manifest  itself  in  life.  Indeed  we  shall 
see  later  on  in  this  volume  that  the  newer  quantum  mechanics,  which  have 
begun  to  spring  up  rather  rapidly,  is  made  possible  only  by  the  semantic  back¬ 
ground  imparted  unconsciously  (as  yet)  to  younger  physicists  by  the  Einstein 
theory.  It  is  my  hope  that  the  present  work  may  make  the  above  issues  con - 
scions ,  and  so  enable  us  not  only  to  impart  this  semantic  attitude  more  easily 
and  with  less  labour  but  also  to  benefit  by  them  more  universally  in  our  daily 
life .  The  problems  of  science  and  life  do  not  differ  in  this  respect.  In  both  we 
are  equally  hampered  by  semantic  disturbances,  ‘emotional  stupors',  identifi¬ 
cation,  and  similar  difficulties,  the  elimination  of  which  means  better  adjust¬ 
ment  for  all  of  us,  as  well  as  swifter  progress  in  science. 

A  study  of  the  history  of  science  shows  how  slow  and  painful  scientific 
progress  has  been.  Now  we  begin  to  see  why.  ‘Geniuses’,  as  history  shows,  are 
men  who  at  least  in  some  fields  are  freer  from  identification  and  false  evaluation 
than  others.  They  are  not  hampered  to  a  similar  extent  by  ‘emotional  stupor' j 
hence  they  can  evaluate  the  old  anew.  Lorentz,  for  instance,  produced  the 
formulae,  but  his  objectifications  prevented  him  from  evaluating  properly  the 
new  formulae.  As  a  fact  of  history  the  formulae  of  Lorentz  were  discovered  by 
Voigt  a  number  of  years  before,  but  identification  made  impossible  the  evalu¬ 
ation  of  these  formulae,  and  so  delayed  the  discovery  of  the  Einstein  theory. 
This  factor  of  identification  can  be  found  all  through  recorded  history  as  a 
retarding  semantic  blockage. 

If  we  could  find  methods  of  eliminating  these  semantic  disturbances,  an 
extremely  hampering,  paralysing  psycho-logical  factor  would  be  eliminated, 
and  ‘geniuses'  could  be  made  the  rule  rather  than  the  exception.  Let  me  say 
again:  in  the  old  days  morons  were  made  and  geniuses  were  born;  in  the  new 
days,  perhaps,  this  can  be  reversed,  and  morons  will  be  born  but  geniuses  made. 
We  witness  something  of  this  kind  among  the  younger  post-einsteinian  physicists, 
where  the  number  of  ‘geniuses’  is  growing  rapidly,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  the 
above  structural  issues  are  not  as  yet  consciously  applied  in  general  education. 
The  secret  of  creative  work  is  freedom  from  structural  bondage,  and  particu¬ 
larly  the  structural  semantic  bondage  of  words. 

The  reader  should  not  assume  that  the  few  simple  structural  explanations 
given  in  this  book  exhaust  the  Einstein  theory.  I  have  not  even  attempted  to 
summarize  the  theory;  I  have  only  given  a  few  semantic  facts,  which  belong  to 
general  semantics  and  to  the  theory  of  knowledge.  The  Einstein  theory  is 

REFLECTIONS  ON  THE  EINSTEIN  THEORY  677 

indeed  such  a  tremendous  structural  linguistic  achievement  that  quite  probably 
its  full  semantic  significance  and  meanings  will  not  be  worked  out  for  many 
years  to  come.  We  have  given  here  only  the  minimum  of  explanation  necessary 
for  our  special  purpose. 

The  historical  development  of  a  theory  has  usually  little  to  do  with  the 
semantic  importance  of  the  theory  or  its  deeper  meanings.  The  constancy  of 
the  velocity  of  light  for  all  observers,  which  started  the  ball  rolling,  was  an  his- 
torical  beginning  and  it  served  its  purpose  well,  though  the  objectified  contrac¬ 
tions’  and  formulae  of  FitzGerald  and  Lorentz  also  did  their  share,  as  they 
helped  Einstein  and  Minkowski  to  produce  their  epoch-making  structural 
challenge  to  old  prejudices  such  as  'absolute  space’  and  'absolute  time’,  which 
were  semantic  remains  of  a  primitive,  perhaps  pre-human,  remote  past.  Once 
this  is  accomplished,  no  matter  how,  there  is  no  return  possible.  Of  physical 
structural  facts,  all  that  we  need  is  the  finite  velocity  of  the  propagation  of 
events,*  which  as  we  already  know  involves  far-reaching  structural  and  semantic 
issues.  Of  the  psycho-logical  issues  involved,  we  need  only  to  eliminate  semantic 
disturbances  which  still  occur  when  we  copy  animals  in  our  nervous  processes 
and  do  not  discriminate  between  different  orders  of  abstractions— which  animals 
do  not  recognize.  This  elimination  can  be  done  by  training  in  the  A  methods 
explained  before,  with  the  net  result  that  we  become  'conscious  of  abstracting’ 
on  different  levels  and  so  can  instinctively  and  by  feeling  discriminate  habitually 
between  orders  of  abstractions,  which  structurally  and  semantically  could  not 
be  done  by  the  old  disciplines. 

The  theory  of  Einstein  has  manifold  applications  but  we  need  only  mention 
a  few,  which  we  shall  utilize  later  on. 

First,  and  above  all,  there  are  no  possible  ‘absolute’  meanings  to  'space 
and  'time’,  beyond  the  relations  established  by  measurements.  The  structure 
of  our  language  involving  ‘space’  and  ‘time’  should  be  similar  to  the  structure 
of  experimental  facts,  which  ultimately  show  the  impossibility  of  sharply 

dividing  them.  .  .  . 

If  any  one  challenges  this  statement,  he  could  not  a  priori  be  criticized. 
Such  criticism  would  be  entirely  against  the  whole  tendency  of  the  present 
work.  But  such  a  person  might  be  approached  with  no  little  curiosity  and 
expectation.  He  could  be  asked:  ‘You  claim  that  you  can  absolutely  divide 

♦‘But,’  some  reader  may  ask,  ‘though  you  assume  a  finite  velocity  of  Pr°Pa£a' 
tion,  may  it  not  happen  that  some  day  an  “infinite  velocity  will  be  discovered. 

Such  a  question  would  show  that  the  reader  has  missed  the  point  m  the  pres¬ 
ent  work.  We  are  confident  in  saying  that  an  ‘infinite  velocity  has  no  meaning,  and 
that  no  matter  what  we  discover,  this  will  never  be  discovered.  This  becomes  still 
clearer  if  we  use  the  differential  definition  of  'velocity.  Velocity  is  defined  as  the 
‘time’  derivative  of  ‘space’  travelled.  If  W  is  taken  as  zero,  or  if  we  have  no 
time’,  there  can  be  no  ‘time  derivative  by  our  very  assumption,  and,  ther«°^> 
‘velocity’.  There  is,  therefore,  no  danger  that  we  shall  ever  discover  m  the  actual 
world  an  ‘infinite’  velocity. 

678  IX.  ON  EMPIRICAL  AND  VERBAL  STRUCTURES 

space  and  time  on  the  objective  level.  That  would  be  an  epoch-making 
structural  discovery.  Please  demonstrate  How  to  do  it' 

The  fact  is,  of  course,  that  he  cannot  demonstrate  the  process,  because  he 
refers  to  identifications  inside  his  skin;  yet  he  is  claiming  to  be  able  to  show  it 
objectively  outside  his  skin.  That  ends  this  problem. 

While  speaking  of  Einstein’s  Theory,  it  will  be  well  to  mention  a  few  of  the 
many  structural  differences  between  the  older  newtonian  and  the  new  einsteinian 
mechanics. 

In  the  iV-system,  relative  velocities  were  simply  added  WN=v+v\  In  the 
einsteinian  system  which  we  will  denote  by  N,  it  is  not  so  structurally  simple. 
We  must  introduce  the  finite  velocity  of  propagation  of  our  signals,  which  alone 
give  us  the  data,  and  so 

v+v’ 

1  H-w'/c2 

The  above  formula  involves  the  remarkable  constant,  c,  the  velocity  of 
light.  If  we  assume  in  the  above  formula  that  our  velocity  vf  is  equal  to  the 
velocity  of  light,  c,  we  would  have 

W--  r+c  _  **+£ 

N  1+vc/c2  1+v/c 

This  means  that  the  addition  of  some  velocity  to  the  velocity  of  light  does  not 
alter  the  velocity  of  light,  which  thus  appears  as  a  limiting  velocity. 

This  applies  to  the  difference  of  velocities  where 

Wi 

v—v 

1  —w'/c2 

Let  us  here  give  an  example  of  Eddington’s.  Let  us  assume  two  relative  veloci¬ 
ties  each  differing  by  only  1  km./sec.  from  the  velocity  of  light.  Let  us  say  that 
one  is  299,999  km./sec.  and  the  other  300,001  km. /sec.  Now  let  us  calculate  the 
relative  velocity.  This  relative  velocity  will  be  found  to  be  180,000,000,000 
km./sec.  For  in  our  formula  v—  r'  =  (c+l)  —  (c  —  1)  —2,  and 

(1  -  w'/c*)  - 1  - (- +1)  /~1}  =  1  - 1  - 1  +  l/e*  =  \/c\ 

whence  W$  -  —  =  2c2  =  2  X  300, 000  X  300,000  =  180,000,000,000. 

We  see  that  a  particle  which  might  try  to  overtake  light  by  having  a  velocity 
of  one  km./ sec.  greater  than  the  velocity  of  light  could  never  succeed.  When  the 
velocity  299,000,  for  example,  was  reached,  the  particle  would  find  itself  further 
away  from  its  goal  than  when  it  started.1 

Similar  general  considerations  apply  to  mass.  If  we  designate  the  mass  of 
a  particle  at  rest  by  wq  its  mass  in  motion 

ge  jcii 

mjj 

1  -i ?/c2 

As  the  denominator  is  smaller  than  unity  the  mass  in  motion,  m&  is  larger 
than  wo,  the  mass  at  rest.  In  the  limiting  case,  when  the  velocity  would  become 
equal  to  c  the  denominator  would  become  zero  and  our  mass  would  tend 

REFLECTIONS  ON  THE  EINSTEIN  THEORY  679 

toward  infinite  values,  which  is  another  way  of  saying  that  it  is  physically 

impossible.  „  ,  . 

In  the  iV-system  we  had  two  kinds  of  energy;  one  was  called  ms  viva,  or 
kinetic  energy,  and  was  represented  by  T  =mv2/2 ;  the  other  was  called  potential 
energy,  or  capacity  for  work,  and  was  denoted  by  Z7.  The  law  of  conservation 
of  energy  in  the  N- system  was  expressed  by  the  statement  that  the  sum, 
T+U =E,  or  the  total  mechanical  energy  of  a  system  remains  constant  (zero 

variation)  during  the  motion  of  the  body. 

We  see  that  as  the  above  formula  involves  the  terms  m  and  v,  the  older 
formulae  for  energy  must  be  altered,  especially  since  they  do  not  survive  a 
Lorentz-Einstein  transformation.  It  is  found  that 

2>-c8  or  w=Wo  +  7>/c2, 

which  formula  appears  rigorous  as  a  definition  of  kinetic  energy  even  if  members 
of  order  higher  than  the  second  are  taken  into  account.  In  words,  the  mass  in 
motion  differs  from  mass  at  rest  by  the  kinetic  energy  divided  by  the  square 

of  the  velocity  of  light.  *••11 

This  expression  suggests  immediately  that  the  static  mass,  m,  is  similarly 
related  to  the  energy  content  in  the  body  at  rest.  Generalizing  our  results  we 
would  have  nt  =E/ct,  an  equation  which  holds  generally  between  mass  and 
energy.  This  fact  has  been  called  by  Einstein  the  law  of  the  inertia  of  energy. 
It  has  been  verified  repeatedly  by  experiments,  and  is  one  of  the  most  striking 
structural  results  of  Einstein’s  theory.  The  above  statement  means  that  the 
two  fundamental  notions  of  ‘mass’  and  ‘energy’  are  equivalent  and  thus  we 
have  a  clearer  vision  of  the  structure  of  ‘matter’.  The  two  older  structural  laws 
of  ‘conservation  of  matter’  and  of  ‘conservation  of  energy’  become  fused  into 
one.  Mass  becomes  structurally  and  verbally  nothing  else  than  energy  con¬ 
centrated  at  a  point,  and  it  appears  as  a  form  of  energy  manifestation. 

The  above  considerations  have  also  led  to  a  revision  of  our  structural 
notions  about  ‘energy’  which  we  do  not  need  to  explain  here.  Suffice  it  to  say 
that  the  old  ‘potential’  energy  is  not  associated  structurally  any  longer  with 
any  features  of  this  world.  It  can  be  made  to  vanish  by  a  proper  selection  of 
co-ordinates,  hence  it  is  no  longer  considered  as  energy  of  any  kind. 

With  the  Minkowski  world  we  became  acquainted  with  a  new  language 
which  represents  structurally  more  nearly  the  facts  of  experience  (lower  or  er 
abstractions)  and  shares  the  structure  of  our  higher  order  of  abstractions,  bo 
we  have  the  language  of  ‘space-time’.  How  about  ’matter’?  The  bumping 
against  something  hard  is  not  to  be  disregarded.  True,  we  need,  a  language  of 
new  structure,  but  that  is  all.  In  the  Einstein  theory,  ‘matter’  of  course  is  not 
treated  separately  as  such.  It  is  an  offspring  of  the  field,  and  is  connected  wit 
the  curvature  of  the  world.  The  reader  should  not  be  surprised  to  find  that  the 
Minkowski  world,  which  has  accelerations,  must  be  curved  in  this  structural  y 

new  form  of  representation.  .  .  ,  .  T 

We  have  already  defined  a  most  fundamental  entity  called  action  .  Natur- 
ally  in  a  space-time  manifold,  energy  multiplied  by  ‘time’  should  be  a  more 
fundamental  entity  than  energy,  and  we  call  it  ‘action’.  When  we  speak  about 

680  IX.  ON  EMPIRICAL  AND  VERBAL  STRUCTURES 

some  continuous  material  present  in  ‘space’  and  ‘time’  we  speak  in  terms  of 
density.  Density  multiplied  by  a  three-dimensional  volume  of  ‘space’  gives  us 
mass,  or  what  appears  as  its  equivalent— energy.  From  a  four-dimensional,  or 
space-time  point  of  view,  density  multiplied  by  a  four-dimensional  volume  of 
space-time  gives  us  action.  We  see  that  the  multiplication  of  density  by  the 
three  dimensions  of  ‘space’  gives  us  mass  or  energy.  A  fourth  multiplication  by 
the  dimension  of  ‘time’  gives  us  mass  or  energy  multiplied  by  ‘time’  which 
becomes  action  by  definition.  It  is  obvious  that,  structurally,  action  must  be 
more  fundamental  than  the  older  quantities. 

In  terms  of  curvature,  action  represents  the  curvature  of  the  world,  because 
where  we  find  ‘action’,  we  also  find  ‘matter’,  acceleration,  gravitation  ,  * 

‘Acton’  is  fundamental,  because  structurally  in  a  four-dimensional  metrical 
manifold  it  takes  the  form  of  the  simplest  integral  invariant  that  can  exist  at 
a  .  On  this  form  of  action  Maxwell’s  electromagnetic  theory  is  built  The 
quantity  action  appears  as  a  pure  number,*  a  unique,  specific  relation  which 
conditions  structure. 

We  should  expect  that  the  action  represented  by  the  number  1  would  be 
most  interesting  and  would  eventually  represent  the  indivisible  atom  of  action. 

1  he  modern  quantum  theory  seems  to  favour  such  a  point  of  view. 

When  we  encounter  a  pure  number  having  such  crucial  significance  in  this 
world  we  should  not  wonder  that  such  a  number  intrigues  us.  As  yet  it  is  im¬ 
possible  to  state  that  action  cannot  have  fractional  numbers.  What,  then 
would  the  action  represent?  *  ' 

Eddington  suggests  that  the  number  may  represent  a  probability  or  some 
function  of  a  probability. 

We  combine  probabilities  by  multiplication,  but  we  combine  actions  in 
two  regions  by  addition.  We  see,  therefore,  that  the  logarithm  of  a  probability 
gives  the  function  indicated  and  Eddington  suggests  the  provisional  equivalence 
of  action  with  the  negative  of  the  logarithm  of  the  statistical  probability  of  the 
state  of  the  world  around  us.  Such  a  suggestion  is  extremely  appealing  and 
important  because  the  principle  of  Least  Action  can  be  stated  as  the  principle 
of  greatest  probability.  The  laws  of  nature  appear  to  be  such  that  the  actual 
state  of  the  world  is  represented  by  that  which  is  statistically  the  most  probable!8 

That  such  structural  conclusion  can  be  drawn  at  all  is  of  tremendous 
semantic  importance  for  us  because,  as  we  are  abstracting  in  different  orders  all 
through,  the  only  appropriate  language  in  which  we  can  eventually  hope  to 
speak  correctly,  is  the  language  of  probabilities,  statistical  averages 

Action  is  one  of  the  terms  of  pre-einsteinian  physics  which  hJs  survived 
unmodified,  the  only  other  one  being  entropy.  The  law  of  gravitation,  the  laws 
of  mechanics,  and  the  laws  of  electromagnetism,  can  all  be,  not  only  summed 
up,  but  also  deduced,  from  a  single  principle  of  least  action.  This  important 
structural  unification  was  accomplished  even  before  the  advent  of  the  einsteinian 
theory,  and  only  the  addition  of  gravitation  to  this  list  is  new.7 

REFLECTIONS  ON  THE  EINSTEIN  THEORY  681 

In  this  brief  structural  and  semantic  survey  we  have  had  neither  the  op¬ 
portunity  nor  the  necessity  of  analysing  the  general  theory  of  Einstein,  which 
embodies  and  unifies  most  of  the  laws  of  mechanics,  that  of  gravitation  included.* 
In  this  unification  lies  the  unrivalled  grandeur  of  the  theory.  As  we  shall  see 
later,  the  newer  quantum  theories  have  been  already  very  much  influenced  by 
the  Einstein  theory.  As  all  possible  theories  are  dependent  on  human  ingenuity 
and  never  can  be  the  events  themselves,  we  can  rest  assured  that  once  freed 
from  ‘emotional  stupors*  and  semantic  disturbances,  the  world  will  not  be  long 
in  producing  a  whole  structurally  unified  system  of  science. 

In  our  discussions  we  deal  with  ‘apparent’,  ‘real’,  ‘actual’,  and  similar  m.o 
terms.  We  should  recall  that  mathematics  is  exclusive  in  one  respect;  namely, 
that  it  has  no  content.  It  is  entirely  a  product  of  higher  abstractions  created 
by  definition  from  undefined  terms.  We  have  seen  that  mathematics  must  be 
considered  as  a  language  of  special  structure  which  is,  however,  similar  to  the 
structure  of  the  world  around  us. 

Our  daily  A  language,  among  others,  being  based  on  the  ‘is’  of  ‘identity’, 
can  never  give  a  structurally  satisfactory  picture  of  this  world  or  ourselves,  but 
actually  prevents  such  an  achievement.  Having  abandoned  a  language  which 
leads  to  identification,  we  shall  be  able  to  apply  a  new  language,  with  new 
structure,  by  which  we  achieve  better  means  for  representing  the  events  around 
us.  From  this  point  of  view,  mathematics  and  our  daily  language  do  not  differ. 
Terms,  being  not  the  things  they  represent,  must  by  necessity  be  creatures  of 
definitions  and  undefined  terms.  The  solution  of  many  baffling  semantic  prob¬ 
lems  is  found  in  the  structure  of  a  language  which  involves  different  semantic 
and  unconscious  attitudes. 

♦In  fact,  a  few  months  ago,  Einstein  and  Mayer  succeeded  in  reducing  the 
laws  of  gravitational  and  electromagnetic  fields  to  a  single  basis.  This  was 
accomplished  by  the  aid  of  a  very  revolutionary  mathematical  discovery  that  it  is 
possible  to  introduce  into  a  ‘space’  of  n  dimensions,  vectors  with  m  components. 
Although  at  present  the  results  of  the  quantum  theory  are  not  included  in  this 
theory,  there  is  no  doubt  that  shortly,  because  of  this  mathematical  discovery, 
these  will  be  included  in  a  generalized  theory  of  relativity. 

PART  X 

ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  ‘MATTER’ 

Rather  against  my  better  judgment  I  will  try  to  give  a  ro“*k  'mpression 
of  the  theory  It  would  probably  be  wiser  to  nail  up  over  the  door  of  t 
new  quantum  theory  a  notice,  “Structural  alterations  in  progress— No 
admittance  except  on  business”,  and  particularly  to  warn  the  <to°rk«*per 
to  keep  out  prying  philosophers.  u«>  A.  s.  eddinotow 

CHAPTER  XL 

THE  OLDER  ‘MATTER* 

And  yet  when  I  hear  to-day  protests  against  the  Bolshevism  of  modern 
science  and  regrets  for  the  old-established  order,  I  am  inclined  to  think 
that  Rutherford  not  Einstein,  is  the  real  villain  of  the  piece.  (149) 

A.  S.  EDDINGTON 

Micro-mechanics  appears  as  a  refinement  of  macro-mechanics,  which  is 
necessitated  by  the  geometrical  and  mechanical  smallness  of  the  objects, 
and  the  transition  is  of  the  same  nature  as  that  from  geometrical  to  physi¬ 
cal  Optics.  (466)  E.  SCHR6DINGER 

From  the  dawn  of  history,  man  has  had  to  deal  with  different  bits  of 
materials,  some  hard  and  solid  like  stones,  some  soft  like  fruit  or  flesh,  some 
liquid.  In  remote  antiquity  air  and  gases  were  not  considered  as  ‘matter*. 

In  those  days  ‘matter’  was  structurally  only  what  could  be  seen,  or  felt, 
or  touched  .  :  anything  else  was  some  kind  of  ‘spirit’,  and  everything  ‘existed’ 
in  an  ‘absolute  void*.  But  even  in  remote  antiquity  our  primitive  ancestry 
could  not  miss  the  fact  that  the  bits  of  materials  they  dealt  with  could  be 
divided  into  smaller  bits.  Naturally,  if  we  can  subdivide  bits  into  smaller 
bits,  an  interesting  question  arises:  How  far  can  this  division  be  carried  on? 
It  seems  that  Democritus  (about  460-360  B.c.)  was  the  first  man  on  record  to 
formulate  an  atomistic  theory.  He  already  postulated  structurally  a  subjective 
world  picture,  to  be  contrasted  with  an  ‘absolute*  or  objective  world  in  which 
‘motion*  was  all  important.  This  theory  started  us  on  the  mechanistic  road 
formulated  for  macroscopic  events,  and  also  on  the  road  of  individualization, 
the  study  of  smaller  and  smaller  bits  of  materials  and  the  search  for  some  unit 
bricks  out  of  which  this  world  appeared  to  be  built;  all  of  which  was  already  a 
search  for  m.o  structure. 

With  the  advent  of  chemistry  some  further  fundamental  structural  light 
was  thrown  on  the  problem  of  individualization.  It  was  found  that  certain 
materials,  as,  for  instance,  iron,  copper .  ,  remain  one  material,  no  matter 
how  far  we  carry  our  subdivision.  These  were  called  ‘elements’.  At  present 
we  recognize  92  elements,  a  number  which  is  supposed  to  represent  all  possible 
elements.  Out  of  these  a  remaining  few  were  at  first  predicted  theoretically, 
and  just  the  other  day  discovered  experimentally.  All  other  materials  do  not 
stand  division  so  well.  At  some  stage  they  decompose  into  their  elements. 
The  smallest  bit  of  one  of  these  last  materials  which  still  has  the  characteristics 
as  the  bulk,  is  called  a  molecule.  The  molecule  is  found  to  be  built  up  from 
atoms  of  the  elements.  For  instance,  the  molecule  of  water  still  has  the  charac¬ 
teristics  of  water,  and  consists  of  two  atoms  of  hydrogen  and  one  atom  of  oxygen, 
which  are  no  longer  water  but  elements  of  entirely  different  characteristics.* 
Electrochemistry  taught  us  in  the  meanwhile  an  important  structural 
lesson;  namely,  that  definite  electrical  charges  are  combined  with  the  atoms. 
Such  electrified  atoms  are  called  ‘ions’  (Greek  for  traveller).  For  instance,  a 

♦The  above  statements  are  over-simplified,  but  satisfactory  for  my  purpose. 

X.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  ‘MATTER’ 

molecule  of  water  is  broken  up  into  a  positively  charged  hydrogen  ion  con¬ 
sisting  of  two  hydrogen  atoms,  and  a  negatively  charged  oxygen  ion  consisting 
of  one  oxygen  atom. 

But  electricity  had  more  structural  surprises  in  store  for  us.  About  1880 
new  facts  were  discovered.  One  of  them  was  that  a  moving  electrical  charge 
has  the  effect  of  an  electrical  current;  namely,  it  can  deflect  a  magnet  just  as 
a  current  does.  Such  moving  electrical  charges  were  called  convection  currents, 
and  the  fact  that  they  produce  effects  similar  to  an  electric  current  led  J.  J. 
Thomson  to  a  surprising  conclusion.  According  to  the  Maxwell  theory  of 
electromagnetism  a  certain  amount  of  energy  must  be  associated  with  every 
electric  or  magnetic  field.  If  an  electrical  charge  in  motion  can  produce  mag¬ 
netic  effects,  hence  energy,  it  was  concluded,  and  verified  by  experiment,  that 
energy  was  required  to  set  an  electrical  charge  in  motion.  From  which  it 
follows  structurally  that  an  electrical  charge  possesses  a  characteristic  in  common 
with  other  materials;  namely,  inertia,  which  can  be  overcome  only  by  the 
application  of  energy.  This  inertial  mass  of  the  electric  charge  was  called 
electromagnetic  mass. 

Here  we  see  two  fundamental  structural  issues  involved.  One  is  that 
electricity  seemingly  has  an  inertial  mass  similar  to  that  of  ‘matter’.  The 
other  is,  that  in  convection  currents,  we  find  means  to  study  electromechanical 
parallelism,  and  so  discover  the  relationship  between  electrical  and  mechanical 
theories. 

In  the  year  1895  Loren tz  proposed  the  electron  theory.  He  assumed 
structurally  that  moving  molecules  contain  electrical  charges  and  so  produce 
convection  currents.  These  charges  are  further  assumed  to  be  one  electrical 
quantum  and  were  called  electrons.  The  electron  theory  proved  to  be  enor¬ 
mously  fruitful  and  all  further  advance  in  our  structural  knowledge  is  inti¬ 
mately  connected  with  it. 

As  knowledge  advanced,  the  more  convincing  became  the  structural 
evidence  for  some  electronic  theory.  As  already  noted,  a  moving  electrical 
charge  produces  magnetic  effects.  So  also  should  a  moving  electron,  whence 
we  succeeded  in  accounting  for  magnetic  effects  in  terms  of  moving  electrons 
which  in  this  case  represent  molecular  convection  currents. 

Granting  this,  a  revolving  electron  should  represent  also  a  small  magnet 
and  a  mechanical  gyroscope  as  well.  Einstein  in  1915  verified  this  assumption 
by  an  experiment.  If  these  structural  assumptions  were  true,  then,  by  a  quick 
reversal  of  magnetism,  a  soft  iron  rod  should  turn  by  a  slight  but  definite 
amount.  The  reverse  effect  has  also  been  verified ;  namely,  a  soft  iron  rod  when 
rotated  rapidly  around  its  axis  becomes  magnetized. 

The  discovery  of  radioactive  materials  was  also  of  enormous  structural 
importance,  as  it  gave  us  a  means  of  studying  directly  the  rays  emitted  from 
these  materials.  The  rays  were  found  to  be  of  three  kinds  and  were  called 
by  the  first  letters  of  the  Greek  alphabet.  The  a-rays  have  been  found  to  be 
similar  to  positive  rays,  the  /3-rays  similar  to  cathode  rays,  and  finally  the  7-rays 
to  Rontgen-rays.  Further  investigation  revealed  that  the  a-rays  were  atoms 

THE  OLDER  ‘MATTER' 

of  helium  charged  with  a  double  positive  charge  of  electricity,  and  that  the 
j9-rays  were  negatively  charged  particles  with  the  charge  of  an  electron. 

These  few  remarks  already  make  apparent  the  structural  fact  that  electro¬ 
magnetic  phenomena  exhibit  characteristics  quite  similar  to  those  of  ‘matter’, 
some  of  their  processes  are  atomic,  they  have  inertia  ,  . 

In  the  older  days  we  tried  to  apply  macroscopic  mechanical  structural 
laws  to  electromagnetic  phenomena,  but  were  not  very  successful.  The  laws 
which  applied  to  those  sub-microscopic  levels  were  seemingly  different  from 
those  which  applied  to  gross  macroscopic  levels,  just  as  the  psycho-logics  of 
the  individual  differ  from  the  psycho-logics  of  the  mob. 

An  epoch-making  semantic  step  was  taken  by  Rutherford  when  he  formu¬ 
lated  the  electromagnetic  theory  of  the  structure  of  ‘matter’.  In  this  theory 
the  atoms  represent  complex  structures  built  up  of  positive  and  negative 
electrons,  and  their  number  and  arrangements  (structure)  determine  the 
chemical  and  physical  characteristics  of  the  atom  in  question.  The  old  struc¬ 
tural  dogma  of  the  immutability  of  the  elements  became  untenable;  and  today, 
theoretically,  and  in  a  few  instances  experimentally,  it  has  been  established 
that  a  transmutation  of  elements  is  not  only  a  possibility  but  a  rather  well- 
established  structural  fact  of  1933. 

It  should  be  noticed  that  once  more  one  of  the  fanciful  linguistic,  structural, 
‘infinities’  has  been  abolished.  The  elements  appear  as  transitory  processes 
with  a  ‘life’  of  a  limited  span  of  years.  The  experimental  structural  evidence 
which  physicists  and  chemists  have  gathered  is  overwhelming  and,  though  the 
positive  theories  (verbal  structures)  may  not  always  be  satisfactory,  the  negative 
results  leading  to  the  rejection  of  the  older  theories  are  conclusive.  This  point 

is  of  supreme  structural  importance  to  us. 

A  short  description  of  the  different  atomic  models  comes  later  in  this 
chapter,  but  first  something  must  be  said  about  the  old  quantum  theory,  which 
represents  at  present  the  central  problem  in  science  and  out  of  the  solution 
of  which  the  most  revolutionary  consequences  are  bound  to  follow. 

The  main  problems  of  the  quantum  theory  may  be  described  and  con¬ 
trasted  somehow  as  follows.  If  we  take  a  line  X'X  and  select  a  point  O  as  the 
origin,  we  may  fix  the  position  of  a  point  P  on  this  line  by  the  co-ordinate  x . 
In  practice  we  find  the  values  of  x  by 

measurement.  If  we  assume  that  x  ^ _ , _ *  ,  ^ 

varies  continuously  we  can  expect  that  0  P 

by  refined  measurements  we  can  find  Fig.  1 

values  of  x  as  close  together  as  we  please. 

Experiments  show  that  for  the  processes  going  on  ‘inside  of  the  atom’  the 
structural  conditions  are  somehow  radically  different.  In  comparing  them  with 

the  above  example,  we  should  have  to  give  our  point  only  the  freedom  of  occu¬ 
pying  certain  discrete  points,  let  us  say  1,  2,  3  .  ,  but  all  fractional  values,  such 
as  1  /2  or  2 /3,  would  be  impossible.  If  the  only  possible  values  of  x  are  whole 
numbers,  then  the  possibility  of  finding  values  of  x  as  close  together  as  we 
choose  in  order  to  make  more  precise  measurements  is  excluded.  If  we  find, 

X.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  ‘MATTER’ 

for  instance,  that  our  x  is  neither  1  nor  2  nor  4,  and  cannot  be  larger  than  4, 
the  only  solution  is  that  our  x  must  be  3. 

These  conditions,  which  are  actually  found  in  the  atomic  mechanics,  rep¬ 
resent  an  entirely  new  and  unexpected  structural  state  of  affairs.  The  whole  of 
the  older  quantum  mechanics  can  be  summarized  in  the  statement,  that  its 
peculiarity  consists  in  the  fact  that  structurally  characteristic  discrete  numbers 
make  their  appearance,  and  that  the  processes  'inside  the  atom’  are  to  be 
described  by  discrete  numbers. 

The  usual  classical  quantum  mechanics  demands  that  x  be  allowed  to  take 
all  possible  continuous  values,  but  that  the  integral  values  of  x  represent  the 
so-called  stationary  states  through  the  quantum  conditions.  Under  such  con¬ 
ditions  the  intermediate  fractional  values  had  no  meanings. 

It  is  safe  to  say  that,  when  in  1900  Planck  formulated  his  quantum  theory 
along  the  structural  lines  sketched  here,  it  meant  a  complete  and  revolutionary 
structural  and  semantic  departure  from  all  accepted  standards  in  life  and 
science,  for  studying  this  world. 

Planck  has  shown  that  it  is  impossible  to  explain  the  spectral  distribution 
of  the  energy  radiated  by  a  black  body  under  the  older  assumptions  that  energy 
can  be  divided  indefinitely  into  smaller  and  smaller  parts,  but  that  it  may  be 
explained  on  the  structural  assumption  that  the  energy  exists  in  quanta  of 
finite  size  hv ,  where  v  is  the  frequency  of  the  radiation  and  A  is  a  constant 
(^=6.54x10  27  erg  sec.). 

These  observations  lead  to  the  revolutionary  structural  conclusion  that 
the  emission  of  radiation  occurs  discontinuously ,  and  so  the  characteristic  dis¬ 
crete  numbers  make  their  appearance. 

^  H  seems  natural  that  because  of  this  peculiar  appearance  of  whole  numbers, 
periodic  processes  such  as  rotations  or  oscillations  should  be  closely  related 
structurally  with  the  quantum  theory.  As  a  matter  of  fact  the  most  important 
structural  and  semantic  reconciliation  of  continuous  differential  equations  of 
the  older  mechanics  with  the  appearance  of  discontinuous  whole  numbers  has 
been  solved  by  the  newer  quantum  mechanics  on  this  basis  as  explained  in 
the  following  chapter. 

The  kinetic  theory  of  heat  and  the  atomistic  theory  of  electricity  have 
shown  an  enormous  productivity.  It  is  quite  natural  that  these  theories  (verbal 
structures)  should  be  highly  workable,  considering  the  structure  of  our  nervous 
systems,  as  explained  in  the  foregoing  chapters.  It  was  this  principle  of  indi¬ 
vidualization  which  helped  so  greatly.  The  quantum  theory  is  a  structural 
attempt  to  extend  this  method  of  individualization,  or  the  atomistic  principle, 
to  processes  themselves. 

As  in  the  older  days  we  introduced  units  or  elementary  quanta  of  mass, 
and  later,  an  elementary  quantum  of  electric  charge,  so  in  our  newer  knowledge 
we  have  need  for  an  elementary  quantum  of  action.  Action  is  defined  as  energy 
multiplied  by  ‘time’,  or  A  =Et. 

Naturally  such  a  product  as  energy  multiplied  by  'time’  must  play  an 
extremely  important  structural  and  semantic  role  in  this  world  of  space-time, 

THE  OLDER  'MATTER' 

where  nothing  happens  ‘instantaneously',  but  all  action  requires  'time'.  If  we 
could  discover  some  unit  of  action,  we  could  change  from  the  language  of 
‘energy’  and  ‘time’  to  the  language  of  ‘action’  and  ‘times’.  This  language,  by 
the  way,  is  much  more  satisfactory  and  structurally  closer  to  experience  than 
the  old  languages.  ‘Action’  as  structurally  defined  (product  of  ‘energy’  by 
‘time’)  is  one  of  the  two  fundamental  entities  of  pre-relativity  physics  which 
have  survived  the  Einstein  revolution.  It  is  really  a  universal  term  which  we 
can  apply  without  danger  of  degrading  science  into  private  gossip.  From  the 
neurological  standpoint,  as  it  deals  with  definite  units  and  times,  such  a  term 
has  all  the  structural  earmarks  of  an  abstraction  of  highest  order  and  of  being 
really  semantically  important.  Energy  in  space-time  must  by  necessity  be 
reformulated  as  ‘action’.  The  quantum  theory  posits  structurally  that  the 
action  of  physical  processes  is  built  up  of  a  number  of  elementary  quanta  of 
action. 

From  the  fact  that  electromagnetic  waves  and  light-waves  have  one  ve¬ 
locity,  Maxwell  concluded  that  light-waves  are  of  an  electromagnetic  character, 
a  conclusion  which  further  experiments  have  fully  justified.  Einstein,  in  1905, 
successfully  applied  the  quantum  structural  principle  to  the  theory  of  light, 
and  in  1907  to  the  theory  of  heat  of  solid  bodies. 

The  evolution  of  our  theories  concerning  the  internal  structure  of  atoms 
has,  until  lately,  closely  followed  our  astronomical  theories,  but  with  the  newest 
quantum  mechanics  this  structural  analogy  seems  less  useful.  The  first  atomic 
model  on  an  electrical  basis  was  proposed  by  J.  J.  Thomson.  He  assumed  the 
atom  to  consist  of  a  uniformly  dense  spherical  volume 
charge  of  positive  electricity,  within  which  electrons 
described  circular  orbits.  But  the  discovery  of  radio¬ 
activity  and  the  fact  that  the  alpha-rays  could  pass 
through  several  centimetres  of  atoms  (which  means  pene¬ 
trating  through  many  thousands  of  atoms),  without  their 
direction  being  altered  made  these  assumptions  struc¬ 
turally  untenable. 

The  Wilson  photographs  (Fig.  2)  show  clearly  that  a 
single  atom  can  deflect  the  alpha-particle  by  a  large  angle 
which  makes  it  clear  that  the  nucleus  of  an  atom  must  be 
considered  as  a  very  small  part  of  the  volume  of  the  atom. 

The  large  deflections  of  the  alpha-particles  show  also  that 
the  mass  of  the  nucleus  must  be  much  larger  than  the 
mass  of  the  deflected  particles.  Observations  show  also 
that  thfe  deflections  increase  with  the  atomic  weight  of  the 
deflecting  materials.  These  and  similar  facts  led  to  the 
structural  assumption  that  the  mass  of  the  atom  is  prin¬ 
cipally  concentrated  in  the  nucleus  and  that  the  mass  of 
the  electrons  must  be  very  small  in  comparison  with  that  of  the  nucleus. 

As  the  atoms  are  in  general  electrically  neutral,  we  had  to  assume  that  the 
positive  charges  of  the  nucleus  are  compensated  by  the  negative  charges  of  the 

X.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  ‘MATTER* 

electrons.  These  and  other  structural  considerations  led  Rutherford  to  propose 
a  different  atomic  model,  which  was  much  more  successful  for  a  while. 

The  Rutherford  atom  is  supposed  to  be  composed  of  a  nucleus  of  positive 
electricity  surrounded  by  negative  electrons.  The  simplest  atom  is  that  of 
hydrogen,  and  was  assumed  to  consist  of  one  electron  revolving  around  the 
simplest  positive  nucleus  or  proton,  each  having  a  charge,  e  -4.77  x  1CT10  e.s.u., 
and  different  masses,  the  mass  of  the  nucleus  or  proton  being  1845  times  the 
mass  of  the  electron.  The  other  atoms  represent  more  complex  structures  built 
up  of  protons  and  electrons,  into  the  details  of  which  we  need  not  enter  here. 
But  this  theory  encountered  difficulties  of  theoretical  as  well  as  of  experimental 
character.  Niels  Bohr  eliminated  most  of  them  by  the  application  of  the 
quantum  theory  to  the  atom. 

For  simplicity  of  writing  in  that  which  follows,  I  will  use  a  descriptive 
language  omitting  in  each  statement  ‘we  assume’  .  ,  but  the  reader  should  be 
continuously  aware,  that  when  we  deal  with  the  sub-microscopic  levels  we  deal 
only  with  inferential  units  the  representation  of  which  involves  a  great  many 
assumptions.  For  my  purpose  it  is  enough  to  stress:  (1)  the  negative  fact,  that 
the  structure  of  materials  is  definitely  different  from  that  which  was  assumed 
before  the  advent  of  the  quantum  theories,  (2)  that  in  science ,  inferential  units 
represent  abstractions  of  higher  order  and  are  as  reliable  as  the  lower  order 
abstractions  which  we  gather  on  the  macroscopic  levels,  if  they  are  treated 
semantically  as  hypothetical  units.  The  layman  should  realize  that  his  ‘world- 
outlook*  appears  as  full  of  assumptions  as  any  scientific  one,  except  that  his 
assumptions  are  not  conscious  and  cannot  be  verified,  whereas  most  of  the 
scientific  assumptions  are  conscious  and  are  continually  verified . 

In  the  older  theory  the  orbits  of  the  electrons  were  supposed  to  be  arbi¬ 
trary;  in  the  Bohr  theory  the  orbits  have  precedence,  for  which  a  definite  mag¬ 
nitude,  a  whole  number  multiple  of  the  elementary  quantum  of  action  is  specified. 
We  posit  one-quantum  orbits,  two-quantum  orbits  .  ,  to  which  definite  values 
of  the  orbits,  the  velocity,  the  number  of  revolutions,  and  the  energy  correspond. 
In  a  one-quantum  orbit,  for  instance,  the  velocity  is  supposed  to  be  equal  to 

c/140,  that  is  one  140th  of  the  velocity 
of  light,  and  the  number  of  revolutions 
equal  to  6000  billions  a  second. 

Bohr  later  modified  his  atomic 
model  structurally  by  taking  into  ac¬ 
count  the  movement  of  the  nucleus.  The 
-€  electron  was  not  supposed  to  revolve  any 
longer  around  the  proton,  but  both  pro¬ 
ton  and  electron  were  assumed  to  revolve 
around  their  common  centre  of  gravity. 
In  the  simplest  form  the  Bohr  atomic 
model  is  shown  in  Fig,  3,  representing 
the  atom  of  hydrogen,  which  we  assume 
to  consist  of  a  nucleus  with  one  positive 

THE  OLDER  ‘MATTER' 

Helium** 
(ot  particle} 

Fig.  7 
P  -  proton 

charge  and  of  an  electron  that  revolves  about  this  nucleus.  The  nucleus  is 
designated  by  a  star,  the  three  circles  represent  the  possible  orbits  for  the 
electron.  The  orbit  of  radius  a '  is  the  most  stable,  and  usually  the  hydrogen 
electron  is  supposed  to  be  found  there,  but  through  the  action  of  heat  or  electric 
fields  or  collisions .  ,  the  electron  may  be  removed  to  one  of  the  outer  orbits 
a"  or  a'".  Such  a  condition  is  not  so  stable,  and  sooner  or  later  the  electron  is 
assumed  to  return  to  the  orbit  a' .  During  these  transitions  of  the  electron,  energy 
is  radiated.  This  structural  model  is  similar  to  the  copernican  planetary  system, 
the  planet-electrons  revolving  around  the  sun-nucleus.1 

The  above  diagrams  show 
schematically  the  supposed 
structure  of  some  of  the  simpler 
atoms.  Fig.  4  represents  the 
hydrogen  atom,  consisting  of 
one  proton  and  one  electron 
revolving  around  the  proton. 

The  mass  of  the  proton  is  about 
1845  times  the  mass  of  the  elec¬ 
tron,  and  we  assume  that  the 
proton  effectively  gives  us  the 
mass  of  the  atom. 

Fig.  5  represents  the  neu¬ 
tral  atom  of  helium.  Its  nucleus 
consists  of  four  protons  and  two 
electrons,  and  it  has  two  re¬ 
volving  electrons;  in  all,  four 
protons  with  four  positive 
charges  and  four  electrons  with 
four  negative  charges,  the  eight 
charges  just  neutralizing  each 
other. 

Fig.  6  represents  a  helium 
atom  which  has  lost  one  elec¬ 
tron.  It  has,  therefore,  four 
positive  charges  and  only  three 
negative  charges.  Such  an 
atom  has  a  resultant  positive 
charge,  and  is  denoted  by  He+ . 

If  the  helium  atom  loses  two 
electrons  it  is  doubly  charged 
with  a  positive  charge  (He++) . 

The  helium  nucleus  He++t  as  shown  in  Fig.  7,  represents  the  particle  emitted 
from  radio-active  materials. 

Lithium  consists  of  two  isotopes;  that  is,  two  elements  which  appear  ex¬ 
tremely  similar  to  each  other  in  physical  and  chemical  characteristics,  but 

£=  electron 

X.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  ‘MATTER’ 

differ  from  each  other  in  the  number  of  electrons  and  protons.  In  Fig.  8  is 
shown  Iithiumg,  with  6  protons  and  3  electrons  in  the  nucleus,  and  3  revolving 
electrons.  In  Fig.  9  is  shown  lithium?,  with  7  protons  and  4  electrons  in  the 
nucleus  and  3  revolving  electrons.2 

In  general  terms,  Bohr  tried  to  account  for  all  other  atoms  on  the  base  of 
the  structure  of  the  hydrogen  atom.  The  next  important  generalization  and 
extension  of  the  Bohr  theory  was  accomplished  by  Sommerfeld  about  1915. 
The  achievement  of  Sommerfeld  can  be  compared  with  the  advance  which 
Kepler  made  over  the  copernican  theory  of  planetary  motions.  Copernicus 
considered  the  planetary  orbits  as  circular.  Kepler*  considered  them  as  ellip¬ 
tical,  and  thus  introduced  a  tremendous  structural  advance  in  astronomy. 
Sommerfeld  replaced  the  circular  orbits  of  Bohr  by  elliptical  ones.  The  theory 
became  much  more  complicated,  because  a  circle  is  given  by  one  magnitude; 
namely,  its  radius,  while  an  ellipse  needs  two  data,  its  major  and  minor  axes, 
and  so  two  quantum  numbers  for  the  specification  of  an  orbit.  Sommerfeld  also 
introduced  some  of  the  results  of  the  Einstein  theory;  for  example,  that  the 
mass  of  a  body  also  depends  on  its  velocity.  Since  the  velocity  of  the  negative 
electrons  in  the  atom  is  supposedly  very  large  it  was  quite  probable  that  the 
relativity  considerations  should  be  appreciable.  According  to  the  Einstein 

theory,  the  faster  a  body  is  moving 
the  greater  is  its  mass.  In  an  ellip¬ 
tical  orbit  the  electron  should  have 
a  larger  mass  at  the  perihelion  than 
at  the  aphelion,  and  so  the  orbit 
would  not  be  exactly  an  ellipse  but 
the  perihelion  would  advance  slightly 
at  every  revolution. 

Fig.  10  gives  us  the  relativis¬ 
tic  Kepler  orbit  as  introduced  by 
Sommerfeld.  0  is  the  fixed  focus  in 
which  the  nucleus  is  situated  and 
P  is  the  initial  position  of  the  peri¬ 
helion.  The  motion  of  the  perihelion 
occurs  in  one  sense  with  that  of  the 
orbit.3 

The  last  analogy  in  the  structure 
of  the  atom  taken  over  from  astron¬ 
omy  was  introduced  in  1925,  when  Goudsmit  and  Uhlenbeck  proposed  their  theory 
of  the  spinning  electron.  The  electron  was  supposed  to  be  spinning  about  its 
axis  like  a  planet  or  a  top.  A  similar  notion  was  used  by  Compton  in  1921,  in 
connection  with  the  magneton,  but  the  notion  of  using  the  spinning  electron  for 

Fig.  10 

™h,vwi?  first  law  states:  The  planet  moves  in  an  ellipse,  at  one  focus  of 
.1  1S  Slt!la[e'?:  p.enhell0n  .is  that  point  of  a  planet’s  orbit  at  which  it 
is  nearest  the  sun.  Aphelion  is  that  point  of  a  planet’s  orbit  at  which  it  is  farthest 
irom  the  sun. 

THE  OLDER  'MATTER* 

the  solution  of  a  structural  difficulty  in  the  quantum  theory,  and  thus  assigning 
a  fourth  degree  of  freedom  to  the  electrons,  originated  with  Goudsmit  and 
Uhlenbeck  independently  of  the  work  of  Compton.4  It  is  not  necessary  for  our 
purpose  to  follow  all  the  further  refinements  of  the  classical  theories.  Suffice  it 
to  say  that  scientists  work  under  uniquely  severe  mutual  supervision,  and  that 
any  theories  advanced  in  science  are  taken  under  consideration  only  when  the 
new  theories  agree  better  with  experiments,  and  when  they  also  prove  struc¬ 
turally  fruitful  in  predicting  new  experimental  facts,  which  again  must  stand 
the  test  of  experiment. 

The  Sommerfeld  orbits  have  proved  to  be  an  advance  over  the  older  Bohr 
orbits,  but  they  had  also  to  be  refined  to  take  into  account  that  the  electron 
does  not  seem  to  revolve  around  a  simple  nucleus  but  around  a  core  consisting 
of  the  nucleus  and  one  or  more  electrons;  and  so  again  we  had  more  complex 
orbits. 

For  our  semantic  purpose  it  is  enough  to  say  that  to  the  best  of  our  knowl¬ 
edge  (1933),  this  world  appears  entirely  different  from  what  our  primitive  an¬ 
cestors  knew  thousands  of  years  ago,  and  perhaps  from  what  the  average  layman 
knows  today.  As  the  problems  of  ‘sanity’  represent  problems  of  semantic 
adjustment ,  and  adjustment  means  adjustment  to  something — in  this  case  to 
the  structures  of  the  world  around  and  in  us — it  appears  imperative  that  we 
should  take  into  account  the  best  knowledge  we  have  of  these  structures. 

The  few  remarks  given  above  about  the  structure  of  ‘matter’  already  show 
unmistakably  that  the  old  ‘matter’  is  not  so  very  ‘material’,  so  very  ‘solid’, 
so  very  definite,  as  we  once  assumed  it  was;  but  it  represents  a  process .  We  see 
that  our  nervous  system,  because  of  its  gradual  growth  and  evolution,  has 
developed  different  levels  or  strata;  our  ‘knowledge’  also  has  different  levels  or 
strata,  operative  as-a-whole,  although  different  aspects  of  it  can  be  analysed  in 
terms  of  order.  The  reader  should  realize  that  because  of  the  old  s.r  we  still 
‘need’  some  ‘bits’  of  something  to  speak  about.  It  is  a  linguistic  semantic  con¬ 
sequence  of  our  pre-scientific,  el  language,  which  posits  absolute  ‘matter’,  ‘space’, 
and  ‘time’.  Thus,  through  a  process  of  identification,  we  ascribe  to  these  terms 
objective  existence.  In  the  old  manner  of  speaking  the  term  ‘is’  of  identity 
played  the  main  semantic  havoc. 

In  the  older  days  electrons  were  often  taken  as  ‘bits’  of  something  or  other. 
For  the  layman  a  ‘bit’  was  identified  with  ‘matter’;  and  here  a  great  deal  of 
confusion  comes  to  light.  Even  a  ‘bit’  of  something  i?  not  necessarily  material. 
Materials,  by  definition ,  are  supposed  to  exhibit  colour,  temperature,  hardness  ,  . 
A  ‘bit’  which  did  not  have  these  characteristics  would  not  be  material  by 
definition. 

Although  the  ‘electron’  is  defined  as  an  electrical  charge,  in  the  older  days 
we  had  the  habit  of  considering  the  electrons  as  some  definite  ‘bits’  of  something, 
some  kind  of  ‘matter’.  Through  a  process  of  objectification  we  made  them 
revolve  in  definite  ‘orbits’,  with  definite  ‘velocities’.  ,  which  implies  the  definite 
application  of  terms  such  as  ‘space’  and  ‘time’,  derived  from  macroscopic  gross 
experiencet  but  not  necessarily  applicable  to  the  sub-atomic  levels. 

X.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  ‘MATTER* 

What  has  been  said  here  about  the  structure  of  ‘matter'  is  quite  sufficient 
for  our  purpose.  Here,  as  always,  the  negative — the  ‘is  not' — results  count.  We 
are  in  a  position  to  realize  by  now  that  the  overwhelming  evidence  which  science 
gives  and  which  would  be  impossible  to  repeat  here,  shows  us  a  structural 
picture  of  the  world  of  tremendous  complexity,  beauty,  and  mystery  of  a  struc¬ 
ture  undreamed  of  by  our  primitive  ancestors  who  formulated  the  current 
mythological  structures  which  moulded  our  older  s.r  and  languages. 

We  can  sum  up,  for  our  purpose,  what  we  know  about  the  structure  of 
matter  somewhat  as  follows.  The  bits  of  materials  visible  and  invisible  to  the 
unaided  eye  seem  to  be  less  simple  than  we  assume  them  to  be  and  to  the  best 
of  our  knowledge  (1933)  represent  extremely  complex  processes  of  a  dynamic 
structure.  It  appears  also  that  our  usual  forms  of  verbal  representation  which 
were  built  by  our  primitive  ancestors  are  not  similar  in  structure  to  the  world 
and  so  are  not  fit  to  represent  the  happenings  going  on  on  the  un-speakable 
levels.  As  all  our  knowledge  is  due  to  the  structure  and  function  of  our  nervous 
system,  which  represents  an  abstracting  mechanism,  all  our  knowledge  there¬ 
fore,  appears  as  some  kind  of  abstractions  of  different  orders,  on  different  levels, 
of  different  character,  and  of  varying  precision  and  intensity,  resulting  in 
various  definite  general  or  individual  s.r. 

To  bring  what  is  said  here  to  the  lower  level  of  abstracting;  namely,  to  the 
level  of  structural  visualization  and  feeling,  we  may  use  the  rough  analogue  of 
an  electric  or  mechanical  fan.  When  such  a  fan  rotates  we  see  a  disk,  simply 
because  our  nervous  system  was  evolved  under  natural  conditions  necessitating 
integration,  and  so  does  not  discriminate  between  the  rotating  blades.  The 
separate  rotating  blades  are  visually  abstracted  by  us  as  a  single  solid  disk, 
although  there  is  no  disk  present. 

To  the  best  of  our  knowledge  atoms  represent  very  minute  energetic  con¬ 
figurations  or  dynamic  structures  where  extremely  rapid  processes  are  going  on, 
which  our  nervous  system  abstracts  as  ‘solid’.  Judging  by  our  present  standards 
in  science  and  the  amount  of  knowledge  we  have  we  may  consider  that  science 
in  the  days  of  Newton  (1643-1727)  was  in  its  infancy.  During  that  period 
we  knew  a  little  about  the  shining  specks  we  see  in  the  skies,  and  more  about 
the  rough  macroscopic  facts  of  our  daily  experience.  The  genius  of  Newton  not 
only  advanced  the  detailed  knowledge  of  his  day  in  many  branches  of  science, 
but  also  formulated  two  general  theories.  One  was  the  differential  and  integral 
calculus,  which  he  discovered  independently  of  his  contemporary  Leibnitz,  the 
other  was  what  we  call  mechanics. 

In  Newton's  era  the  problems  of  macroscopic,  microscopic,  and  sub- 
microscopic  levels  of  investigation  had  not  yet  arisen  in  the  modern  sense, 
although  in  formulating  the  differential  and  integral  calculus  a  theoretical 
structural  step  was  taken  toward  the  analysis  of  the  processes  on  the  subtler 
levels.  Quite  naturally  we  applied  the  wisdom  we  derived  from  Newton  to  all 
phases  of  life  and  knowledge.  With  the  advent  of  more  detailed  structural 
knowledge  of  electromagnetic  phenomena  which  occur  on  sub-microscopic,  as 
well  as  macroscopic  levels,  difficulties  began  to  appear.  It  seemed  as  if  the 

THE  OLDER  ‘MATTER’ 

newtonian  mechanics  were  not  entirely  applicable  to  these  new  and  smaller 
scale  phenomena.  Finally  Maxwell  (1831-1879)  produced  his  famous  theory 
of  electromagnetism.  This  theory  appears  structurally  at  variance  with  the 
classical  mechanics.  Attempts  were  made  to  reconcile  both  kinds  of  phenomena 
in  one  theory.  The  problems  of  macroscopic,  microscopic,  and  sub-microscopic 
structure  and  levels  came  to  the  foreground. 

With  the  advent  of  the  quantum  theory  further  difficulties  made  their 
appearance.  It  became  quite  obvious  that  neither  the  classical  ‘continuous 
mechanics,  nor  the  classical  electromagnetic  theory  could  fully  account  for  the 
‘discontinuous'  quantum  facts.  The  situation  became  acute  and  bewildering. 
The  Einstein  theory  with  its  profound  structural  semantic  and  methodological 
revolution  liberated  us  from  our  semantic  delusions  of  the  uniqueness,  absolute¬ 
ness,  and  ‘objectivity'  of  ‘matter’,  ‘space’,  and  ‘time’.  It  built  up  a  new  semantic 
attitude  in  the  younger  generation  of  scientists  already  educated  on  this  new 
structure,  and  therefore  unhampered  by  the  old  prejudices.  New  theories  are 
now  being  formulated  along  increasingly  more  constructive  and  creative  lines. 

It  is  true  that  as  yet  neither  ‘psychologists’  nor  ‘philosophers'  have  paid 
enough  attention  to  the  subjects  discussed  here,  and  so  have  not  made  us  con¬ 
scious  of  the  structural  and  semantic  problems  involved.  However,  the  Einstein 
theory  has  had  a  profound  structural  influence  on  the  semantic  attitudes  of  the 
younger  scientists,  though  in  the  main  they  are  unconscious  of  this  fact. 

The  main  issues  at  hand  are  twofold.  One  is  semantic;  namely,  to  inculcate 
the  permanent  structural  feeling  that  words  are  not  the  things  they  stand  for. 
If  applied  habitually,  this  leads  to  the  rejection  of  the  term  ‘is’  of  identity. 
The  other  is  to  replace  old  languages  and  methods  by  structurally  new  languages 
and  new  methods,  in  which  when  we  describe  ordered  happenings,  we  describe 
the  functioning,  the  behaviour .  ,  by  speaking  more  in  a  language  of  what 
something  ‘does’  than  in  the  old  language  of  what  something  ‘is’,  which  as  we 
have  seen  must  be  always  structurally  fallacious  and  semantically  dangerous. 

The  reader  should  not  take  lightly  these  most  general  structural  and 
semantic  issues.  They  are  unusually  important  for  sanity.  When  they  are 
formulated  we  can  pass  them  on,  and  train  children  in  the  new  s.r  quite  easily. 
It  is  much  more  difficult,  after  training  a  child  thoroughly  in  the  old  vicious 
structural  semantic  habits  of  identification,  eventually  to  have  to  appoint  a 
guardian  angel  to  watch  him  day  and  night  to  remind  him  that  a  word  is  not 
an  object ,  .  Such  a  procedure  would  lay  a  terrific  strain  on  us  and  on  the 
guardian  angel.  It  would  probably  be  also  very  expensive,  judging  by  our 
present  earthly  substitutes  for  the  ‘heavenly  powers'. 

Once  this  is  realized  and  applied,  the  second  issue  becomes  a  purely  struc¬ 
tural  linguistic  one.  There  is  no  a  priori  reason  why  a  language  which  applies 
to  one  level  should  apply  to  another. 

With  these  two  main  issues  in  view,  it  is  readily  understood  why  modern 
science  tries  so  hard  to  develop  functional  languages  and  methods  in  order  to 
be  able  to  describe  in  terms  of  order  happenings  and  processes  which  are  ob- 

69  6 

X.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  ‘MATTER’ 

served.  Something  similar  could  be  said  about  all  theories  which  postulate  too 
much  of  a  definite  mechanism,  usually  involving  some  identification  somewhere. 

The  slightest  discrepancy  between  such  a  theory  and  observation  elim¬ 
inates  the  theory  as  structurally  unsatisfactory;  while  theories  which  succeed 
in  not  postulating  mechanisms,  and  so  are  formulated  in  a  functional  language, 
last  much  better.  One  of  the  enormous  advantages  of  the  Maxwell  electro¬ 
magnetic  theory  is  the  fact  that  it  describes  the  behaviour  of  electricity  and 
magnetism  while  hardly  positing  any  mechanism  at  all.  A  similar  statement 
applies  also  to  the  Einstein  theory. 

The  above  general  remarks  are  extremely  well  illustrated  by  the  newer 
quantum  mechanics. 

The  classical  theories,  as  usual  with  scientific  theories,  were  very  satis¬ 
factory  in  many  respects,  but  not  in  all;  which  is  an  unattainable  ideal  always 
demanded  from  a  good  scientific  theory.  They  also  postulated  too  much  of  a 
definite  mechanism,  which  was  the  result  of,  and  led  to,  the  semantic  dis¬ 
turbance  called  identification.  Indeed,  I  have  read  an  address  by  a  prominent 
physicist  in  which  he  claims  to  have  'seen*,  and  invites  everybody  else  to  ‘see’, 
an  'electron'.  He  challenges  his  critics,  and  seems  to  feel  like  fighting — a  quite 
usual  result  of  identification.  Electrons  represent  inferential  entities ,  and  as 
such  cannot  be  ‘seen’,  but  only  inferred,  which  does  not  detract  at  all  from  the 
importance  of  the  ‘electrons’.  The  ‘seeing’  business  was  good  enough  in  the 
infancy  of  science,  but  not  in  1933.  We  ‘see’  the  stick  broken  in  water,  the 
camera  records  it  as  broken,  an,d  yet  it  is  not  broken.  We  ‘see’  the  fan  as  a  disk, 
the  camera*  records  it  so,  but  there  is  no  disk.  We  ‘see’  a  ‘solid’  piece  of  wood  or 
stone,  which  under  the  microscope  proves  to  have  a  very  different  structure  ,  . 

In  the  older  days  the  electrodynamics  of  moving  bodies  presented  difficul¬ 
ties  quite  similar  to  the  difficulties  encountered  in  the  quantum  mechanics. 
Einstein  by  an  epoch-making  stroke  of  genius  solved  the  problem  by  observing 
that,  in  the  languages  in  question,  we  operated  with  a  notion  of  ‘simultaneity’ 
which  did  not  correspond  to  any  observable  structural  phenomenon  in  the 
physical  world.  He  discovered  that  it  is  impossible  to  establish  the  simultaneity 
of  two  events  occurring  at  different  places,  and  that  a  thorough  revision  of  our 
old  theories  is  necessary  in  this  connection.  Einstein  formulated  a  procedure, 
a  method  for  measurements,  taking  into  account  the  known  laws  of  the  propa¬ 
gation  of  light  and  electromagnetic  phenomena.  He  once  more  established  the 
most  important  semantic  thesis  that  the  laws  of  nature  are  relations  which  are 
discovered  between  events  which  are  actually  observed,  or  which  are  funda¬ 
mentally  observable . 

It  appears  that  in  the  older  quantum  mechanics  there  were  introduced 
some  objectified  entities  which  were  never  observed,  as,  for  instance,  the  posi¬ 
tions,  velocities,  and  periods  of  ‘electrons’  inside  the  atom.  How  indeed  could 
we  find  lengths  and  ‘times’  inside  the  atom?  Such  a  procedure  requires  the  intro¬ 
duction  of  rods  and  clocks,  which  themselves  consist  of  atoms;  so  that  inside 
the  atom  such  a  procedure  cannot  be  applied.  We  see  clearly  that  all  such 
conclusions  are  of  an  indirect  character;  but  of  course  such  conclusions  should 

THE  OLDER  'MATTER1 

be  based  on  some  observable  facts,  and  not  only  on  our  freedom  to  use  words 
in  any  manner  whatsoever.  It  follows  that  we  must  give  up  a  language  that 
speaks  in  terms  of  the  'position’  of  an  electron  at  a  given  'time*.  ,  and  use 
instead  a  language  that  describes  observable  characteristics,  as,  for  instance, 
energy  levels  which  are  directly  measurable  by  electron  impacts  and  the  fre¬ 
quencies  which  are  derivable  from  them,  the  intensity  and  polarization  of  the 
emitted  waves  .  ;  instead  of  electronic  'motions’  inside  the  atom,  which  never 
are  and  never  can  be  actually  observed.  It  is  structurally  indispensable  to  look 
for  such  data  which  are  actual  or  at  least  can  be  observed. 

As  words  are  not  the  things  we  speak  about,  and  structure  is  the  only  link 
between  them,  structure  becomes  the  only  content  of  knowledge.  If  we  gamble 
on  verbal  structures  that  have  no  observable  empirical  structures,  such  gam¬ 
bling  can  never  give  us  any  structural  information  about  the  world.  Therefore 
such  verbal  structures  are  structurally  obsolete,  and  if  we  believe  in  them, 
they  induce  delusions  or  other  semantic  disturbances. 

CHAPTER  XLI 

THE  NEWER  ‘MATTER’ 

,  ”^le  twof°y  nature  of  light  as  a  light- wave  and  as  a  light-quantum  is 
thus  extended  to  electrons  and,  further,  to  atoms:  their  wave-Sture  U 
asserting  itself  more  and  more,  theoretically  and  experimentally  as  con 
current  with  their  corpuscular  nature.  <«„  Y  **  “oL“rfeld 

“ncepts  of  wave  amplitude,  electric  and  magnetic  field  strengths 
nf  nfil  p?SI^'  ?c’  were  originally  derived  from  primitive  experiences 
elastic  bidSs.S«is>  “  h<!  observatlon  of  water  waves  or  the  vibrations  of 

niiTnre  °f  <>ua,?tum  theory  centers  on  the  fact  that  th^particle 

"*  ■ mm,y  — mm  “ir* »'  «* “ 

H  3  coiiLy.  uia)  w  HEISENBERG 

extraordinarily  difficult  to  tackle  problems  of  the  above 
kind,  as  long  as  we  feel  obliged  on  epistemological  grounds  to  repress  in- 

as*transition0OTohfh-r>!niCS’  and  *1°  °?erate  on|y  with  such  abstract  ideas 
as  transition  probabilities,  energy  levels,  etc.  <466,  E.  schrodinger 

'  •  ;  for  visualization,  however,  we  must  content  ourselves  with  two  in¬ 
complete  analogies— the  wave  picture  and  the  corpuscular  picture.  <2is> 

W.  HEISENBERG 

Not  every  physicist  is  an  epistemologist,  and  not 
be  one  Special  investigation  claims  a  whole  man, 
knowledge.  (326) 

everyone  must  or  can 
so  does  the  theory  of 
E.  MACH 

The  following  chapter  was  written  in  1928  and  since  then  the  newer  quantum 
mechanics  has  been  developed  much  further,  proved  enormously  fruitful,  and 
has  been  repeatedly  supported  by  experiments.  The  literature  on  this  subject 
is  steadily  accumulating,  the  most  important  classical  memoirs  by  the  origina¬ 
tors  of  this  new  scientific  trend  have  been  collected  into  book  form  and  are  now 
easily  accessible.  There  is  also  a  large  number  of  excellent  technical,  as  well 
as  non-technical  presentations.  On  reading  in  December  1932  what  I  had 
written  in  1928,  I  find  that  although  from  some  aspects  the  presentation  may 
be  considered  unsatisfactory  and  antiquated,  yet  the  epistemological  side  of 
the  older  presentation  remains  valid.  So  it  seems  advisable  to  retain  this  chapter 
and  add  only  a  few  further  A  suggestions. 

It  is  known  that  practically  all  creative  and  constructive  physicists,  who 
have  produced  revolutionary  and  lasting  works,  were  interested  in  epistemology. 
Ihere  are  many  physicists  who  know  as  much  physics  as  an  Einstein,  for  in- 
stance,  yet  Einstein  remains  quite  unique  and  his  work  is  to  a  large  extent 
responsible  for  the  present  revolutionary  developments  of  physics.  The  reason 
is  simple.  Einstein  has  corrected  a  long  established  epistemological  fallacy, 
which  can  be  expressed  in  my  language  as  the  rejection  of  the  structural  fallacy 
of  elementalism  in  a  limited  yet  very  important  field  of  physics.  He  also  estab¬ 
lished  and  applied  new  fundamental  epistemological  principles,  which  is  another 

THE  NEWER  ‘MATTER* 

way  of  saying  that  he  established  new  standards  of  evaluation  in  physics,  as 
for  instance,  that  we  should  never  postulate  entities  which  cannot  possibly  be 
observed,  that  the  ‘laws  of  nature’  should  be  formulated  in  terms  of  generally 
invariant  relations  expressed  in  tensor  equations  ,  . 

The  weakness  of  the  system  of  Einstein,  resulting  in  many  futile  criticisms, 
lies  in  the  fact  that  he  eliminated  elementalism  in  one  vital  region  of  physics, 
but  he  did  not  formulate  the  general  epistemological  principle  of  non-elementalism, 
which  should  be  applied  everywhere,  daily  life  included.  This  he  could  not 
have  accomplished  without  a  still  deeper  enquiry  into  the  mechanism  of  time¬ 
binding,  which  produces  all  science,  and  which  leads  to  the  discovery  of  the 
fundamental  fallacy  in  the  use  of  the  'is*  of  identity.  Only  after  the  elimination 
of  this  remainder  in  us  of  the  primitive  man,  does  structure  become  the  only 
possible  link  between  the  objective  and  verbal  worlds,  and  becomes  also  the 
only  possible  content  of  ‘knowledge’.  ‘Similarity  of  structure’  then  demands 
the  complete  and  general  elimination  from  science  and  life  of  any  elementalism. 

The  strength  of  the  newer  quantum  mechanics  lies  in  the  fact  that  the 
younger  physicists  have  accepted  the  new  epoch-making  einsteiman  standards 
of  evaluation  or  epistemological  principles;  the  weakness  lies  in  the  fact  that 
the  scientists  do  not  realize  that  the  fallacy  of  elementalism  is  entirely  general 
and  vitiates  all  scientific  outlooks.  No  one  can  produce  satisfactory  theories, 
nor  evaluate,  nor  interpret  them  properly  as  long  as  he  continues  to  use  the 
few-valued  and  elementalistic  ‘logics’  and  ‘psychologies’,  which  are  at  present 
always  found  at  the  bottom  of  any  'evaluation  or  interpretation  .  ^  _ 

The  latest  work  of  Dirac  goes  very  far  in  the  direction  of  building  A 
physics  by  establishing  his  language  of  transformations,  states,  observables  .  , 
ascribing  structure  to  protons,  magnetic  poles  .  ,  but  even  Dirac  does  not  seem 
to  realize  the  general  fundamental  A  issues  involved.  Dirac  says:  ‘The  descrip¬ 
tion  which  quantum  mechanics  allows  us  to  give  is  merely  a  manner  of  speaking 
which  is  of  value  in  helping  us  to  deduce  and  to  remember  the  results  of  ex¬ 
periments  and  which  never  leads  to  wrong  conclusions.  One  should  not  try  to 
give  too  much  meaning  to  it.' 1  (Italics  are  mine.)  The  italicized  words  show  that 
even  Dirac  does  not  realize  fully  the  mechanism  of  identification,  as  otherwise 
he  would  not  have  used  these  words  in  this  form.  If  we  entirely  abandon  identi¬ 
fication,  then  a  theory  or  a  book,  being  verbal,  represents  nothing  else  but 
special  language;  there  is  no  ‘merely’  about  that  either,  structure  being  the  only 
possible  link  between  the  non-verbal  and  verbal  worlds.  Instead  of  warning 
the  reader  ‘that  one  should  not  try  to  give  too  much  meaning  to  it ,  we  must 
simply  insist  that  the  only  ‘meaning’  should  be  looked  for  in  structure  .  ,  the 
‘too  much  meaning’  always  indicating  inappropriate  evaluation  and  ultimately 

semantic  disturbances.  ,  f 

Current  physical  literature  shows  that  the  main  problems  of  ‘interpretation 
depend  on  the  solution  of  the  m.o  problems  of  ‘observation’,  ‘reality’,  ‘fact’.  , 
and  border  on  the  scientific  solution  of  the  problems  of  pathological  ‘delusions’, 
‘illusions’,  and  ‘hallucinations’,  all  of  which  involve  the  fundamental  issues  of 
the  elimination  of  identification .  But  once  the  A  issues  are  structurally  formu- 

X.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  ‘MATTER’ 

lated  and  applied  in  practice,  they  result  in  a  A,  non-el,  oo-valued  orientation 
which  involves  the  recognition  of  the  mulliordinaUty  of  terms .  ,  which  also 
solves  the  problems  of  quantum  ‘interpretations’,  the  details  of  which  I  cannot 
enter  into  here. 

Originally  the  quantum  writers  had  an  inclination  to  ascribe  ‘physical 
meaning  to  waves.  The  present  tendency  of  specialists  is  to  regard  the  waves 
as  ‘purely  symbolic’,  forgetting  that  experimentally  something  else  besides  the 
symbols  ‘bends  around  the  corners’.  From  a  A  point  of  view,  when  the  prob¬ 
lems  of  the  multiordinality  of  such  terms  as  ‘observation’,  ‘fact’,  ‘reality’. , 
are  understood  we  will  have  to  ascribe  ‘physical  reality’  to  the  waves,  ascribe 
finer  structure  to  the  ‘electron’,  .  We  would  also  have  to  abandon  the  A 
particle -orientation  and  treat  the  ‘electron’,  ‘proton’.,  in  a  A,  oo-valued 
way  as  minute  fields,  which  under  the  present  experimental  conditions  behave 
as  ‘particles’.  This  A  field-orientation  suggests  a  great  many  possible  inter- 
pretations,  impossible  in  the  A  'particle’-orientation. 

Mathematically,  the  geometry  of  'space  filling’  curves  would  have  to  be 
elaborated  further  so  that  we  would  better  understand  the  structure  of  plenums, 
and  this  knowledge  should  be  applied  to  physics. 

We  should  also  perform  a  direct  series  of  experiments  with  a  more  elaborate 
Faraday  box.  A  small  wooden  laboratory  should  be  isolated  from  the  rest  of 
the  world  by  every  available  energetic  screen  and  physical  experiments  repeated 
under  such  new  dynamic  conditions.  Technically  the  winding  of,  say,  a  foot 
thickness  of  insulated  wires  for  different  currents  would  not  present  any  dif¬ 
ficulties  except  for  the  door  which  should  be  also  in  the  circuit.  The  eventual 
probable  results  of  experiments  in  such  a  laboratory  under  different  conditions 
could  be  calculated  in  advance,  and  it  may  be  fairly  well  anticipated  that  at 
least  significant  discrepancies  between  the  calculations  and  actual  experiments 
would  appear,  throwing  new  light  on  the  structure  of  the  space-time  plenum, 
the  eventual  connection  between  gravitation  and  electromagnetism  ,  .  Argu¬ 
ments  alone  will  not  help  in  this  field  and  only  experiments  will  point  the 
pathway. 

Because  of  the  extensive  literature  dealing  with  the  new  quantum  mech¬ 
anics  it  seems  unnecessary  to  dwell  upon  it  any  further,  except  by  expressing 
the  hope  that  some  mathematicians  and  physicists  will  master  the  A  oo-valued 
orientation  and  will  revise  the  theories  now  existing. 

Section  A .  Introductory . 

The  new  researches  in  the  structure  of  the  materials  of  the  universe  pro¬ 
ceeded  under  unique  conditions.  On  the  one  hand,  since  Planck  in  1900  origi¬ 
nated  the  quantum  theory,  which  earlier  elaboration  we  now  call  the  classical 
quantum  theory,  the  amount  of  experimental  facts  pointing  in  the  direction  of 
some  quantum  theory  had  become  very  convincing,  yet,  on  the  other  hand,  the 
lack  of  a  structurally  satisfactory  theory  to  co-ordinate  these  new  experimental 
facts  was  becoming  distressing. 

THE  NEWER  'MATTER* 

It  appeared  as  though  there  were  either  a  lack  of  ‘geniuses’  able  to  produce 
the  required  new  theories,  or  the  geniuses  existed,  but  were  unable  to  function 
properly.  They  seemed  to  suffer  from  a  semantic  blockage  due  to  some  identi¬ 
fication  which  successfully  prevented  broader  and  unhampered  vision. 

Presently  the  co-ordinating  theories  were  produced.  In  the  production  of 
the  new  quantum  mechanics  we  see  at  work  the  unconscious  semantic  liberating 
influence  of  the  E  and  N  systems  which  had  been  developed  and  which  we 
have  already  analysed.  The  classical  theories  had  come  to  a  structural  impasse, 
but  with  the  advent  of  younger  scientists,  who  were  educated  in  the  theoretical 
semantic  freedom  of  these  new  systems,  the  semantic  blockage  due  to  ascribing 
‘objectivity’  to  ‘matter’,  ‘space’,  and  ‘time’  was  removed,  creative  forces  were 
released,  and  these  young  scientists  proceeded  to  construct  the  structural  for¬ 
mulations  needed.  They  are  now  rightly  hailed  as  geniuses. . 

It  is  astonishing  how  these  young  post-einsteinian  scientists  of  various 
lands  and  different  inclinations  produced,  independently  and  practically  simul¬ 
taneously,  various  new  quantum  theories,  using  different  methods  and  different 
mathematical,  as  well  as  national,  languages.  When  these  different  theories 
were  studied  and  compared  they  were  found  to  amount  practically  to  one  theory, 
but  expressed  by  different  mathematical  languages.  Now  the  use  of  different 
mathematical  languages  to  express  one  group  of  experimental  facts  brings  an 
additional  benefit  in  that  it  gives  diversified  verbal  structural  information  about 
the  problems  at  hand.  Since  these  developments  are  very  recent  and  progress 
has  been  extremely  rapid  it  is  hard  to  keep  track  of  the  status  of  the  problem. 

In  this  account  of  the  newer  quantum  mechanics  I  will  emphasize  only  the 
structural  and  semantic  side,  treating  the  different  theories  as  behaviour  of 
their  respective  authors,  and  as  illustrating  the  issues  above  mentioned.  From 
this  point  of  view,  we  are  not  interested  in  discussing  to  what  extent  the  given 
theories  are  ‘true’  or  ‘false’,  which  means  no  more  than  similar  or  dissimilar  to 
the  world  in  structure.  We  are  interested  directly  in  those  semantic  aspects  of 
human  behaviour  which  have  been  neglected.  When  ‘Smith’  puts  a  black  mark 
on  white  paper,  it  is  to  be  called  human  behaviour ,  and  behaviour  unique  for 
man.  Our  analysis  does  not  involve  the  question  of  the  validity  of  his  doings. 
But  since  he  did  it,  let  us  analyse  his  doings. 

In  speaking  about  theories  as  complex  and  technical  as  the  newer  quantum 
mechanics,  it  is  practically  impossible  to  give  a  satisfactory  account  in  a  non¬ 
technical  way.  Such  theories  have  not  yet  been  worked  out  thoroughly  enough, 
many  points  are  still  not  clear,  and  no  proper  evaluation  is  possible  at  present. 
These  difficulties  are  really  immaterial  to  our  present  purpose,  because  these 
theories  are  empirical  facts  on  record ,  and  they  throw  significant  light  on  human 
behaviour.  It  is  not  here  proposed  to  make  reflections  on  the  world  around  us, 
but  to  analyse  a  certain  linguistic,  structural  form  of  human  behaviour. 

From  the  point  of  view  of  structure  and  s.rt  the  classical  quantum  mechanics 
would  be  quite  enough  for  sanity  and  adjustment;  it  is  enough  to  realize  that 
the  still  older  theories  of  ‘matter’,  ‘space’,  and  ‘time’  ar  eel,  structurally  fallacious 
and  represent  only  primitive  identifications. 

X.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  ‘MATTER’ 

•  of  SUch  a  crop  of  Seniuses  and  of  several  theories  expressed 

quite  differently  yet  nearly  equivalent,  is  an  event  of  deep  human  semantic 
significance.  It  helps  to  understand  the  working  of  the  human  nervous  system, 
and  is  in  accord  with  the  present  general  theory. 

From  the  point  of  view  of 
\\  /'  the  physicist,  these  new  theor- 

\  \  /  ies  are  a  marked  structural  im- 

Q  7S  t  \  \  Classical  /  provement  over  the  classical 

»\  \  Theory  /  theory,  a  fact  which  can  best 

U  \  /  be  illustrated  by  a  diagram  of 

$  \\  \  /  a  special  case.  In  Fig.  1,  the 

g  0.5  *\  crosses  indicate  the  experi- 

i!  Experimental  Data  mental  data,  the  curves  indi- 

\\  cate  the  results  as  predicted  by 

\VNew  Quantum  tbe  classical  theory,  by  the 

-25  \\  Theory  Compton  theory,  and  by  the 

Compto&V  new  quantum  mechanics.  It 

Theory  **5^^  should  be  noticed  that  the  new 

0  h  y  — —  quantum  theory  appears  much 

O  45  30  ig0  more  in  accordance  with  the 

Angle  of  Scattering  experimental  data  than  the 

(After  The  New  Quantum  Mechanics  older  theories.  This  fact  is  of 

by  G.  Birtwistle,  p.  192)  great  structural  and  semantic 

Fig.  1  importance  to  us  as  well  as  to 

-  .  ‘  the  physicist. 

^^-Experimental  Data 

_  _  \V^New  Quantum 

Theory 

Compton 

Theory 

O  L_  .  "  u  «- 

O  45  30  735 

Angle  of  Scattering 
(After  The  New  Quantum  Mechanics 
by  G.  Birtwistle,  p.  192) 

Fig.  1 

Section  B.  The  nature  of  the  problem . 

“y  “pI“  ,h«  ”*•"»  <* ,h'  p™1"'”  •»..  w„ 

We  have  become  familiar  with  the  use  of  co-ordinates.  This  procedure  has 
been  generalized  and  has  given  rise  to  ‘generalized  co-ordinates’.  These  are 
defined  as  arbitrary  variables  which  represent  not  merely  lengths  but  may  also 
represent  angles,  surfaces,  volumes  .  ,  though  they  must  be  capable  of  repre¬ 
senting  the  3n  orthogonal  co-ordinates.  If,  in  a  special  case,  we  make  the 
"*:0f  generalized  co-ordmates  equal  to  the  number  of  degrees  of  freedom 
which  the  system  has,  these  5  generalized  co-ordinates  can  be  regarded  as  inde- 
pendent  of  each  other.  If  we  denote  by  g{  the  generalized  co-ordinate,  (i  =  1  to  s) 
t  en  the  orthogonal  co-ordinates  of  any  of  the  n  particles  can  be  represented  as 
definite  functions  of  the  generalized  co-ordinates,  so  that 

Xh  fen  ?2,  93,  .  .  .  q8)  .  (1) 

We  know  that  kinetic  energy  is  represented  by  mv2/2  where  m  represents 
the  mass  and  v  the  velocity,  or  the  ‘time’  derivative  of  the  ‘space’  travelled. 

we  want  to  find  the  value  for  the  energy  we  must  differentiate  each  of  the 
,  e<?Uatl°nS  (1)  w,th  resPect  to  ‘time’,  which  gives  the  components  of  the 
ve  ocity,  square  them,  multiply  them  by  the  corresponding  masses  and  add 
them  together  to  find  the  double  value  for  the  energy. 

THE  NEWER  'MATTER' 

For  simplicity  we  will  denote  the  ‘time’  derivatives  by  the  chosen  letter 
but  with  a  dot  over  it  (newtonian  method).  Thus, 

dxi, .  dx*  ,  d** . 

**=^2l  +  ^9S+  W 

Squaring  (2),  we  have 

“■-(£)‘s‘I+(S)v+ "+(S>' 

,  „dxh  dxh  .  .  dxh  ...  ... 
+  2  —  —  M2  +  2  —  —  Ms  + 
dqi  dq2  dqi  dqz 

♦  see  page  xii 

ndxh  dxh  .  .  , 
+  2-—  —  2s23  + 
052  023 

The  last  expression  (3)  can  be  simplified : 

.  v'1  dxh  .  .  (41 

Xh2  =2  22  ^  TT  2<®>  ■  W 

Pi  fe-i  32<  32*, 

It  is  easy  to  see  that  if  in  (4)  we  put  k  =i  we  will  have  square  members, 
and  when  k,  every  term  will  occur  twice  and  so  the  above  abbreviation  (  ), 

covers  the  formula  (3).  f  , 

If  we  write  similar  expressions  for  all  of  the  3 n  orthogonal  co-ordinates, 
multiply  by  the  corresponding  masses  and  then  add  them  together  we  obtain 
twice  the  value  for  the  kinetic  energy  2 L. 

i—s  k**s 

2L  =  X)  X  c*  ft  ft*  where 

i-i  k=i 

to  \dxhdxh  dyndyk 

C*k  mh  |_  dqi  dqje  dqi  dqu  dqi  dqk  J 

The  coefficients  in  the  expansion  of  Ok  depend  only  on  the  values  of  the  general¬ 
ized  co-ordinates  and  are  independent  of  the  value  of  the  time-derivatives. 
The  time-derivatives  can  be  properly  called  generalized  velocities ,  and  we  may 

denote  them  by  q ».2 

In  establishing  formulae  for  the  quantum  theory  we  want  to  be  as  general 
as  possible  and  not  restrict  ourselves  to  vibrational  energy  only.  But  we  want 
to  take  into  consideration  any  arbitrary  point-mass,  independently  of  whether 

we  assume  this  point  to  be  charged  or  not. 

We  define  the  momentum  or  impulse  as  the  product  of  the  mass  and  the 
velocity,  or,  p  =mv.  If,  instead  of  denoting  our  co-ordinates  by  *,  y,  and  2,  we 
use  the  generalized  co-ordinates  qit  we  would  have  for  the  magnitude  and 
direction  of  the  velocities  the  time-derivatives  of  the  co-ordinates;  namely, 
qit  where  qx=x=dx/dt,  q2=y=dy/dt ,  . 

If  Pu  Pit  Pit  represent  the  corresponding  components  of  the  momentum 
or  impulse,  then  we  would  have  pi=mqi. 

X.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  ‘MATTER’ 

We  should  notice  that  the  dynamical  triplet  of  impulse  co-ordinates  occurs 
conjointly  with  the  geometrical  triplet  of  the  co-ordinates  of  position.  The 
second  law  of  motion  tells  us  that  ‘the  change  in  momentum  is  proportional  to 
the  impressed  force  and  takes  place  in  the  direction  in  which  that  force  acts’. 
If  we  assume  that  the  force  K  is  derivable  from  the  potential  energy  Epot,  (a 

function  of  $*•),  then  we  have  pi  =K<  =~^Epo\  (6) 

dqi  *  w 

The  kinetic  energy  ( Ekin )  is  represented  by 

2  2m 

where  by  We  call  the  total  energy,  which  is  represented  as 

the  sum  of  the  kinetic  and  the  potential  energy,  as  expressed  in  terms  of  the 
generalized  co-ordinates  and  momenta,  the  hamiltonian  function  H.  Then 
we  have: 

H  (q,  p)  =Ekin+Epct,  9H=dEMn  =Pi 

dq%  dqi  dpi  dpi  m 

From  (5),  (6),  and  (7),  we  get  the  fundamental  equations  of  motion, 

(7) 

dt  dpi  dt  dqi 

The  above  hamiltonian,  or  canonical,  form  of  the  equations  is  remarkable 
because  it  preserves  its  form  if  any  arbitrary  co-ordinates  are  introduced;  it  is 
invariant  under  the  transformation  of  co-ordinates.  The  equations  hold  not 
only  for  an  individual  point-mass  but  also  for  any  arbitrary  mechanical  system. 
For  arbitrary  co-ordinates  and  systems  the  momentum  or  impulse  p  is  defined  by 

A  _&Ekin 

P*  so  that  the 

dqi 

kinetic  energy  is  expressed  as  a  function  of  the  g.-'j  and  their  derivatives  the  g,’s. 

To  help  visualization  we  can  construct  and  consider  the  p  and  q  as  rect¬ 
angular  co-ordinates  in  two  dimensions  in  the  phase  plane  of  our  system.  In 
this  plane  the  sequence  of  those  graph-points  that  correspond  to  the  successive 
states  of  motion  of  the  system  represent  the  phase  paths  or  phase-orbits.  The 
characteristic  structural  feature  of  the  quantum  theory  is  that  it  selects  a  dis¬ 
crete  family  of  phase-orbits  from  the  infinity  of  possible  orbits. 

We  next  consider  a  point-mass  m  that  is  bound  elastically  to  its  position 
of  rest,  and  which  can  move  to  either  side  of  the  central  position  only  in  the 
direction  x  =q,  or  its  reverse,  when  experiencing  a  restoring  force.  We  call  such 
point-mass  a  linear  oscillator.  If  we  wish  to  emphasize  that  our  oscillator  is 
capable  only  of  definite  vibrations,  on  account  of  its  elastic  attachment,  we 
call  it  a  ‘harmonic  oscillator’.  If  the  vibration  number,  or  the  frequency  of  the 
oscillator,  winch  is  represented  by  the  number  of  its  free  vibrations  per  unit 
of  time  ,  is  denoted  by  v,  then  the  vibration  is  represented  by  x  =q  =a  sin  2irvt. 

THE  NEWER  'MATTER' 

The  impulse  becomes  p-mv-mq-2irvma  cos  2 rvt.  The  phase-orbit  is  repre- 

g2  P 2 

sented  by  an  ellipse  in  the  p-g-plane  and  is  given  by  the  equation  - +“2  =  1. 
where  the  minor  axis  b  =  2irvma. 

In  our  family  of  orbits  the  phase  area  between  two  orbits  is  equal  to  the 
quantum  of  action  h.  Sommerfeld  regards  h  as  an  elementary  region  or  element 
of  the  phase  area,  and  considers  it  as  the  definition  of  the  Planck  quantum 
of  action  h.  If  Wn  represents  the  energy  of  the  oscillator  when  it  describes  the 
w-th  orbit,  then  Wn=nhv.  In  these  orbits  the  energy  appears  as  a  whole 
multiple  of  the  elementary  quantum  of  energy;  €  =hv,  and  Wn  =ne. 

We  call  stationary  states  of  the  oscillator  those  states  which  the  oscillator 
may  pass  through  without  cessation  and  without  loss  of  energy,  or,  without 
radiation. 

When  an  oscillator  retains  its  stationary  state,  its  energy  is  constant  and 
its  graph  appears  as  an  ellipse  of  the  family  in  the  phase  plane.  However, 
when  the  energy  of  the  oscillator  changes  and  jumps  over  to  a  smaller  orbit, 
it  emits  energy.  When  it  passes  to  a  larger  orbit  it  absorbs  energy.  The  emission 
and  absorption  of  energy  occurs  in  multiples  of  the  energy  quantum,  6. 

The  graphs  of  the  system  in  the  phase  plane  are  restricted  to  certain 
‘quantised*  orbits.  Between  each  orbit  and  its  successor  there  is  an  elementary 
region,  of  area  h.  The  w-th  orbit,  if  closed,  has  as  area  nh>  Or,  expressed  sym¬ 
bolically,  fpdg=nh.  This  integral  is  called  the  phase  integral  and  is  taken 
along  the  «-th  orbit. 

The  quantum  hypothesis  can  be  structurally  formulated  so  that  the  phase 
integral  must  be  a  whole  multiple  of  the  quantum  of  action  h.  This  forin  of 
the  classical  quantum  postulate  is  more  general  than  the  original  formulation 
of  Planck,  although  it  includes  the  latter  as  a  particular  case. 

pi 

In  case  of  a  rotating  point-mass,  a  similar  analysis  gives  us  Ekin  =-r 

and  when  ,  Ew»  = vf  =  T  where  v  represents  the  rotation  frequency 

2 re  2  2tc  l 

of  the  rotator,  or  the  number  of  full  revolutions  per  unit  of  ‘time’,  and  takes  the 
place  of  the  vibration  number  of  the  oscillator. 

In  the  classical  theory,  the  quantised  states  were  distinguished  from  all 
other  possibilities  by  the  characteristic  whole  numbers,  and  so  we  had  a  network. 
In  a  quantum  orbit  the  ‘electron’,  if  undisturbed,  was  supposed  to  move  per¬ 
manently  without  resistance  and  not  to  emit  radiation.  The  phase-space, 
representing  the  manifold  of  the  possible  states,  including  non-stationary  states, 
is  crossed,  mesh-like,  by  the  graph  curves  of  the  stationary  orbits.  The  size 
of  the  meshes  is  determined  by  Planck’s  constant  h ,3 

Section  C .  Matrices . 

The  older  quantum  mechanics  forms  an  elaborate  system,  and  we  have  a 
large  accumulation  of  numerical  data  on  record.  Some  of  these  data  corroborated 
the  older  theories  nicely,  but  some  data  were  in  contradiction  to  the  classical 

X.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  ‘MATTER’ 

theory.  The  problem  was  not  to  discard  the  numerical  data,  which,  whatever 
they  mean  structurally,  represent  quite  solidly  established  data,  but  to  find 
new  equations  which  would  be  satisfied  by  these  facts.  Now  ‘new  equations’ 

really  mean  languages  of  new  structure,  and  therefore  new  formulations  had 
to  be  discovered. 

Dealing  with  tables  which  give  special  theoretical  data,  it  was  natural  to 
start  with  a  calculus  which  deals  with  such  numerical  special  tables.  Such  a 
calculus  had  been  developed  long  ago,  and  was  called  the  matrix  calculus 
Later  on,  when  matrices  themselves  were  treated  as  complex  quantities,  and 
still  later,  as  operators,  we  were  enabled  to  pass  to  the  more  developed  calculi 
which  use  ordinary  differential  equations.  The  new  quantum  theories  give  us 
a  unique  case,  in  which  several  mathematical  methods  have  been  used  at  once 
and  of  which  the  results  are  fairly  in  accord. 

At  this  point  it  is  advisable  to  give  a  few  structural  explanations  of  these 
mathematica1  notions,  including  the  matrix  calculus.  If  we  have  two  equations 
of  the  first  degree  with  two  variables;  namely,  a1x+b1y  =  c1  and  a2x+b2y=c2, 

the  solution  of  these  equations  takes  the  form;  x-btCl  -cia,. 

j  .  ai&2—  a\b%—a?b\ 

The  common  denominator  of  the  two  solutions  can  be  written  in  a  two- 
dimensional  table  u 

lai,  &i| 

.  I  *2  f  (1) 

rivhtV8  "ndersf°d  as. the  Product  of  the  upper  left-hand  number  and  the  lower 
hand  nMte^mber’  mmUS  ^  produCt  of  the  Iower  left-hand  and  upper  right- 

Similarly,  the  numerators  of  these  solutions  can  also  be  represented  in 
the  form  of  two-dimensional  tables;  namely, 

(2)  and  ciai  —  ciOj 

(3) 

4*»-6i»-|Cl’  bl 

I  ^2,  ^2  , 

to  which  the  above-mentioned  rule  appHes.  Expressions  like2’(lT'  (2),  (3)  are 
called  determinants  of  the  second  order.  W 

The  numbers  in  the  first,  second  .  ,  horizontal  lines  are  called  the  first 
second  ,  rows,  respectively;  the  vertical  lines  are  called  first,  second  .  ,  columns'. 

enuJin  abT  definit|°nS  a"d  method  0411  be  aPP,ied  to  a»y  "umber  of 

wouH  b  s  “  T  "Umber  °f  variables-  and  in  case  our  determinant 
would  have  n%  numbers,  n  rows  and  n  columns. 

We  may  use  another  notation  which  employs  one  letter  for  the  coefficients 
o  four  variables,  with  indexes  or  suffixes  to  indicate  that  their  values  are 
dirterent.  Let  us  consider  »2  elements  in  the  table: 

fli.i»  ai.2>  ^1.3,  .  .  .  ,  ai >n 
<*2,2,  <*2,3,  •  •  •  ,  a2,n 

™  an,2f  <*n,3,  ...»  <*n,H  | 

The  expression  (4)  is  called  a  determinant  of  the  n- th  order. 

(4) 

THE  NEWER  'MATTER' 

The  notation  by  suffixes  is  very  convenient  and  is  very  much  used  these 
days.  The  first  suffix  denotes  the  row,  the  second  the  column  in  which  the 
element  is  situated.  Usually  the  comma  dividing  the  two  numbers  in  the  index 
is  dropped  and  the  coefficients  are  written  simply  an,  instead  of  ai,i.  In  general 
the  element  a*t*,  or  a represents  the  element  in  row  i  and  column  k. 

The  elements  lying  in  the  diagonal  joining  the  upper  left-hand  to  the  lower 
right-hand  number  are  called  the  principal  diagonal.  In  our  example  we  notice 
that  the  elements  in  the  diagonal  are  such  that  i—k. 

We  have  definite  rules  by  which  we  can  arrive  at  the  solution  of  our 
equations,  once  the  coefficients,  which  are  the  elements  of  the  determinant, 
are  given.  In  general,  the  determinants  are  treated  as  a  functional  form. 

If  m  and  n  are  positive  integers,  a  manifold,  or  system  of  mn  ordered 
quantities  or  elements  arranged  in  m  horizontal  and  n  vertical  rows,  will  be 
called  a  rectangular  matrix  and  we  may  use  the  notation  A  =  (a(mn)) : 

(a(ll)  a(12)  a(13) 
a(21)  a(22)  a(23) 
a(31)  a  (3*2)  a(33) 

^  ,  or  (a(nm)). 

The  numbers  m  and  n  are  called  the  orders  of  the  matrix.  If  m—n  the  matrix 
is  called  a  square  matrix.  Without  loss  of  generality  we  can  treat  any  rectangular 
matrix  in  which  m  n  as  a  square  matrix  by  supplementing  the  missing  rows 

and  columns  with  zeros. 
A  matrix  of  the  type, 

or  (5(wm))f 

where  8(nm)  «1  for  n=m,  and  6(nm)  *0  for  n  ^  m,  is  called  a  unit  matrix. 

The  matrix 

a(33) 

^  or  ( a(tm )  S(nm)), 

is  called  a  diagonal  matrix.  In  the  new  quantum  mechanics  a  diagonal  matrix 
is  independent  of  t  and  represents  a  constant  of  the  classical  theory.  The 
reverse  is  not  necessarily  true.  The  operation  of  differentiation  can  be  expressed 
in  terms  of  multiplication  of  matrices  with  the  aid  of  the  unit  matrix.4 

Equations  in  which  matrices  are  equated  are  called  matrix  equations.  If 
the  equations  involve  only  one  unknown  matrix,  which  does  not  occur  more 
than  once  as  a  factor,  such  equations  are  called  matrix  equations  of  the  first 
degree. 

X.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  ‘MATTER’ 

The  m  scalar  equations 

011*1+012*2  +  .  • 

•  +01n*n  — C\ 

021*1  +022*2  +  •  • 

•  +02»*n  =  C% 

0ml*l+0m2*2+  •  . 

•  +0m«*n  =  Cm 

are  together  equivalent  to  one  single  matrix  equation.  There  are  several  ways 
in  which  the  notation  can  be  simplified. 

The  difference  between  a  determinant  and  a  matrix  is  subtle,  but  important 
By  a  determinant  we  understand,  by  definition,  a  certain  homogeneous  poly¬ 
nomial  of  the  n-th  degree,  in  the  «2  elements  aH.  Accordingly,  a  determinant 
gives  a  definite  number  when  calculated. 

But  m  many  instances  we  are  interested  in  the  table ,  or  the  n2  elements 
arranged  in  a  certain  order  but  not  combined  into  a  polynomial.  Such  an  array, 
or  table,  is  called  a  matrix.  Thus,  from  this  point  of  view,  a  matrix  does  not 
represent  a  definite  quantity,  but  a  system  of  quantities,  and  so  a  matrix  is 
not  a  determinant. 

We  can  illustrate  this  difference  by  an  example.  If  we  take  a  determinant 
of  the  second  order 

Iai,  I 

02,  b%  I 

and  change  the  rows  into  columns,  or  vice  versa,  thus: 

0i t  02  I 
b\,  I 

the  value  of  both  determinants  will  be  equal;  namely, 

01&2  —  02&1, 

by  the  definition  rule  already  given;  yet  the  matrices  of  the  two  determinants 
are  different . 

Although  different,  a  determinant  nevertheless  defines  a  matrix,  called  the 
matrix  of  the  determinant;  conversely,  a  matrix  defines  a  determinant,  called 
the  determinant  of  the  matrix. 

We  have  said  that  a  matrix  does  not  represent  a  quantity,  while  a  deter¬ 
minant  does.  At  this  stage,  and  from  this  point  of  view,  we  may  say  so  legiti¬ 
mately.  However,  we  might  eventually  treat  a  matrix  as  a  quantity  also;  but 
for  this  purpose  we  should  have  to  enlarge  the  meaning  of  the  term  'quantity'. 

In  our  present  use  of  the  term  'quantity'  we  mean  the  real  and  complex 
quantities  of  ordinary  algebra. 

It  may  be  said  that  mathematicians  have  had  a  peculiar  tendency,  which 
has  proven  of  great  value  in  the  development  of  mathematics,  gradually  to 
extend  the  meaning  of  terms  in  order  to  embrace  new  notions  as  they  arise. 
For  instance,  we  have  enlarged  the  primitive  meaning  applied  to  positive  in¬ 
tegers  to  embrace  negative  numbers,  which  formerly  would  not  have  been  con¬ 
sidered  as  quantities.  Similarly,  if  we  here  use  the  ordinary  notion  of  algebraic 
quantity,  then  a  matrix  is  not  a  quantity  but  a  system  of  quantities.  The 
problem  is,  how  shall  we  enlarge  this  meaning  to  include  the  matrices? 

THE  NEWER  'MATTER’ 

Mathematics  recognizes  that  this  generalization  of  mathematical  notions  is 
extremely  useful  and  legitimate .  This  structural  issue  appears  to  be  of  very 
general  application,  as  all  of  us  exhibit  a  tendency  towards  it.  It  is  a  purely 
mathematical  and  useful  tendency  in  mathematics,  but  it  leads  to  disastrous 
results  when  applied  to  daily-L-j  abstractions,  as  explained  in  Part  VII.  In 
this  connection  we  should  recall  the  difference  between  the  mathematical  con¬ 
tentless  abstractions  and  the  abstractions  with  physical  content,  with  which 
we  are  generally  concerned  in  science  and  life. 

Let  us  now  follow  up  the  method  by  which  a  matrix  can  be  considered  as 
a  quantity.  If  we  have  objects  of  two  or  more  kinds  which  can  be  counted  or 
measured,  and  if  we  consider  an  aggregate  of  such  objects,  say  5  horses,  3  cows 
and  2  sheep,  we  could  denote  such  a  complex  quantity  by  the  symbol  (5,3,2). 
In  this  case,  the  first  place  in  our  symbol  would  be  reserved  for  horses,  the 
second  for  cows,  and  the  third  for  sheep. 

In  mathematics,  we  do  not  specify  horses,  or  cows,  or  sheep,  but  consider 
sets  of  quantities,  and  distinguish  them  by  the  position  which  they  have  in  our 
symbolism.  We  may  denote  such  a  complex  quantity  by  a  single  letter, 
A  =  (atb,c,).  (For  instance,  we  denote  a  fraction  by  a  single  letter,  although  a 
fraction  is  specified  by  two  numbers.) 

In  such  an  instance,  we  should  call  a  complex  quantity  equal  to  another 
when,  and  only  when,  the  components  are  respectively  equal.  And  a  complex 
quantity  is  said  to  vanish  only  in  case  all  the  components  vanish. 

Ordinary  mathematical  operations  can  be  applied  to  such  complex  quan¬ 
tities.  For  instance,  we  may  define  a  sum  or  difference  of  two  complex  quantities 
A '  =  (ai,  bit  ci)  and  A”  =  (a2,  b2,  c2)  as 
A'±A"  —  (aid=a2,  biztb2j  ci±C2)  •  * 

a  definition  which  is  entirely  satisfactory  theoretically,  and  also  practically,  as 
can  be  verified  from  our  example. 

From  this  point  of  view  we  may  consider  a  matrix  as  a  complex  quantity 
with  mn  or  m2  components.  A  matrix  would  then  represent  a  complex  quantity, 
as  a  special  case  under  the  general  method  sketched  above. 

We  could  then  define  our  further  operations.  A  matrix  would  be  said  to 
be  zero  when  all  elements  are  equal  to  zero.  Two  matrices  would  be  said  to  be 
equal  when  they  have  equal  numbers  of  rows  and  columns  and  every  element 
of  one  is  equal  to  the  corresponding  element  of  the  other. 

By  setting  up  some  such  rules  we  could  develop  a  calculus  of  matrices,  and 
matrices  would  be  considered  as  complex  numbers.  In  general,  the  algebraic 
rules  would  be  found  to  be  applicable  to  matrices,  which  would  further  justify 
us  in  treating  matrices  as  complex  numbers. 

One  of  the  notable  exceptions  in  our  operations  would  be  found  in  the 
application  of  the  classical  operation  of  multiplication  and  its  dependencies. 
In  ordinary  algebra  and  arithmetic,  multiplication  is  what  is  called  commu¬ 
tative’  which  means  that  2  X3  =  3x2=6,  or  axb-b  Xa* 

In  defining  the  multiplication  of  matrices  we  have  no  a  priori  grounds  for 
determining  why  one  definition  or  restriction  should  be  preferable  to  another. 

X.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  ‘MATTER* 

Only  practice  can  show  which  definition  is  more  workable  or  more  fruitful  in 
results.  In  the  matrix  calculus  the  definition  of  Cayley  is  generally  accepted, 
as  it  has  led  to  the  most  workable  results.  It  was  based  on  considerations  of 
the  composition  of  linear  tranformations. 

The  definition  is  approximately  as  follows:  The  product  ab  of  two  square 
matrices  of  the  n- th  order  gives  a  square  matrix  of  the  n-th  order  in  which  the 
element  which  lies  in  the  i~ th  row  andj-th  column  is  obtained  by  multiplying 
each  element  of  the  f-th  row  of  a  by  the  corresponding  element  of  the  j-th 
column  of  b  and  adding  the  results. 

If  we  denote  by  a and  b a  the  elements  in  the  V-th  row  and  j-th  column  of 
a  and  b  respectively,  then  by  definition  the  element  (ij)  of  our  product  ab 
would  give, 

+Gt2&2j  +  *  *  *  (5) 

and  the  (ij)  element  in  the  matrix  ba  would  be 

aijbn  +<Hj^*2  +  *  •  *  +flB /&<»•  (6) 

In  general,  the  quantities  (5)  and  (6)  are  not  equal  and  therefore  we  see 
that  the  multiplication  of  matrices  is,  in  general,  not  commutative.  The  order  in 
which  we  perform  our  multiplication  is  of  importance  and  ab  is  not  generally 
equal  to  ba,  (ab^  ba).5 

It  should  be  noticed  that  the  vector  calculus  has  made  us  familiar  with 
new  operations  which  differ  from  arithmetical  operations.  For  instance,  the 
sum  of  two  vectors  differs  in  general  from  the  arithmetical  sum  and  is  defined 
by  the  law  of  the  parallelogram  (see  Chapter  XXXIII).  This  definition  is 
more  general,  and  the  arithmetical  definition  expresses  only  the  particular  case 
in  which  the  vectors  have  one  direction.  Similarly,  the  non-commutative  law 
of  multiplication  corresponds  more  closely  to  vector  multiplication  than  to 
arithmetical  multiplication. 

We  will  not  go  further  into  the  details  of  the  matrix  calculus,  which  is  a 
well-developed  mathematical  discipline  with  a  large  literature,  but  will  empha¬ 
size  some  methodological  points  of  importance. 

One  of  the  main  applications  of  the  theory  of  matrices  is  found  in  the 
subject  of  linear  transformations . 

In  mathematics,  instead  of  using  the  given  variables,  we  very  often  intro¬ 
duce  new  variables  which  are  functions  of  the  old.  Such  transformations,  or 
change  of  variables,  are  particularly  simple  and  important  when  the  functions 
in  question  are  homogeneous  and  linear. 

If  xu  xz,  .  .  .  ,  xn  represent  the  original  variables,  and  xi,  .  .  .  ,  xnf  the 
new  variables,  we  have,  by  definition,  the  formulae  of  transformations: 

- \-alnxn 

Xn=aniXi-i - bannXn- 

The  square  matrix  made  up  of  the  coefficients  is  called  the  matrix  of  the  trans¬ 
formation  and  the  determinant  is  called  the  determinant  of  the  transformation 
and  is  completely  determined  by  the  matrix.  We  have  already  seen  the  import¬ 
ance  of  linear  equations  and  linear  transformations  in  physics  and  therefore  in 

THE  NEWER  ‘MATTER1 

the  investigation  of  the  world  around  us.  The  theory  of  matrices  is  connected 
with  such  transformations,  hence  the  importance  of  the  theory  of  matrices  for 
physics. 

For  our  purpose  another  characteristic  of  the  matrix  calculus  is  of  interest 
and  that  is  the  fact  that  in  physics  we  usually  have  a  large  number  of  empirical 
numerical  data  which  enter  as  coefficients  in  equations  and  which  can  always 
be  put  in  the  form  of  a  two-dimensional  array  of  numbers,  or  a  table,  which 
we  have  just  called  a  matrix. 

It  appears  that  every  physical  quantity,  however  complicated,  can  be 
represented  by  such  a  table  giving  the  values  of  the  parameters  which  determine 
its  character.  From  the  definition  of  the  term  ‘variable'  as  any  value  out  of 
a  possible  range  of  values,  we  might  treat  our  variables  in  two  distinct  ways, 
one  from  the  point  of  view  of  function  or  operations,  the  other  from  the 
extensional  point  of  view,  when  the  function  or  operations  are  unknown,  although 
the  particular  values  of  the  variable  are  given.  The  matrix  calculus  takes  this 
last  point  of  view. 

In  physical  research  work  we  deal  for  the  most  part  with  arrays  of  numbers 
or  unique  and  specific,  mostly  asymmetrical,  relations  which  the  experiments 
give  us.  Our  usual  problem  is  to  find  the  structure,  the  function,  and  the 
operations  which  are  satisfied  by  the  given  experimental  relations. 

We  see  that  the  dual  approach  to  our  solutions  is  due  entirely  to  the  defini¬ 
tion  which  we  have  accepted  for  the  variable.  We  have  two  issues:  Either  to 
find  the  values  of  the  variable  which  satisfy  the  given  function  and  operations 
or,  having  particular  values  of  the  variable  (experimental),  to  find  the  function 
and  operations. 

Obviously  every  physical  quantity  can  be  represented  by  a  matrix,  which 
may  be  a  sequence,  and  every  mathematical  theorem  can  be  reduced  to  a 
property  of  matrices.  Once  the  proper  mathematical  theories  are  worked  out 
it  will  be  always  possible  to  pass  from  one  form  of  representation  to  the  other.6 

In  the  older  mechanics  the  functions  were  rather  obvious  and  so  the  use 
of  the  matrix  calculus  was  not  so  imperative.  In  the  newer  mechanics,  the 
opposite  is  the  case.  We  have  a  large  amount  of  numerical  experimental 
relations,  but  the  functions  and  operations  connecting  these  variables  are 
unknown  and  the  problem  is  to  find  them.  From  this  point  of  view  the  matrix 
calculus  represents  an  extensional  calculus,  a  calculus  of  observation .  In  using 
the  descriptive  term  ‘observation’  we  must  add  that  some  objections  have 
been  advanced  to  such  a  use  of  the  term.  The  answer  is  that  the  term  ‘observa¬ 
tion’,  like  most  of  our  most  important  terms,  must  be  considered  a  multiordinal 
term .  Once  this  is  understood  the  objections  to  the  use  of  the  term  do  not  hold. 

There  is  no  limitation  as  to  what  the  elements  of  a  matrix  may  represent; 
they  may  be  functions,  functions  of  functions  ,  . 

Section  D .  The  operator  calculus. 

The  use  of  the  operator  calculus  is  interesting,  structurally  and  psycho¬ 
logically,  in  that  attention  is  concentrated,  not  on  the  numerical  quantities, 

X.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  ‘MATTER’ 

but  on  the  semantic  operations  of  combining  them.  The  calculi  used  in  the 
newer  quantum  mechanics  are  peculiar,  because,  while  they  retain  the  numerical 
data  and  as  far  as  possible,  the  classical  equations,  they  alter  the  operations 
by  which  these  quantities  are  combined,  or  the  interpretation  of  the  equations. 

As  an  illustration  of  such  a  procedure  we  can  take  two  different  formulae 
for  the  addition  of  velocities!  one  from  the  classical  mechanics,  where 

^13  =  ^12  +  ^23,  (1) 

and  the  other,  the  formula  for  velocity  as  given  by  the  Einstein  theory;  namely, 

yn-Y*  +  V»  . 

(2) 

c2 

In  these  formulae  Vlt  represents  the  velocity  of  body  1  relative  to  body  2 
!n  formuk  (1)  the  sign  '+’  symbolizes  the  ordinary  arithmetical  operation  of 
addition.  As  we  already  know,  this  formula  has  proven  too  simple  to  represent 
accurately  the  experimental  data,  and  Einstein  has  replaced  it  by  the  more 
elaborate  formula  (2). 

The  above  statement  is  the  usual  way  of  speaking  about  the  modification 
m  formulation  which  has  taken  place  in  physics  since  Einstein.  But  we  could 
equally  well  say  that  the  formula  has  not  been  altered  except  that  the  '  +’  has 
no  longer  the  old  meaning  and  does  not  now  represent  the  arithmetical  operation 
of  addition.  Both  points  of  view  lead  ultimately  to  one  value,  F18,  and  the 
computations  are  similar  in  both  cases. 

We  should  notice  especially  the  great  freedom  with  which  we  can  treat 
mathematical  entities.  Our  voluntary  selection  of  the  point  of  view  becomes 
important.  A  similar  freedom  of  selection  of  interpretation  appears  to  a  still 
larger  extent  in  all  verbal  problems,  a  fact  of  considerable  structural  and  semantic 
importance  m  any  theory  of  sanity,  as  we  have  already  seen. 

Further  illustration  of  this  freedom  can  be  seen  in  the  way  in  which  the 
ordinary  notion  of  multiplication  is  re-interpreted  in  the  operator  calculus 
Let  us  denote  by  g  and/,  two  numerical  quantities,  and  g/as  their  product. 
But  we  could  view  this  problem  differently.  We  could  say  that  qf  results  from 
a  semantic  operation  q  performed  on  /,  or  a  semantic  operator  (g  x)  acting 
upon  /  which  transformed  /  into  qf.  We  could  denote  the  operation  of  multi¬ 
plying  by  g  or  the  operator  (g  x)  by  a  single  symbol  Q.  Quite  obviously  the 
operator  Q  is  not  the  number  g;  in  other  words,  the  semantic  operation  of 
multiplying,  say  by  two,  is  not  the  number  2. 

The  operation  of  multiplying  integer  1  by  integer  2  gives  the  result  2. 
Similarly,  the  operation  of  multiplying  1  by  q,  or,  in  our  new  language,  the 
application  of  the  operator  Q  to  the  integer  1,  gives  q.  In  symbols,  01  =g. 
If  we  take  any  arbitrary  function/,  the  result  of  the  operation  of  Q  upon  /  is 

THE  NEWER  ‘MATTER’ 

written  Qf-qf.  If  we  were  to  follow  the  operation  Q  by  the  differential  operation 
i/dx  the  result  would  be*: 

But  as  /  is  arbitrary,  it  jnay  be  omitted  from  the  equations  and  the  result 
written  in  the  operator  form  as 

The  symbol 

dQ 

dX' 

defined  by  this  equation,  should  be  read  as  'the  operation  of 

multiplying  by  dq/dx\  Similarly, 

d(QF)_dQp  dP 
dX  dX  VdX  * 

In  translating  the  ordinary  equations  into  the  language  of  operators  nothing 
new  is  introduced.  This  translation  involves  only  a  change  of  lmentaV  focus. 
Instead  of  concentrating  our  attention  on  the  numerical  values  we  concentrate 
on  the  operations  of  combining  them.  Since  the  great  problems  of  the  quantum 
mechanics  consist  in  finding  new  methods  of  computation,  or  of  combining 
numerical  values,  such  a  change  of  attitude  may  prove  to  be  structurally  useful. 

It  should  be  noticed  here  that  once  matrices  are  considered,  and  treated, 
as  quantities,  or  unique  and  specific  relations,  by  similar  reasoning  they  can 
be  treated  as  operators.  This  problem  is  of  fundamental  structural  and  semantic 
importance  because  in  the  quantum  theory  we  deal  with  matrices  which  have 
infinite  numbers  of  terms  and  since  this  complexity  presents  great  technical 
difficulties  it  is  of  enormous  advantage  to  be  able  to  pass  to  some  more 
developed  methods  of  calculation. 

At  the  preliminary  stage  in  the  operator  calculus  we  have  assumed  that 
multiplication  was  commutative,  that  QP=PQ;  but  in  the  further  and  more 
general  development  of  the  theory,  this  does  not  hold. 

In  general  we  must  assume  in  the  operator  calculus  that  multiplication  is 
not  commutative,  that  QP 9^  PQ .  For  instance,  if  ()  =  (?X)  and  P  =d/dq,  the 
two  operations  are  certainly  not  commutative.  Naturally,  the  validity  of 
2X2  -  4  is  not  doubted,  but  generalized  non-commutative  multiplication  has  a 
definite  asymmetrical  and  so  structural  geometrical  interpretation,  to  be  found 
in  the  vector  calculus.  When  we  associate  with  each  numerical  quantity  its 
own  operation  of  multiplication  we  thus  obtain  a  more  general  calculus. 
Operators  may  be  regarded  as  compound,  or  built  up  from  the  elementary 
arithmetical  operations  of  addition  and  multiplication.  They  represent,  so  to 
say,  functions  of  these  operations.7 

♦The  operator  Dxt  also  written  d/dxy  is  called  a  differential  operator.  If  applied 
to  a  product  (mp)  the  results  are  given  by  the  formula  Dx(uv)  =  uDxv+vDxu . 

X.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  ‘MATTER* 

Section  E.  The  new  quantum  mechanics . 

The  mam  problem  of  the  quantum  theory  is  to  determine  these  functions 
o  the  operations,  so  that  the  solution  of  certain  equations  (hamiltonian)  may 
represent  the  experimental  facts.  The  original  equations  of  the  new  mechanics 
o  Heisenberg,  Born,  and  Jordan  were  frankly  founded  on  an  empirical  basis. 
As  Dirac  puts  it,  m  seeking  for  the  new  equations,  the  classical  equations  were 
to  be  retained  as  far  as  possible  and  only  the  operations  by  which  these  quantities 
are  combined  were  to  be  altered. 

To  gain  this  freedom  to  alter  multiplication  the  data  were  first  interpreted 
as  matrices.  Then  it  was  found,  by  Born  and  Wiener,  that  the  matrices  could 
be  interpreted  as  a  special  kind  of  operator,  which  furnished  means  to  calculate 
the  matrices.  Carl  Eckart  independently  developed  a  simple  operator  calculus 
or  the  solution  of  the  quantum  problems.  In  this  present  work  I  follow  closely 
the  paper  of  Eckart.7 

The°r.!gin°f  thC  ”eW  t»uantum  mechanics  was  an  epoch-making  paper  by 
Werner  Heisenberg,  in  July,  1925.  The  older  quantum  theory  had  postulated 
the  existence  of  stationary  states  of  the  atom,  which  were  calculated  with  the 
aid  of  the  older  mechanics.  In  the  new  mechanics  the  equations  have  similar 
form  as  in  the  classical  theory,  but  the  variables  no  longer  obey  the  commutative 
aw  of  multiplication.  In  general  pq  is  not  equal  to  qp,  (pq  =gp  and  pq  -qp  =0 

in  the  classical  theory)  but  =  where  h  represents  the  Planck  co„. 

slant,  q  the  generalized  co-ordinate,  p  the  momentum,  1  stands  for  the  unit 
matrix,  and  n  and  t  have  the  usual  meaning.  The  fact  that  multiplication  is 
not  commutative  m  our  calculus  allows  us  to  give  a  definite  value  to  the  above 
difference  and  by  introducing  the  Planck  constant  h,  we  are  enabled  to  intro¬ 
duce  the  quantum  conditions  in  our  calculations. 

The  quantum  conditions  of  the  older  theory  led  to  an  algebraic  equation, 
y  using  the  classical  equation  with  a  non-commutative  multiplication  law  for 
the  variables  it  is  possible  to  perform  calculations  in  the.  new  and  wider  scheme 
of  dynamics.  The  difference  between  pq  and  qp  is  expressed  in  terms  of  the 
Planck  constant  h  When  h  is  made  to  approach  zero,  pq  approaches  qp,  and 
so  we  pass  to  the  classical  mechanics.  Thus  we  see  that  the  classical  mechanics 
appear  only  as  a  particular  case  of  this  more  general  theory. 

In  introducing  his  theory,  Heisenberg  pointed  out  that  the  older  mechanics 
uses  quantities  which  are  never  observable,  and  can  never  be  observed,  such  as,  for 
instance,  orbital  frequencies  and  amplitudes,  or  the  position  and  ‘time’  of 
revolution  of  an  ‘electron’.  ,  which,  as  such,  have  no  physical  meaning.  He 
proposes  to  use  observable  data,  such  as  the  frequencies  and  intensities  of  the 
radiations  ,  .  Now  these  frequencies  are  always  differences  between  two  terms 
pven  by  integers.  If  Tn  and  Tm  are  two  such  terms,  the  observable  frequency 
is  eoretica  y  represented  by  vnm  =  Tn  —  Tm.  Such  numbers  as  v„m  characterize 
riie  atom  as  far  as  it  is  observable.  It  was  natural  that  such  a  collection  (‘sum’ 
m  this  case  has  no  longer  any  physical  meaning)  of  terms  could  best  be 
represented  by  a  matrix.  In  the  classical  theory  a  dynamical  quantity  was 

THE  NEWER  'MATTER* 

represented  structurally  by  a  trigonometrical  Fourier  series;  in  the  new,  it 
is  represented  by  a  two-dimensional  table  of  values;  that  is,  by  a  matrix  giving 
the  frequencies  and  the  intensities  of  radiations. 

An  important  and  interesting  structural  issue  now  appears.  It  is  that  the 
Heisenberg  theory  gives  a  new  formulation  for  the  hamiltonian  equations  of 
motion,  whereby  their  form  is  preserved,  yet  they  are  made  applicable  both  to 
periodic  and  to  non-periodic  motion.  It  becomes  possible  to  fuse  the  classical 
mechanics  with  the  quantum  mechanics.  The  distinction  between  ‘quantised’ 
and  ‘unquantised’  motion  loses  all  meaning,  and  a  fundamental  equation, 
h 

pq~~qp  — —  1,  is  formulated  which  is  valid  for  all  motion . 

2  wi 

The  Heisenberg  theory  is  also  characterized  by  its  thoroughly  behaviour- 
istic,  actional,  functional,  and  operational  character.  The  number  of  unjusti¬ 
fiable  assumptions  is  the  lowest  in  existence  and  most  of  the  identifications  are 
eliminated.  According  to  Heisenberg,  electrons  and  atoms  do  not  have  the 
‘same’  kind  of  ‘reality’  as  ordinary  objects  of  lower  order  abstractions.  This  con¬ 
clusion,  which  underlies  his  whole  work,  is  of  particular  importance  structurally. 
As  we  know,  differences  in  character  separate  different  orders  of  abstraction 
and  since  the  quantum  phenomena  belong  to  a  higher  order  of  abstraction  they 
must  differ  from  objects  which  belong  to  a  lower  order  of  abstraction.  In  this 
theory  the  feelings  of  ‘space’  and  ‘time’  are  no  longer  applicable  to  the  ‘inside’ 
of  the  atom — as  might  be  expected. 

The  distinction  between  ‘inner’  and  ‘outer’  electrons  in  an  atom  becomes 
meaningless,  since  it  is  impossible  to  recognize  a  particular  entity  among  a 
series  of  similar  entities.  In  accordance  with  the  new  ‘space- time’  outlook  we 
gain  a  physical  basis  for  the  absolute  individuality  of  some  eventual  unit. 

Because  of  its  structure,  the  Heisenberg  theory  is  a  very  fundamental  one 
and  there  is  little  doubt  that  the  Heisenberg  methods  will  be  elaborated  further 
and  will  be  kept  as  a  permanent  checking  method  in  physics.  A  theory  which  is 
thoroughly  behaviouristic,  with  a  minimum  of  assumptions,  will  probably  re¬ 
main  both  a  most  important  instrument  of  research  and  an  inspiration  to 
physicists  and  mathematicians. 

The  Heisenberg  theory,  again,  because  of  its  structure  and  method,  does 
not  lend  itself  easily  to  visualization.  This  is  not  against  the  theory.  The 
pictorial  representations  of  lower  order  abstractions  are  not  to  be  relied  upon. 
Besides,  visualization  depends  on  the  lower  centres  and  therefore  must  be  rep¬ 
resented  by  a  macroscopic  representation  of  a  continuous  (rather  than  a  discrete) 
character,  such  as  waves  ,  . 

^f  we  were  to  try  to  describe  the  Heisenberg  theory  pictorially,  which  is 
obviously  difficult  to  do,  we  would  have  to  give  a  negative  description.  We 
should  have  to  say  that  what  we  observe  must  be  considered  only  as  radiations 
from  the  location  which  the  atom  was  supposed  to  occupy.8 

There  remains  but  to  mention  some  more  characteristics  of  the  Heisenberg 
theory  which  seem  to  have  very  far-reaching  structural  and  semantic  bearings 

X.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  ‘MATTER* 

This  theory  appears  frankly  statistical  and  introduces  fundamental  probability 
assumptions.  The  moment  we  realize  that  the  human  organism  is  essentially 
an  abstracting  affair  and  that  the  abstracting  is  performed  on  different  levels, 
or  in  different  orders,  it  becomes  obvious  that  statistical  methods  and  proba¬ 
bility  notions  become  fundamental. 

In  the  earlier  days  we  used  to  assume  that  statistical  laws  were  laws  with 
exceptions.  Such  an  outlook  was  conditioned  by  our  dealings  with  macroscopic 
events.  Now,  we  analyse  such  macroscopic  events  in  terms  of  microscopic  and 
sub -microscopic  events,  the  statistical  laws  become  accurate  laws,  not  for  in¬ 
dividuals  but  for  groups  of  individuals.  Because  we  abstract  in  different  orders, 
we  deal  only  with  statistical  data,  mass  effects  of  different  ‘packets’  of  nervous 
excitement,  as  is  best  illustrated  by  different  thresholds  in  different  nervous 
tissues. 

The  processes  in  the  higher  centres,  more  remote  from  the  external  world , 
deal  with  a  special  material,  no  more  with  statistical  data  of  ‘packets'  and 
averages,  but  with  what  we  used  to  call  ‘inferences’,  ‘inductions’.  ,  which  give 
only  the  probability  of  happenings.  But  as  we  have  already  seen,  probability 
has  become  a  well-developed  structural  mathematical  discipline,  which  has  not 
yet  made  much  effect  upon  our  primitive-made  macroscopic  metaphysics  and 
language.  It  should  be  noticed  that  the  highest  activities  of  the  nervous  centres 
are  based  on  statistical  data  furnished  by  the  lower  centres.  So  we  see  that,  to 
the  best  of  our  knowledge  about  ourselves  and  the  world  around  us,  a  modern 
structural  and  semantic  outlook,  in  science  or  in  life,  must  be  based  on  statistical 
and  probability  methods. 

In  space-time  every  point  has  a  date,  and  therefore  in  the  language  of 
space- time  all  points  are  different  and  do  not  repeat  themselves.  Such  structural 
outlook  is,  of  course,  again  conditioned,  and  leads  toward  the  statistical  and 
probability  methods.  The  main  psycho-logical  importance  of  the  new  methods 
is  to  diminish  affective  tension,  which  is  always  wasteful  and  harmful.  In¬ 
ferences  may  involve  belief.  When  belief  is  too  strongs  although  this  is  never 
justified  according  to  the  best  modern  knowledge,  we  very  easily  fall  into 
identification,  delusions,  illusions,  and  the  like.  It  should  be  emphasized  that 
the  last-mentioned  pathological  states  are  always  compound.  They  involve  at 
least  two  components.  One  of  these  consists  of  some  ignorance  somewhere;  the 
other  of  strong  affective  belief  in  the  ‘truth’  of  our  mistaken  notions.  The 
stronger  the  affective  tension  is,  the  more  dangerous  the  semantic  disturbance 
becomes. 

The  Heisenberg  theory  has  succeeded  in  formulating  (verbal)  structural 
methods  which  are  best  suited  to  represent  the  experimental  facts  which  underlie 
physics,  as  well  as  being  structurally  in  accord  with  the  working  of  the  human 
nervous  system.  That  is  why  I  venture  to  assert  that  this  theory  will  never 
be  abandoned  as  a  checking  and  research  instrument. 

In  an  hypothetical  experiment  in  the  quantum  field,  we  may  assume  what 
may  be  called  a  gamma-ray  microscope.  If  we  were  to  illuminate  an  ‘electron’ 

THE  NEWER  ‘MATTER’ 

by  gamma-rays,  the  rays  would  disturb  the  experiment,  and  in  our  fundamental 

equation,  pq  —gp - — ,  1,  by  which  the  ‘position’  was  to  be  determined,  the 
2m 

'momentum’  would  thereby  be  disturbed.  This  change  of  ‘momentum’  would 
be  greater  the  shorter  the  wave-length  of  the  rays  used;  and  the  shorter  the 
wave-length  of  the  ray,  the  more  accurate  the  determination  of  ‘position  would 
be.  Hence,  the  more  exactly  a  co-ordinate  q  could  be  found,  the  less  exactly 
could  its  momentum  p  be  found,  and  vice  versa. 

So  we  have  to  introduce  corrections  for  errors,  and  have  to  introduce 
'mean  values’  and  ‘probability  functions’,  which  we  can  develop  and  compute. 
Lately,  Bohr  has  further  developed  the  probability  aspects  of  the  newer  quantum 
mechanics  but  I  have  not  seen  this  work.  Heisenberg  introduces  ‘probability 
packets’  which  correspond  to  the  ‘wave  packets’  of  Schrodinger. 

It  is  difficult  to  speak  briefly,  and  yet  in  a  satisfactory  way,  about  these 
new  developments,  and  particularly  difficult  to  give  credit  properly  to  different 
authors.  All  their  works  are  interwoven  and  at  present  they  all  really  work 
together  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  historically  some  of  these  theories  have  been 
developed  independently. 

What  we  call  today,  for  the  sake  of  brevity,  the  Heisenberg  theory,  because 

of  its  originator,  has  been  further  developed  by  Heisenberg,  Born,  Jordan,  and 
others.  Later,  when  the  wave-mechanics  appeared,  all  the  new  theories  were 
finally  fused  into  a  very  elaborate  and  impressive  structure. 

Historically,  P.  A.  M.  Dirac  worked  at  the  theory  from  a  different  mathe¬ 
matical  point  of  view,  utilizing  what  is  called  the  ‘Poisson  bracket  method. 
In  this  treatment  the  difficulties  of  the  matrix  calculus  were  avoided.  He 
introduced  dynamical  variables  which  he  called  the  q  numbers.  These  do  not 
obey  the  commutative  law  of  multiplication  although  the  c  numbers  (classical) 
do.  He  also  considered  the  difference  of  the  non-commutative  products  xy -yx, 
where  x  and  y  are  functions,  respectively,  of  the  co-ordinates  q\  ...  q 8,  and  of 
the  momenta  pi .  .  .  pa  of  a  multiple  periodic  system  with  5  degrees  of  freedom. 

Dirac  has  generalized  the  matrix  theory  and  the  Schrodinger  equations. 
His  work  seems  to  be  most  important,  in  physics  and  mathematics,  but  it  is 
not  possible  for  us  to  consider  it  here  in  any  detail.9 

Let  us  recall  once  more  that  there  are  fundamental  differences  between 
the  different  orders  of  abstraction,  and  that  we  all  have  to  abstract  in  different 
orders.  From  this  point  of  view  it  is  natural  that  every  theory,  even  if  expressed 
at  present  in  a  form  which  cannot  be  visualized ,  like  the  Heisenberg  theory  or 
the  original  Dirac  theory,  has  sooner  or  later  to  be  expressed  in  a  structural 
form  which  can  be  visualized.  These  problems  have  really  nothing,  or  at  most 
very  little,  to  do  with  the  world  around  us.  They  are  concerned  with  the 
neurological  structure  which  produces  all  theories. 

Theories  of  a  structure  such  as  that  of  the  Heisenberg  theory  are  extremely 
important,  as  already  explained,  but  in  them  we  lose  the  help  of  ‘intuition’. 
Now  ‘intuition’  (lower  centres)  has  two  quite  different  effects — sometimes  it 
leads  us  astray,  but  on  other  occasions  it  helps  greatly. 

X.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  ‘MATTER* 

An  ‘intuitive1  theory  has  a  creative  aspect,  but  always  ought  later  to  be 
revised  and  scrutinized  by  non-intuitive  means.  In  fact,  because  of  our  nervous 
structure,  we  should  always  strive  to  produce  both  aspects  of  theories — strive 
consciously — for  thus  we  facilitate  progress.  Historically,  we  can  never  com¬ 
pletely  avoid  producing  both  types  of  theories,  as  they  are  inherent  in  our 
nervous  structure  and  in  the  different  orders  of  abstractions  we  produce. 

It  is  precisely  in  the  newer  quantum  mechanics  that  a  typical  example  of 
this  simple  neurological  fact  is  found.  The  non-intuitive  handling  of  data  was 
introduced  by  Heisenberg:  the  translation  of  the  matrix  calculus  into  opera¬ 
tional  and  ‘Poisson  brackets’  methods;  and,  finally,  the  new  ‘wave  mechanics’ 
of  de  Broglie,  Schrodinger,  and  others,  gives  us  a  perfect  translation  into 
intuitive  methods. 

It  should  be  noticed  that  according  to  the  old  notions  such  two  methods, 
the  intuitive  and  the  non-intuitive,  were  not  supposed  to  be  a  neurological 
necessity .  We  still  assumed  that  they  were  separated  ‘absolutely’,  and  even 
today  in  many  quarters  we  argue  as  if  they  were  absolutely  separable.  If  we 
accept  the  principle  of  non-elementalism,  we  realize  that  this  distinction  is 
verbal  only  and  that  the  invention  of  verbal  means  has  little  or  nothing  to  do 
with  the  world  around  us,  but  that  it  depends  on  human  structural  ingenuity. 

Investigation  of  the  ordered  cyclic  nerve  currents  shows  unmistakably 
that  such  sharp  differentiation  is  unjustifiable;  and  we  must  conclude,  in  accord¬ 
ance  with  historical  experience,  that  translation  from  one  method  to  the  other 
must  be  a  necessity,  and  so  will  be  accomplished  some  day  in  every  field.  It  is 
true  that  at  present  the  Einstein  theory  has  not  been  translated  with  entire 
success  into  terms  of  lower  order  abstractions.  This  is  a  task  which  is  facilitated 
by  this  present  work.  The  newer  quantum  mechanics  gives  us  an  unparalleled 
example  of  such  translation,  and  hence  our  main  interest  should  be  concentrated 
on  this  structural  aspect. 

On  neurological  grounds  it  seems  certain  that  visualization  involves  in 
some  way  the  lower  nerve  centres,  which  again,  by  evolutionary  necessity, 
involve  macroscopic  forms  of  representation.  Our  macroscopic  experience  led 
us  to  geometrical  intuitions .  These  were  framed  three-dimensionally  in  ‘ absolute 
emptiness and  were  impossible  in  higher  dimensions.  The  old  structure 
represented  a  static  empty  ‘space’  in  which  nothing  could  happen  and  which 
was  thus  unfit  to  represent  this  world  around  us  where  something  is  going 
on  everywhere. 

The  new  structure  represents  ‘ fulness ’  or  a  plenum.  We  can  visualize  it  as 
a  network  of  intervals  or  world-lines  and  then,  by  the  notions  of  the  differential 
calculus,  as  already  explained,  we  pass  easily  to  the  visualization  of  the  many¬ 
dimensional  space-time  world  of  Minkowski-Einstein.  Now,  in  such  a  world, 
the  curves  are  represented  by  functions,  and,  vice  versa,  functions  represent 
curves.  Thus  it  is  obvious  that  analytical  ‘non-intuitive’  methods  have  ‘in¬ 
tuitive’  structural  geometrical  counterparts.  From  this  point  of  view  the 
method  of  operators  represents  a  passing  step  from  the  non-intuitive  to  intuitive 

THE  NEWER  ‘MATTER’ 

methods.  As  soon  as  we  have  functions,  we  can  represent  a  functional  calculus 
as  an  operational  calculus.  This  involves  a  more  behaviouristic  semantic  attitude 
and  so  leads  to  the  possibility  of  translation  of  either  method  into  the  other. 
Ultimately  these  are  psycho-logical  transformations  and  translations. 

We  should  not  be  surprised  to  find  that  in  the  development  of  the  newer 
quantum  mechanics  the  operational  calculus  plays  just  such  a  role. 

Now  our  older  macroscopic  experience,  which  affected  our  lower  nerve 
centres,  gave  rise  to  the  elementary  geometrical  structural  notions  of  ‘lines', 
‘surfaces’,  ‘volumes’,  .  For  the  building  of  physics  we  had  to  introduce  ‘time’, 
‘motion’,  .  In  older  days  we  did  not  realize  that  these  give  us  forms  of  repre¬ 
sentation  and  that  it  is  optional  with  us  which  forms  we  will  accept  as  funda¬ 
mental  or  use  as  a  starting  point. 

The  old  descriptive  apparatus  posited  structurally  an  absolute  and 
immutable  ‘space’  (emptiness),  ‘time’,  ‘matter’  out  of  which  we  built  up  a 
verbal  definition  for  ‘motion’.  The  semantic  attitude  of  all  of  us,  scientists 
included,  depended  upon  identification.  We  ascribed  lower-centre  significance 
to  higher-centre  abstractions.  We  did  not  discriminate  enough  between  the 
macroscopic  and  small  scale  events.  So  we  had  ‘geometrical  optics'  in  which 
we  ‘perceived’  a  ray  of  light  (in  a  dusty  room,  let  us  say)  as  a  ‘straight  line’. 
Further  investigation  disclosed  that  the  ‘rays'  on  one  level  of  abstraction  were 
waves  on  another,  but  they  were  not  perceived  as  waves  by  the  lower  centres. 

But  through  our  lower  centres  we  had  acquaintance  with  some  waves, 
such  as  in  water;  so  representation  for  waves  was  developed.  A  wave- theory 
still  remained  intuitively  workable,  even  when  we  dealt  with  waves  which  we 
could  not  see.  Now  the  equations  of  waves  are  well  known.  It  is  then  possible 
to  translate  a  non-intuitive  matrix  mechanics,  when  we  treat  matrices  as 
operators,  into  a  functional  calculus  which  has  an  intuitive  geometrical  wave 
representation. 

This  is  precisely  what  has  happened  and  now,  perhaps  for  the  first  time 
in  human  history,  we  have  all  the  aspects  of  a  theory  being  worked  out  simul¬ 
taneously,  with  mutual  co-operation  of  all  workers  and  the  use  of  methods 
which  are  mutually  complementary  from  the  neurological  side.  There  seems 
little  risk  in  predicting  that  because  of  these  neurological  factors  the  newer 
quantum  mechanics  will  give  extremely  rapid  and  far-reaching  results.  When 
scientists  become  aware  of  the  structural  semantic  and  neurological  issues 
involved,  perhaps  such  achievements  will  be  multiplied  consciously ,  instead  of 
being  a  kind  of  coincidence. 

Personally,  I  am  convinced  that  these  new  achievements  are  not  simply 
coincident.  It  seems  that  the  abolishment  of  the  old,  el>  static  ‘absolute  space’ 
and  ‘absolute  time’  has  relieved  the  younger  scientists  front  a  semantic  blockage . 
This  release  was  due  to  the  bold  stroke  of  genius  of  Einstein  in  refusing  to  use 
the  vicious  aristotelian  ‘is’  of  identity.  As  soon  as  we  realize  that  words  are  not 
the  objective  levels,  we  gain  an  unconscious  semantic  freedom  in  handling  words, 
as  words.  At  once  this  freedom  is  bound  to  produce  many  different  forms  of 

X.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  ‘MATTER' 

representation  for  events,  according  to  the  personal  make-up  of  the  individual 
workers.  And  of  course  these  forms  can  be  translated  into  one  another. 

Section  F.  The  wave  mechanics . 

We  have  not  sufficient  space  at  our  disposal  to  discuss  more  fully  the  new 
wave  mechanics.  I  found  that  short  of  a  small  volume,  no  explanations,  readily 
intelligible,  could  be  made. 

In  mathematics  and  physics,  which  represent  the  most  developed  sciences, 
we  consciously  and  unconsciously  strive  for  more  and  more  general  formulations. 
The  work  of  Einstein,  showing  that  the  classical  mechanics  was  only  a  particular 
case  of  a  more  general  mechanics,  has  given  a  healthy  stimulation  to  such  a 
fruitful  line  of  work. 

As  the  quantum  phenomena  could  not  be  accounted  for  by  the  old  me¬ 
chanics,  it  was  natural  that  physicists  should  try  schemes  of  new  mechanics 
which  included  classical  mechanics  as  a  particular  case.  Thus,  Sommerfeld, 
through  his  methods  of  the  application  of  the  Einstein  theory  to  the  quantum 
mechanics  and  his  generalizations  of  phase-space,  and  his  treatment  of  the 
relation  of  wave-optics  to  ray-optics  and  of  the  relation  of  mechanics  to  ray- 
optics,  came  close  to  the  discovery  of  the  wave  mechanics.10 

The  new  wave  mechanics  originated  in  1924  in  Paris,  with  the  thesis  of 
Louis  de  Broglie,  published  in  1925,  and  republished  in  a  book  form  in  1926. 

The  controversy  between  the  corpuscular  light  theory  of  Newton  (emission 
theory)  and  the  wave  theory  of  Huygens  is  well  known.  The  emission  theory 
had  its  support  in  the  ‘rectilinear'  propagation  of  light,  which  followed  from 
the  inertia  of  light  particles.  Also,  it  explained  the  reflection  and  the  refrac¬ 
tion  .  ,  of  light,  but  failed  in  other  respects.  It  is  true  that  the  wave  theory 
also  had  its  weak  structural  spots.  In  it  the  ‘rectilinear'  propagation  of  light 
remained  a  complete  mystery  and  it  completely  failed  to  account  for  the  dis¬ 
persion  of  light,  until  this  was  explained  on  the  electron  theory. 

Both  theories  assumed  the  periodicity  of  light  phenomena,  but  the  ac¬ 
ceptance  of  one  theory  was  generally  held  to  mean  the  rejection  of  the  other. 
It  did  not  occur  to  many  that  both  theories  might  be  correct  but  only  partial 
structural  aspects  of  a  more  general  theory. 

With  the  advent  of  the  quantum  theory  of  Planck  (1900)  new  methods 
were  found.  In  1905  Einstein  propounded  his  theory  of  ‘light  quanta’  success¬ 
fully.  He  assumed  that  radiation  occurs  in  discrete  quanta  of  energy  hv ,  where 
v  represents  the  frequency.  From  this  point  of  view  the  quantum  had  the 
characteristic  discreteness  of  a  corpuscle,  and  yet  the  frequency  characteristic 
of  a  wave.  We  see  that  the  new  theory  involved  a  kind  of  a  blend  of  the  two 
older  theories. 

De  Broglie  generalized  still  further  the  above  notions.  His  theory  is  in  a 
way  the  result  of  the  theory  of  Einstein.  As  we  already  know,  Einstein  shows 
the  connection  of  mass  and  energy,  so  that  the  conservation  of  mass  becomes 
also  the  conservation  of  energy,  and  vice  versa.  Starting  with  these  premises 
de  Broglie  concluded  that  if  any  element,  in  the  most  general  sense,  be  it  an 

THE  NEWER  ‘MATTER* 

electron  or  proton  or  light  quantum  or  what  not,  has  energy  W,  there  must  be 
in  the  system  a  periodic  phenomenon  of  frequency  t>,  defined  by  W  ~hv.  From 
this  point  of  view  all  forms  of  energy,  radiation  included,  must  have  an  atomic 
structure  and  the  atoms  of  energy  must  be  grouped  around  certain  points, 
forming  what  we  call  ‘electrons’,  ‘light  quanta’, . 

Applying  the  Loren tz- Einstein  transformation,  he  finds  a  rather  startling 
fact — that  the  frequency  associated  with  any  assumed  mass  mo;  namely, 

represents  no  more  and  no  less  than  a  periodic  phenomenon,  analogous 

to  a  stationary  wave,  which  spreads  around  the  point  of  which  the  mass  is  a 
singularity.11 

In  other  words,  a  ‘mass  particle'  at  rest  is  the  centre  of  a  pulsation  through¬ 
out  the  spread,  or  otherwise  it  is  a  singularity  of  the  pulsation.  The  quantity 
which  pulsates  is  called  and  is  interpreted  as  the  electric  density,  where  y£ 
is  the  conjugate  of  the  complex  quantity  \p. 

In  the  Minkowski  representation,  the  above 
astonishing  result  becomes  quite  simple,  and  we 
can  see  clearly  how  simultaneous  pulsations  be¬ 
come  travelling  waves.  In  Fig.  2,  we  give  a  two- 
dimensional  diagram  of  space- time.  OX o  is  the 
‘space*  co-ordinate,  OTq  the  ‘time*  (icto)  co-ordi¬ 
nate.  }pi,  >h,  represent  the  traces  of  the  sur¬ 
faces  of  constant  phase  which  are  perpendicular 
to  OTq.  The  Loren tz-Einstein  transformation  is 
equivalent  to  the  transformation  from  rectangular 
system  XqOTq  to  the  rectangular  system  XOTt 
forming  an  angle  6 .  In  the  new  system  the  lines 
fit  fa  fa  .  .  .  ,  are  no  longer  parallel  to  the  X 
axis  and  so  represent  a  moving  wavefront  In  this 
new  system  the  ^-lines  represent  the  moving  wave 
front  for  different  points,  P,  Pf .  ,  on  one  phase 

Fig.  2 

(From  Wave  Mechanics , 
by  H.  F.  Biggs) 

line  and  have  different  values  of  t  The  smaller  the  velocity  (v)  of  the 
particle,  the  smaller  the  angle  $  and  the  greater  the  distance  PQ  travelled  by 
the  phase  in  a  given  ‘time’,  P'Q  or  At,  which  means  the  greater  the  phase  velocity  u. 

The  frequency  of  these  pulsations  or  waves  is  the  ‘total  energy  of  the 
particle*  divided  by  Planck’s  constant,  h.  in  symbols,  hv-mc2- 1- potential 
energy,  where 

The  problem  before  us  is  to  connect  structurally,  the  waves  with  two  ob. 
servations,  one  of  the  radiations,  the  other  of  what  we  call  the  ‘material  particles’. 

Our  interest  at  present  lies  only  in  the  connection  with  the  latter.  Ac¬ 
cording  to  this  theory,  the  ‘region  occupied  by  the  particle*  is  only  a  region 

X.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  'MATTER' 

where  a  set  of  ^-waves,  which  vary  continuously  in  direction  and  in  frequency 
in  a  small  range,  reinforce  each  other  to  give  a  wave-group  travelling  with  what 
we  usually  call  ‘the  velocity  of  the  particle’. 

As  the  waves  have  different  frequencies,  they  travel  with  different  veloci¬ 
ties  and  so  we  have  to  face  the  problem  of  the  dispersing  medium,  where,  ac¬ 
cording  to  classical  theories,  the  region  of  reinforcement  has  a  velocity  different 
from  that  of  the  phase.  The  ordinary  expression  for  ‘group  velocity*  gives,  on 
the  wave  interpretation,  the  magnitude  of  the  ‘velocity  of  the  particle’.12 

That  which,  in  the  classical  theories,  we  called  the  ‘motion  of  the  particle’ 
is  represented  by  the  motion  of  the  region  of  reinforcement  of  V'-waves.  The 
direction  of  motion  is  represented  by  the  direction  of  a  ray-,  or  wave-normal. 
The  particular  ray  selected  as  the  position  of  the  ‘path  of  the  particle'  is  repre¬ 
sented  by  the  ray  cut  in  coinciding  phase  by  a  set  of  ^-waves  with  slightly 
varying  directions.  The  ‘position  of  the  particle'  is  given  by  the  small  region 
occupied  by  the  group  of  waves  of  slightly  different  frequencies  and  velocities. 

In  this  connection  we  should  notice  an  important  point  which  is  necessi¬ 
tated  by  the  methods  of  generalization  and  of  translation  from  macroscopic  to 
sub -microscopic  events  and  vice  versa.  Schrodinger,  by  formulating  the  dif¬ 
ferential  equations  for  the  ^-waves,  has  brought  out  clearly  the  important 
structural  point  that  wave  mechanics  bears  a  similar  relationship  to  classical 
mechanics  of  particles  as  wave-optics  bears  to  ray-optics. 

Here  again  we  have  the  macroscopic  phenomena  capable  of  being  treated  by 
mathematical  methods  different  from  those  used  for  the  small-scale  phenomena. 

In  classical  mechanics  the  state  of  a  system  whose  co-ordinates  were 
qi  .  .  .  q9  and  whose  momenta  were  pi  .  .  .  pt ,  was  represented  by  a  point  in  a 
2s-dimensionaI  ^-spread  and  the  changes  in  the  system  were  represented  by  the 
passage  of  the  point  along  some  curve,  a  ‘ray’,  so  to  say. 

Schrodinger  regards  the  classical  mechanics  as  only  an  approximation, 
while  rigorous  treatment  must  be  made  by  the  aid  of  wave  mechanics. 

The  large-scale,  or  macroscopic,  mechanical  processes  correspond  to  a 
wave  signal  in  the  5-spread  and  can  be  regarded  as  a  point  in  comparison  with 
the  geometrical  structure  of  the  path.  In  small-scale  phenomena,  such  as  the 
atomic  processes,  a  rigorous  wave  formulation  must  be  used. 

This  analysis  can  be  carried  further  and  Hamilton  knew  well  and  used  the 
analogy  between  mechanics  and  geometrical  optics.  The  Hamilton  variation 
principle,  bJ'Ldt  =  0,  is  Fermat’s  principle  for  a  wave  motion;  the  Hamilton- 
Jacobi  equation  expresses  Huygens’  principle  for  wave  motion;  and  the  new 
wave  mechanics  expresses  the  Kirchhoff  analysis  of  physical  optics.  As  Huygens* 
principle  could  deal  with  the  problems  of  physical  optics  up  to  a  certain  point, 
so  the  Hamilton-Jacobi  equations  could  deal  with  atomic  problems  up  to  a 
certain  point.  At  the  exact  wave  analysis  of  Kirchhoff  was  needed  to  clear  up 
the  finer  points  of  physical  optics,  so  the  new  wave  mechanics  is  required  for 
the  exact  solution  of  the  atomic  problems.13 

A  detailed  analysis  shows  that  classical  mechanics  was  associated  with 
geometrical  optics  (ray-optics).  Obviously,  a  more  exact  system  of  mechanics 

THE  NEWER  'MATTER' 

would  be  one  associated  with  wave-optics,  which  would  give  the  classical  results 
in  all  cases  where  the  wave-length  was  negligible  in  comparison  with  the  dimen¬ 
sions  of  the  path.  Schrodinger  suggests  that  a  correct  extension  of  the  analogy 
would  be  to  regard  the  wave  system  as  sine-waves.  In  this  connection  it  should 
be  recollected  that  Fourier  has  shown  that  any  given  form  of  waves  can  be 
represented  by  the  superposition  of  sine-waves ,  and  that  therefore  a  sine-wave 
(see  Chapter  XXXII)  may  be  considered  as  a  general  formulation. 

The  ray  methods  in  physics  worked  only  to  some  extent,  that  is  to  say,  in 
the  cases  where  the  radii  of  curvature  of  such  rays  and  the  dimensions  of  the 
spreads  were  large  in  comparison  with  the  wave-length.  When  this  is  not  the 
case  we  have  to  consider  waves  and  not  rays.  Naturally,  dealing  with  atomic 
dimensions,  which  are  very  small,  instead  of  using  the  paths  of  the  particles 
or  the  i/'-rays,  we  have  to  use  the  ^-waves.  It  appears  that  this  difference  was 
the  main,  rather  puzzling  distinction  between  the  classical  mechanics  and  the 
quantum  mechanics,  between  the  macroscopic  theories  and  the  sub-microscopic 
ones. 

The  above  realization,  and  its  formulation  into  a  mathematical  theory, 
seems  to  be  an  important  and  extremely  fruitful  generalization,  which  probably 
will  be  retained  as  a  method. 

One  of  the  puzzling  features  of  the  quantum  theory  was  the  structural 
appearance  of  the  whole-number  laws  of  the  ‘orbits’.  That  some  such  whole- 
number  relation  is  justified  seems  to  be  well  established,  yet  it  contradicted 
the  older  'continuous’  mechanics.  A  new  theory,  to  be  at  all  satisfactory, 
should  be  able  to  fit  these  whole-number  empirical  data.  The  first  test  of  the 
new  wave  mechanics,  and  also  its  first  success,  was  precisely  in  this  field. 

If  a  ray  of  the  t/'-wave  was  supposed  to  run  around  in  a  circle  for  a  stationary 
state,  the  circumference  must  be  a  whole  multiple  of  the  wave-length,  or 

„  ^  h  a  h 

2irr  =n\  -n — ,  and  mvr-n—~ 

mv 

where  n  is  an  integer.  We  see  that  the  quantum  condition  of  the  Bohr  theory, 
that  the  angular  momentum  must  be  a  whole  multiple  of  h/ is  only  the 
result  of  the  requirement  that  the  wave-function  \p  shall  be  single- valued, 
which  is  another  way  of  saying  that  the  circumference  (2irr)  must  contain  a 
whole  number  of  wave-lengths.  It  may  be  compared  perhaps  with  waves 
travelling  around  a  circular  loop  of  string.  If  they  travelled  both  ways  we 
would  have  stationary  waves. 

At  this  point  a  very  important  structural  feature  of  the  new  wave  mechanics 
makes  its  appearance.  In  the  above  interpretation  the  'velocity  of  the  electron* 
has  lost  its  physical  meaning,  it  becomes  simply  the  wave  length  of  the  ^-waves. 
In  the  wave  mechanics,  as  well  as  in  the  matrix  mechanics,  there  is  no  meaning 
to  the  older  'position  of  an  electron  on  its  orbit'.  So  the  wave  mechanics  again 
embodies  the  advantages  of  the  matrix  mechanics  by  not  postulating  entities 
which  can  never  be  observed.  The  whole  numbers,  as  Schrodinger  remarks, 
'appear  as  naturally  as  do  "integers”  in  the  theory  of  vibrating  strings’.  In 
the  theory  of  string  vibrations  these  whole  numbers  are  determined  by  certain 

X.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  'MATTER' 

boundary  conditions  which  have  to  be  satisfied  by  the  solution  of  a  differential 
equation*  In  the  new  wave  mechanics  there  is  also  a  differential  equation 
representing  the  Schrodinger  wave  equation.14 

Section  G.  Structural  aspects  of  the  new  theories . 

We  should  notice  the  important  distinction  between  the  two  structural 
types  of  these  theories.  The  extensional  matrix  theory  can  hardly  be  visualized, 
with  all  the  consequent  advantages  and  disadvantages.  The  wave  mechanics 
can  be  visualized.  From  what  we  already  know  of  the  structure  and  working 
of  the  nervous  system,  we  see  that  the  wave  mechanics  will  have  a  creative 
element  and  the  matrix  mechanics  will  remain  an  important  checking  method. 

At  present,  all  these  new  theories  seemingly  have  blended  or  perhaps  it 
would  be  better  to  say  that  they  have  been  translated  from  one  language  to 
another  and  all  the  workers  in  this  field  work  from  all  angles. 

It  should  be  mentioned  also,  that  Einstein,  Bose,  Jordan,  and  others,  work 
from  the  point  of  view  of  statistics ,  and  that  these  methods,  too,  are  being 
retranslated  and  connected  with  the  rest  of  the  new  theories. 

The  new  wave  mechanics  evades  the  difficulties  of  the  matrix  calculus  and 
brings  the  new  mechanics  within  the  scope  of  the  highly  developed  analysis 
of  the  theory  of  differential  equations.  It  also  enlists  the  creative  aspects  of 
'intuition',  ‘visualization’,  . 

Concluding  our  consideration  of  the  subject,  three  remarkable  aspects  of 
the  wave  mechanics  must  be  referred  to.  We  are  already  acquainted  with  the 
term  ‘action’.  It  appears  that  the  main  point  of  the  passing  from  the  old 
mechanics  to  the  new  was  the  stroke  of  genius  of  de  Broglie,  when  he  divided 
action  by  the  fundamental  constant  h  with  some  definite  numerical  factor 
which  then  gives  us  the  phase .  In  the  expression  for  }p,  the  energy  appears  as 
the  ‘time*  component  of  a  space-time  vector  whose  ‘space’  components  are 
those  of  the  momentum.  When  this  vector  is  divided  by  h,  its  components 
become  the  frequency ,  or  the  number  of  waves  which  each  axis  cuts  per 
centimetre. 

These  are  the  methods  by  which  we  can  use  differential  equations,  whereby 
the  older  discontinuities  disappear  and  the  particle  is  represented  as  a  group 
of  reinforcing  waves.16 

From  this  point  of  view  we  also  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the  ‘conserva¬ 
tion  of  energy’,  which  was  very  valuable  in  the  old  days,  is  perhaps  only  a 
gross  macroscopic  generalization  and  will  give  place  to  a  newer  and  more 
fundamental  notion  of  the  conservation  of  frequency  or  ‘times’.16 

It  has  been  already  mentioned  that  the  newer  mechanics  must  be  repre¬ 
sented  in  accordance  with  statistical  data,  probabilities ,  with  due  attention  paid 
to  the  theory  of  errors  ,  .  While  these  requirements  have  very  little  to  do  with 
the  world  around  us,  they  are  unconditionally  required  by  our  nervous  structure, 
which  is,  after  all,  the  general  author  of  all  our  ‘knowledge*  and  ‘theories’. 
Let  us  be  candid  about  it;  there  is  no  such  thing  as  ‘knowledge’  outside  of  a 
nervous  system,  and  therefore  the  neurological  requirements,  as  already 

THE  NEWER  'MATTER' 

mentioned,  become  paramount.  The  newer  theories  brilliantly  satisfy  this 
requirement. 

As  an  example,  we  may  perhaps  mention  an  aspect  of  the  wave  mechanics 
theory  which  is  not  at  present  settled,  but  which  remains  just  as  interesting. 

Schrodinger  shows  that  in  highly  excited  states  a  suitably  chosen  group 
of  waves  represents  a  ‘ wave  packet which  behaves  like  a  point-mass  of  the 
ordinary  mechanics.  It  oscillates  with  frequency  vo  in  a  rectilinear  path.  The 
number  and  breadth  of  the  waves  which  form  the  packet  vary  with  the  ‘time', 
but  the  width  of  the  packet  remains  constant.  The  remarkable  part  about  the 
shape  of  the  curve  is  that  it  represents  the  Gaiiss  error  curve. 

Heisenberg  has  shown 
that  this  result  is  only  acci¬ 
dentally  true,  but  for  our 
purpose  of  illustration  this 
is  quite  enough. 

The  newer  quantum 
mechanics  has  shown  once 
more  the  necessity  for  a 
re-analysis  of  our  funda¬ 
mental  notions.  From  a 
space-time  point  of  view,  which  seems  to  be  a  permanent  acquisition  of  science, 
since  it  is  a  language  and  method  of  structure  closer  related  to  the  external 
world  than  the  older  languages  and  methods,  it  seems  beyond  dispute  that 
even  macroscopic  phenomena  are  the  results  of  repeated  observation .  Now, 
such  a  point  of  view,  although  it  is  extremely  plausible,  and  close  to  neurological 
and  physical  data,  necessitates  a  complete  reconstruction  of  our  describing 
apparatus,  which  is  not  adapted  to  such  an  outlook. 

The  problem  of  'observation*  enters.  Bohr  suggests,  and  rightly,  that  this 
vocabularly  is  strictly  connected  with  the  older  ‘causal*  vocabulary.  One  of 
the  main  points  of  the  present  work  is  to  draw  attention  to  the  multiordinal 
mechanism  and  terms  and  to  show  that  the  analysis  of  these  problems  cannot 
be  even  attempted  without  first  analysing  the  structure  of  our  languages,  of 
our  ‘knowledge’,  and  the  neurological  and  semantic  aspects  which  such  analysis 
involves. 

When  this  analysis  is  carried  through  we  see  that  the  problems  of  ‘con¬ 
tinuity*  and  ‘discontinuity’  lose  their  absolute  character.  They  become  verbal 
problems,  to  be  solved  through  the  ingenuity  of  some  one  who  will  suggest 
the  solutions. 

The  newer  quantum  mechanics  give  us  ample  material  for  work  on  these 
problems,  but  they  also  illustrate  a  much  more  general  and  important  problem, 
which  is  the  subject  matter  of  the  present  book;  namely,  that  all  ‘knowledge* 
is  structural ,  strictly  dependent  on  the  nervous  structure  and  functioning, 
and  the  language  we  use.  ‘Method’  is  that  aspect  of  the  search  for  structure 
which  deals  with  the  most  expedient  means  for  finding  structure.  Since  words 
are  not  the  things  we  speak  about,  the  study  of  linguistic  structure  becomes  a 

n 

■ - i 

VI I 

Fig.  3 

(From  The  New  Quantum  Mechanics ,  p.  115, 
by  George  Birtwistle) 

X.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  'MATTER' 

most  important  research  method.  The  more  languages  (theories)  we  have  for 
analysis  and  structural  comparison,  the  more  glimpses  do  we  get  at  the  structure 
of  the  world.  The  newer  quantum  mechanics  give  us  enormous  material  of  a 
linguistic,  structural,  and  semantic  character. 

It  is  natural  that  this  wisdom  can  come  only  from  the  study  of  the  structure 
of  the  highest  developed  languages  in  existence,  which  are  mathematical 
languages.  If  we  want  progress  in  any  line  of  human  endeavour,  this  progress 
is  always  dependent  on  the  languages  we  use,  since  what  we  call  'progress’  is 
a  co-operative  affair  and  therefore  dependent  on  means  of  communications 
and  languages. 

From  the  point  of  view  of  structure,  we  deal  with  a  world  of  absolute  in¬ 
dividuals  and  therefore  our  languages  must  be  such  as  to  reflect  such  individu¬ 
ality.  We  already  know  that  this  involves  an  extensional  attitude  and  methods, 
which  historically  have  produced  mathematics  as  the  only  language  which  as 
yet  reflects  in  structure  the  world  around  us. 

With  the  newer  quantum  mechanics,  the  old  ‘discontinuity’  resolves  itself 
into  an  essential  individuality ,  as  noticed  by  Bohr,  perfectly  foreign  to  the 
older  theories. 

History  proves  that  we  were  slow  in  arriving  at  that  point.  Our  tragedies 
began  when  the  ‘intensional’  biologist  Aristotle  took  the  lead  over  the  ‘ex- 
tensional’  mathematical  philosopher  Plato,  and  formulated  all  the  primitive 
identifications,  subject-predicativism  .  ,  into  an  imposing  system,  which  for 
more  than  two  thousand  years  we  were  not  allowed  to  revise  under  penalty  of 
persecution.  Mathematics  was  not  particularly  encouraged,  but  at  least,  not 
persecuted,  so  that  it  was  developed  into  the  present  day  great  linguistic  syste  m. 
The  theory  of  function  involves  semantic  factors  of  non-identification. 

The  invention  of  the  differential  and  the  integral  calculi,  represents  the 
two  great  structural  and  psycho-logical  aspects  of  analysis  and  differentiation, 
versus  synthesis  and  integration. 

The  application  of  these  methods  led  us  to  differential  geometries,  to 
methods  of  treating  ‘fulness’,  and  to  ‘contact’  methods.  ‘Fulness’  necessitated 
geometries  of  higher  dimensions,  impossible  in  ‘absolute  emptiness’,  and  so  the 
fusion  of  geometry  with  physics  became  possible.  The  four-dimensional  world 
of  Minkowski  and  the  theory  of  Einstein  finally  achieved  this  fusion.  The 
next  step  was  the  invention  of  the  new  quantum  mechanics,  where  all  these 
important,  nay,  all-important,  structural,  semantic,  and  linguistic  achievements 
find  their  culmination.  The  old  primitive  metaphysics  become  too  ‘materialistic’ 
for  an  enlightened  age. 

Without  legislating  about  the  ‘truth’  or  ‘falsehood’  of  the  newer  mechanics, 
as  a  matter  of  human  behaviour  these  theories  are  the  best  indications  and 
examples  of  the  structure  of  human  ‘knowledge’,  which  I  have  attempted  to 
formulate  in  this  work  as  a  general  theory. 

The  A  -system  was  strictly  interconnected  with  primitive-made  structural 
assumptions  or  metaphysics,  reflected  in  the  structure  of  the  older  languages 
and  in  the  el  notions  about  language,  ‘psychology’,  ‘logic’,  and  the  pre-scientific 

THE  NEWER  'MATTER* 

anthropomorphic  astronomy,  physics,  and  other  disciplines.  Of  late,  science 
has  developed  in  spite  of  all  handicaps  and  persecutions,  and  has  begun  to  de¬ 
part  structurally  and  semantically  from  the  path  of  aristotelianism  and  the 
dark  ages.  Every  science  has  had  to  build  its  own  language  and  this  fact  com¬ 
pletely  condemns  the  A  language,  which,  it  is  shocking  to  notice,  we  continue 
to  preserve  in  our  daily  life. 

Should  we  wonder  that  we  have  shown  hardly,  any  progress  at  all  in  our 
purely  human  affairs  and  notions?  We  should  wonder,  rather,  that  we  have 
been  able  to  survive  until  now — though  with  needless  difficulties  and  suffering. 
More  wars,  more  revolutions,  more  insanity,  more  morons,  more  struggle  and 
competition,  and  more  unhappiness  are  what  we  are  entitled  to  expect  and 
ptedict  as  the  outcome  of  this  structurally  and  semantically  impossible  situation. 

As  the  organism  works  as-a-whole,  such  things  as  ‘pure  intellect*  or  ‘pure 
emotions’  represent  structurally  el  fictions  and  scientists  should  realize  that 
their  professed  detached  scientific  attitude  is  profoundly  and  fundamentally 
unjustified.  All  science  has  ‘emotional'  components,  which  play  most  important 
roles  in  life.  If  we  live  in  a  modern  world,  but  keep  the  ‘emotional  attitudes’  of 
primitive  bygone  days,  then  naturally  we  are  bound  to  be  semantically  un¬ 
balanced,  and  cannot  be  adjusted  to  a-  fundamentally  primitive  ‘civilization* 
in  the  midst  of  great  technical  achievements.*  When  scientists  understand  that, 
then  the  layman  will  have  a  different  attitude  toward  science.  He  will  under¬ 
stand  that  science  is  not  a  privilege  of  the  few,  something  without  effect  upon 
all  and  every  one.  He  will  realize  that  while  he  lives  in  a  modern  world,  made  so 
by  science,  structural  ignorance  of  the  fundamentals  as  discovered  by  science 
leaves  him  with  primitive  structural  assumptions  or  metaphysics,  which  by 
necessity  build  for  him  a  delusional  world  leading  to  semantic  unbalance  and 
ultimately  to  ‘mental’  and  nervous  ills. 

From  the  non-elementalistic  point  of  view,  the  only  escape  is  to  realize  that 
ignorance  in  an  adult  is,  and  must  be,  pathological,  because  ‘knowledge’  is  to 
be  considered  as  a  normal  characteristic  of  human  nervous  tissue. 

A  special  structural  and  methodological  brief  and  simplified  account  of 
scientific  achievements,  such  as  I  have  attempted  in  this  work,  must  be  a  part 
of  a  theory  of  sanity.  Sanity  means  adjustment  and  without  the  minimum  of 
the  best  structural  knowledge  of  each  date  concerning  this  world,  such  adjust¬ 
ment  is  impossible. 

It  is  not  necessary  that  the  reader  should  fully  understand  all  technical 
details  of  a  theory,  to  be  aware  (instinctive,  affective  .  ,)  of  the  existence  of  the 
structural  and  semantic  problems  and  to  realize  that  some  of  the  most  competent 
and  skilled  professionals  are  working  at  these  theories.  Such  awareness  has 
great  pacifying  semantic  influence;  it  eliminates  the  older  affective  tensions 
which  were  due  to  identifications,  absolutism,  dogmatism,  flights  into  mystic¬ 
ism,  and  other  similar  pathological  disturbances. 

*See  my  Manhood  of  Humanity. 

X.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  'MATTER' 

A  non-aristotelian  system  must  deal  with  all  these  structural  and  semantic 
issues.  It  is  hoped  that  once  a  J[  -system  is  presented  to  the  public,  scientists 
and  laymen  will  become  more  interested  in  the  structural  and  semantic  issues 
emphasized  here,  and  that  new  and  wider  researches  will  be  undertaken. 

History  shows  that  such  hopes  are  not  illusory.  The  greatest  men  of 
science  have  always  had  wide  human  aims  and  interests.  From  the  non-ele- 
mentalistic  point  of  view,  they  probably  became  productive  geniuses  because  of 
this  broad  human  urge.  From  the  point  of  view  of  psychiatry,  it  is  well  known 
that  'mental’  ills  involve  usually  anti-social  affective  attitudes.  When  we  see 
men  with  distinctly  anti-social  tendencies,  no  matter  how  they  rationalize  them, 
they  are  invariably  ill  in  some  way.  A  fully  healthy  individual  is  never  anti¬ 
social. 

That  science  should  include  structural  and  semantic  factors  of  sanity  may 
be  a  startling  notion,  but  only  at  first!  In  the  present  analysis  this  turns  out 
to  be,  rather  unexpectedly,  a  necessity.  But  on  second  consideration  we  should 
rather  expect  it.  Science  and  mathematics  show  the  working  of  the  'human 
mind’  at  its  best.  Accordingly,  we  can  learn  from  science  and  mathematics  how 
this  ‘human  mind’  should  work,  to  be  at  its  best  Then  we  should  make  an 
analysis  of  science  and  mathematics  from  some  wider  structural  and  semantic 
point  of  view, — the  task  which  has  been  undertaken  in  the  present  work. 

At  this  early  stage  it  is,  of  course,  of  comparatively  little  importance  to 
what  extent  this  analysis  turns  out  to  be  satisfactory.  The  main  point  is  that 
it  has  been  originated .  If  the  present  author  fails,  others,  perhaps  even  because 
of  his  failure,  may  be  stimulated  to  do  it  better.  The  great  and  vital  thing  is 
that  it  should  be  done,  by  someone. 

SUPPLEMENT  I 

THE  LOGIC  OF  RELATIVITY 
by  R.  D.  Carmichael 

In  order  to  be  able  to  deal  with  such  quantities  as  are  involved  in  the 
measurement  of  motion,  time,  velocity,  etc.,  or  indeed  in  the  quantitative 
analysis  of  any  physical  phenomena,  it  is  necessary  to  have  some  system  or 
systems  of  reference  with  respect  to  which  measurements  can  be  made.  Let  us 
consider  any  set  of  things  consisting  of  objects  and  any  kind  of  physical  quanti¬ 
ties  whatever,  as  electric  charges  or  magnets  or  light-sources  or  telescopes  or 
other  objects  and  instruments,  each  of  which  is  at  rest  with  respect  to  each  of 
the  others.  Let  us  suppose  that  among  the  objects  are  clocks,  to  be  used  for 
measuring  time,  and  rods  or  rules  to  be  used  for  measuring  length,  and  that 
time  and  length  may  be  measured  at  any  desired  instant  and  any  assigned 
place.  Such  a  set  of  objects  and  quantities  and  instruments,  including  the 
equipment  for  measuring  time  and  length,  all  being  at  rest  relatively  to  each 
other,  we  shall  call  a  system  of  reference.  Such  a  system  we  shall  denote  by  S. 
In  case  we  have  to  deal  at  once  with  two  or  more  systems  of  reference  we  shall 
denote  them  by  S ,  S',  Si,  S2,  .  . . 

In  this  definition  of  systems  of  reference  nothing  specific  has  been  said 
about  the  units  of  length  and  of  time.  If  we  were  dealing  with  our  usual  prin¬ 
ciples  of  mechanics  we  might  pass  over  such  a  matter  without  any  feeling  of 
difficulty  about  it;  it  would  be  sufficient  to  proceed  in  accordance  with  our 
intuitive  conceptions  of  time  and  length.  But  in  the  theory  of  relativity  these 
appear  in  a  new  light.  We  can  not  proceed  with  confident  dependence  upon  our 
intuition.  On  the  other  hand  we  shall  not  attempt  to  give  explicit  definitions 
of  units  of  time  and  length.  We  shall  proceed  from  certain  principles  or  postu¬ 
lates,  presently  to  be  stated,  to  an  analysis  of  time  and  length  and  so  arrive  at 
a  suitable  precision  of  these  conceptions  by  means  of  certain  guiding  principles. 
It  will  be  seen  that  it  is  not  far  from  the  truth  to  say  that  our  fundamental 
terms  are  defined  implicitly  and  indirectly  by  means  of  the  statements  made 
about  them  and  accepted  initially  as  valid  and  that  they  may  mean  anything 
which  is  consistent  with  the  truth  of  these  fundamental  principles  and  postulates. 

The  restricted  principle  of  relativity  may  now  be  stated  in  the  following 
form: 

Restricted  Principle  of  Relativity.  If  Si  and  S%  are  two  systems  of 
reference  having  with  respect  to  each  other  a  uniform  unaccelerated  motion ,  then 
natural  phenomena  run  their  course  with  respect  to  in  accordance  with  precisely 
the  same  general  laws  as  with  respect  to  Si. 

This  principle  says  nothing  about  the  suitability  of  any  particular  system 
of  reference  for  the  convenient  expression  of  the  laws  of  nature;  but  it  does  say 

SUPPLEMENT  I 

that  if  either  Si  or  S2  is  suitable  the  other  is  equally  suitable,  the  relative  motion 
of  the  two  being  unaccelerated. 

In  order  to  bring  into  suitable  relations  the  measurements  made  on  one 
system  of  reference  and  those  made  on  another  it  is  necessary  to  have  some 
agreement  as  to  the  correspondence  of  units  on  the  two  systems.  Accordingly 
we  shall  make  the  following  assumption  concerning  the  correspondence  of  units: 

Principle  of  Correspondence  of  Units.  The  units  of  any  two  systems 
Si  and  S2  are  such  that  the  same  numerical  result  will  he  obtained  in  measuring 
with  the  units  of  S\  a  quantity  L\  and  with  the  units  of  Si  a  quantity ‘  L%  when  the 
relation  of  Li  to  Si  is  precisely  the  same  as  that  of  L2  to  Si. 

We  shall  agree  that  the  restricted  principle  of  relativity  is  to  be  understood 
in  a  sense  which  implies  this  assumption  concerning  the  correspondence  of  units; 
that  is,  the  latter  will  be  taken  as  a  more  precise  formulation  of  a  part  of  the 
content  of  the  former.  It'  is  clear  that  the  possibility  of  realizing  this  latter  is 
taken  for  granted  in  the  Galileo-Newtonian  mechanics;  it  is  often  passed  over 
without  remark  although  it  is  a  profound  fact  and  is  a  part  of  the  essential 
basis  of  any  theory  of  motion. 

It  is  a  grave  question  whether  the  restricted  principle  of  relativity  can  be 
maintained  in  the  interpretation  of  natural  phenomena.  Indeed  in  the  more 
general  theory  of  relativity,  to  be  taken  up  later,  it  is  treated  merely  as  a  sort 
of  approximation  to  a  more  comprehensive  principle — an  approximation  strictly 
valid  only  in  the  absence  of  a  gravitational  field  but  very  close  to  the  truth  for 
a  wide  variety  of  phenomena  including  most  of  those  which  are  purely  terrestrial. 

There  are  two  particular  characteristic  postulates,  or  ‘laws  of  nature’, 
lying  at  the  base  of  the  restricted  theory  of  relativity.  These  may  be  stated  as 
follows: 

Postulate  M.  The  unaccelerated  motion  of  a  system  of  reference  S  can  not 
be  detected  by  observations  made  on  S  alofie ,  the  units  of  measurement  being  those 
belonging  to  S, 

Postulate  R.  The  velocity  of  light ,  in  free  space ,  measured  on  an  unac¬ 
celerated  system  of  reference  S  by  means  of  units  belonging  to  St  is  independent  of 
the  velocity  of  S  and  of  the  unaccelerated  velocity  of  the  light-source . 

For  these  two  particular  postulates  there  is  the  strongest  possible  experi¬ 
mental  evidence.  Everything,  known  points  toward  their  truth,  and  there  is 
nothing  known  which  in  any  way  seems  to  be  in  disagreement  with  them.  It 
is  to  be  observed  that  they  apply  only  to  the  ideal  case,  that  is,  the  case  in  which 
there  is  supposed  to  be  no  gravitational  field. 

For  the  development  of  the  restricted  theory  of  relativity  there  are  three 
additional  necessary  postulates,  or  ‘laws  of  nature;’  those  that  theory  shares 
in  common  with  the  Galileo-Newtonian  mechanics.  Such  assumptions  in  some 
form  are  essential  to  the  initial  arguments  and  to  the  conclusions  which  are 
drawn  by  means  of  them.  To  the  present  writer  it  seems  to  be  preferable  to 
have  these  assumptions  explicitly  stated.  They  may  be  put  into  the  following 
form : 

THE  LOGIC  OF  RELATIVITY 

Postulate  V.  If  the  velocity  of  a  system  of  reference  Si  relative  to  a  system 
of  reference  Si  is  measured  by  means  of  the  units  belonging  to  Si  and  if  the  velocity 
of  Si  relative  to  S%  is  measured  by  means  of  the  units  belonging  to  S2  the  two  results 
will  agree  in  numerical  value . 

Postulate  T.  If  two  systems  of  reference  Si  and  S2  move  with  unaccelerated 
relative  velocity  and  if  a  body  moves  relatively  to  one  of  the  systems  in  a  straight 
line  with  unaccelerated  velocity  then  it  also  moves  in  a  straight  line  relatively  to  the 
other  and  with  unaccelerated  velocity. 

Postulate  L.  If  two  systems  of  reference  Si  and  S2  move  with  unaccelerated 
relative  velocity  and  if  a  line  segment  l  is  perpendicular  to  the  line  of  relative  motion 
of  Si  and  S%  and  is  fixed  to  one  of  these  systems,  then  the  length  of  l  measured  by 
means  of  the  units  belonging  to  Si  will  be  the  same  as  its  length  measured  by  means 
of  the  units  belonging  to  S2. 

We  now  have  before  us  the  logical  basis  upon  which  may  be  built  the  re¬ 
stricted  theory  of  relativity  in  all  its  details.  It  has  been  put  in  essentially  the 
same  form  as  that  employed  in  my  ‘Theory  of  Relativity”  (published  by  Wiley 
and  Sons,  New  York)  and  in  my  earlier  articles  in  “The  Physical  Review”. 
Reference  may  be  made  to  the  book  named  for  the  detailed  development  of  the 
theory.  Here  we  shall  attempt  to  sketch  only  the  progress  of  ideas  and  to 
indicate  the  main  conclusions. 

The  first  thing  to  be  done  in  developing  the  theory  on  this  basis  is  to 
consider  carefully  the  relation  between  the  time  units  of  the  two  systems.  The 
following  remarkable  conclusion  is  reached  by  a  process  of  reasoning  which  is 
fully  cogent  in  character: 

If  two  systems  of  reference  Si  and  S2  move  with  a  relative  velocity  v  and 
/ 3  is  the  ratio  v/c  of  v  to  the  velocity  c  of  light  as  measured  on  either  system, 
then  to  an  observer  on  Si  the  time  unit  of  5i  appears  to  be  in  the  ratio  Vl  —  /S2:l 
to  that  which  is  described  to  him  as  a  unit  by  an  observer  on  £2  while  to  an 
observer  on  £2  the  time  unit  of  S2  appears  to  be  in  the  ratio  a/  1  — /32:1  to  that 
which  is  described  to  him  as  a  unit  by  the  observer  on  St. 

Thus  we  have  the  extraordinary  conclusion  that  the  time  units  of  the 
two  systems  of  reference  Si  and  62,  not  at  rest  relatively  to  each  other,  are  of 
different  lengths  in  such  a  way  that  an  observer  on  either  system  thinks  that 
the  time  unit  of  the  other  system  is  greater  than  his  own.  It  is  evident  that 
no  simple  change  of  the  unit  on  either  system  (or  both)  will  bring  the  units 
into  agreement  for  observers  on  both  systems.  As  postulates  V  and  L  and  T 
are  generally  accepted  and  have  not  elsewhere  led  to  such  strange  conclusions 
it  is  natural  to  suppose  that  the  strangeness  here  is  not  due  to  them.  In  the 
argument  the  restricted  principle  of  relativity  needs  to  be  used  only  in  so  far 
as  it  is  involved  in  the  conclusion  that  the  units  of  any  two  systems  of  reference 
and  S2  are  such  that  the  same  numerical  result  is  obtained  in  measuring 
with  the  units  of  Si  a  quantity  Li  and  with  the  units  of  £2  a  quantity  when 
the  relation  of  Li  to  5i  is  precisely  the  same  as  the  relation  of  L2  to  62.  But 
this  principle  is  accepted  in  the  classical  mechanics  and  has  not  elsewhere 
led  to  strange  results.  The  conclusion  in  postulate  M  appears  to  be  demanded 

SUPPLEMENT  I 

by  the  strongest  experimental  evidence;  it  is  generally  accepted;  if  the  strange 
dement  in  the  result  concerning  units  of  time  is  due  to  this  postulate,  it  appears 
that  we  must  accept  it  as  being  required  by  such  experience  as  has  already 
been  tested  with  due  care.  Hence  the  condusion  seems  to  be  inevitable  that 
the  strangeness  in  our  result  is  due  prindpally  to  postulate  R. 

We  shall  presently  see  that  the  same  basis  of  postulates  leads  to  the  con- 
elusion  that  corresponding  units  of  length  in  the  two  systems  are  also  different 
when  talcen  in  certain  directions.  From  the  transformations  of  time  and  space 
which  result  from  the  conclusions  thus  obtained  the  whole  restricted  theory 
of  relativity  may  be  deduced  (as  is  shown  in  the  book  mentioned).  Therefore 
this  theory  depends  essentially  on  the  principle  of  correspondence  of  units  in 
two  systems  of  reference  and  on  the  propositions  set  forth  explidtly  in  the 
postulates;  and  all  of  these  are  dther  generalizations  from  experiment  or 
statements  of  laws  which  have  usually  been  accepted.  Hence  we  conclude: 
The  restricted  theory  of  relativity  may  he  developed  by  logical  processes  from  the 
generalized  results  of  certain  experiments  together  with  certain  laws  which  have 
jor  a  long  fame  been  accepted . 

•  r?ult  COr,Cerning  the  reIation  of  units  of  length  may  be  put 

in  the  following  form: 

If  two  systems  of  reference  S,  and  St  move  with  a  relative  velodty  t>  and 
if is  the  ratio  v/c  of  v  to  the  vdodty  c  of  light  as  measured  on  either  system 
then  to  an  observer  on  5i  the  unit  of  length  of  5!  along  the  line  of  relative 
motion  appears  to  be  in  the  ratio  VTZ^-.l  to  that  which  is  described  to 
m  as  a  unit  by  an  observer  on  S2  while  to  an  observer  on  St  the  unit  of  length 
of  St  along  the  line  of  relative  motion  appears  to  be  in  the  ratio  Vl  —B*:l  to 
that  which  is  described  to  him  as  a  unit  by  the  observer  on  Si, 

These  remarkable  conclusions  concerning  units  of  length  in  two  systems 

of  reference  rest  on  just  those  postulates  which  led  to  the  strange  results  as 
to  the  units  of  time. 

What  often  impresses  one  as  the  most  remarkable  conclusion  in  the  theory 
o  relativity  is  one  which  implies  that  the  notion  of  simultaneity  of  events 
happening  at  different  places  is  indefinite  in  meaning  until  some  convention 
is  adopted  as  to  how  simultaneity  is  to  be  determined.  In  fact,  there  is  no  such 
thing  as  absolute  simultaneity  of  events  happening  at  different  places.  With 
respect  to  the  measured  time  and  space  of  physics  we  must  conclude  that 
time  does  not  run  its  course  independently  of  space.  Measured  time  and  space 
are  indissolubly  bound  together.  The  theorem  which  sets  this  forth  most 
concretely  may  be  stated  in  the  following  way: 

Let  two  systems  of  reference  *  and  Ss  have  an  unaccelerated  relative 
velocity  v.  Let  an  observer  on  5,  place  two  clocks  in  the  line  of  relative  motion 
of  Si  and  St  and  adjust  them  so  that  they  appear  to  him  to  mark  simultaneously 
the  same  time.  Then  to  an  observer  on  5,  the  clock  on  St  which  is  forward 
m  point  of  motion  appears  to  be  behind  in  point  of  time  by  the  amount 

THE  LOGIC  OF  RELATIVITY 

H  d 

7*'VxZjp 

where  c  is  the  velocity  of  light,  0  =*v/ct  and  d  is  the  distance  between  the  two 
clocks  as  measured  by  the  observer  on  Su 

By  means  of  the  foregoing  theorems  we  may  readily  obtain  the  formulae 
for  the  celebrated  Lorentz  transformation  of  space  and  time  coordinates. 
(The  non-mathematical  reader  may  omit  the  remainder  of  this  paragraph.) 
Let  two  systems  of  reference  5  and  S'  have  the  relative  velocity  v  in  the  line  /. 
Let  systems  of  rectangular  coordinates  be  attached  to  the  systems  of  reference 
S  and  S'  in  such  a  way  that  the  x-axis  of  each  system  is  in  the  line  l  and  that 
the  two  ic-axes  have  the  same  positive  direction,  and  let  the  y-axis  and  the 
z-axis  of  one  system  be  parallel  to  the  y-axis  and  z-axis  respectively  of  the 
other  system  and  have  their  positive  senses  in  the  same  directions.  Let  these 
two  systems  of  axes  coincide  at  the  time  zero.  Furthermore,  for  the  sake  of 
distinction,  denote  the  space  and  time  coordinates  on  S  by  x,  y,  s,  t,  and  those 
on  S'  by  x',  y,  s',  t'.  Let  us  suppose  that  S'  moves  with  respect  to  5  in  the 
direction  of  increasing  values  of  x.  Then  it  turns  out  that  the  foregoing 
theorems  imply  the  following  relations  between  the  two  systems  of  coordinates; 

Vl-,31 

x' 

Vl  -0* 

(*-»/), 

Z-y, 

tf-s. 

where  /S  =t t/e  and  c  is  the  velocity  of  light. 

The  foregoing  theorems,  or  (in  more  compact  language)  the  foregoing 
equations  of  transformation,  furnish  the  effective  means  for  developing  the 
whole  of  the  restricted  theory  of  relativity.  Our  purpose  does  not  require  us 
to  follow  that  development  further  in  detail.  But  we  may  mention  a  few  of 
the  remarkable  conclusions  which  now  emerge  readily.  If  two  velocities,  each 
of  which  is  less  than  c,  are  combined  the  resultant  velocity  is  also  less  than  c. 
The  mass  of  a  body  increases  with  an  increase  in  its  velocity  relative  to  the 
system  on  which  the  mass  is  measured.  The  mass  of  a  body  at  rest  appears 
to  be  the  measure  of  its  internal  energy.  Mass  and  energy  in  general  appear 
to  be  essentially  convertible  terms.  The  velocity  of  light  is  a  maximum  which 
the  velocity  of  a  material  body  may  approach  but  can  never  equal  or  exceed. 

The  development  by  Einstein  in  1905  of  the  foregoing  restricted  theory 
of  relativity  led  to  a  fresh  analysis  of  the  whole  foundations  of  physics.  This 
was  made  inevitable  by  its  effective  attack  upon  such  fundamental  notions  as 
those  of  length  and  time  and  mass  and  velocity.  Einstein  himself  succeeded 
in  1915  in  greatly  extending  the  range  of  his  theory,  developing  what  has  since 

SUPPLEMENT  I 

been  called  the  general  theory  of  relativity.  We  shall  now  speak  briefly  con- 
cerning  the  foundations  underlying  the  latter.  7 

hi  ^Itreadyin  the  restricted  theory  time  and  space  had  become  essentially 
blended  so  that  we  could  no  longer  speak  of  a  three-dimensional  space  2 
separate  and  apart  from  the  one  dimension  of  time.  A  sort  of  combination  of  the 

7°  <'ame ,‘ntu  °Uf  C°nCepti0n  and  we  be*an  t0  realize  that  they  can  not  be 
disentangled  by  the  measurements  of  physics.  We  are  forced  to  consider  a 
four-dimensional  continuum  of  space  and  time.  It  is  with  this  space-time 
extension  of  four-dimensions  that  the  general  theory  of  relativity  has  essentially 
to  do,  and  its  problems  are  intimately  connected  with  the  relations  of  two 
systems  of  reference  of  the  generalized  sort  which  this  makes  necessary  The 
Lorentz  transformation  was  a  great  psychological  (and  even  logical)  aid  in 
the  formation  of  the  new  theory. 

.  ..  Lf, US  consider  a  four-dimensional  extension  in  which  space  and  time  are 
intimately  connected  and  blended  so  that  each  point  P  in  these  four  dimensions 
represents  a  definite  place  A  at  a  definite  time  t  at  which  A  is  to  be  considered 

^inJ  PU AM  1 111116  3  maIerkl  PartiC,e  is  repr™d  by  a  succession  of  these 
ff  f.  „  ‘hfe  P°ln'?  for  a  given  material  particle  lie  on  what  is  called  the 
world-line  of  that  particle;  and  this  world-line  represents  the  state  of  motion 
(or  eventually  the  state  of  rest)  of  the  material  particle.  If  two  objects  come 
into  coincidence  at  an  instant  their  world-lines  have  a  corresponding  inter¬ 
section.  The  things  which  the  physicist  deals  with  ultimately  are  these  inter- 
sections  of  world-lines. 

In  order  to  deal  with  them  he  finds  it  necessary  to  introduce  certain  ref¬ 
erence  numbers  which  we  may  call  the  coordinates  xlt  x2,  x3,  x4.  These  numbers 
change  m  such  a  way  that  their  variation  along  any  world-line  is  continuous 
and  thut  no  two  points  ever  have  the  same  ordered  set  of  four  numbers  assigned 
to  them.  This  gives  us  a  very  general  set  of  coordinates.  It  is  clear  that  co¬ 
ordinates  can  be  set  up  in  an  immense  variety  of  ways  so  as  to  have  these  few 
very  general  properties.  One  of  the  first  problems  in  the  general  theory  of 
relativity  is  that  of  the  character  of  the  transformation  by  means  of  which  we 
can  pass  from  a  given  choice  *2,  x3l  *4  of  coordinates  to  a  second  one  |2 
«-  f 4«  It  is  clear  that  we  must  have  relations  of  the  form 

£*•  =fi  (*i,  X2 ,  #3,  Xi),  i  =  1,  2,  3,  4, 

where  the  functions/,-  of  the  variables  *„  **,  *4  are  rather  general  functions 

of  these  four  arguments  and  are  indeed  to  a  large  extent  arbitrary.  Now  suppose 
that  the  laws  of  nature  are  expressed  in  terms  of  the  coordinates  *  and  also  in 
terms  of  the  coordinates  |;  the  question  arises  as  to  what  relation  one  ought  to 
expect  between  these  two  forms  of  the  law.  Now  there  are  no  coordinates  in 
nature.  These  have  been  inserted  by  us  for  our  convenience.  What  is  more 
natural,  then,  than  the  demand  that  we  shall  formulate  our  statements  of  these 
kws  so  that  they  shall  have  the  same  form  in  these  two  systems  of  reference, 
and  indeed  in  all  possible  systems  of  reference?  This  is  precisely  one  of  the 
fundamental  basic  requirements  upon  which  Einstein  insists.  The  corresponding 

THE  LOGIC  OF  RELATIVITY 

principle  lie  has  called  the  principle  of  covariance.  In  detailed  and  precise  form, 
It  may  be  stated  somewhat  as  follows: 

Principle  of  Covariance.  The  laws  of  nature  can  he  { and  are  to  he)  ex¬ 
pressed  in  such  mathematical  form  in  terms  of  the  space-and-time  coordinates  Xu 
Xj,  xj,  xa  that  they  shall  remain  invariant  under  every  transformation  of  the  form 
—f%  (^i)  x<Ly  x$}  Xa)}  i  —  1,  2,  3,  4, 
where  the  functions  f  are  subject  to  the  following  conditions: 

1)  They  are  {apart  from  exceptional  points  or  regions  of  fewer  than  four 
dimensions)  finite  and  continuous  and  indefinitely  differentiable; 

2)  They  are  such  that  the  transformation  is  uniquely  reversiblet  the  inverse 
transformation  having  the  properties  demanded  for  the  direct  transformation ; 

3)  They  are  such  that  in  both  the  transformation  and  its  inverse  the  fourth 
variable  has  the  character  of  a  time  variable  while  the  other  three  have  the  character 
of  space  variables. 

This  principle  demands  the  attainment  of  an  ideal  which  is  admittedly 
mathematical  in  its  character.  By  means  of  it  alone  one  could  not  come  to  grips 
with  phenomena.  One  needs  some  additional  hypotheses.  One  of  these  is  to 
the  effect  that  the  restricted  theory  of  relativity  is  valid  in  free  space,  that  is, 
in  space  free  of  a  gravitational  field.  The  other  is  the  celebrated  law  of  the 
equivalence  of  gravitational  forces  and  the  apparent  forces  due  to  acceleration. 
This  may  be  set  forth  as  follows: 

Principle  of  Equivalence.  For  an  indefinitely  small  region  of  the  world 
{that  is ,  a  region  so  small  that  the  variation  of  gravitation  in  it  in  both  time  and 
space  is  negligible)  there  exists  a  coordinate  system  So  {Xu  X2,  X3,  Xa)  with  respect 
to  which  gravitation  has  no  influence  either  upon  the  motions  of  mass  particles  or 
upon  any  other  physical  phenomena  whatsoever. 

Such  is  the  logical  basis  from  which  the  general  theory  of  relativity  proceeds. 
We  can  not  here  follow  it  in  its  high  enterprise  of  conquest  over  the  laws  of 
nature.  The  road  (at  present  and  perhaps  for  a  long  time  to  come)  can  be  fol¬ 
lowed  only  by  one  who  is  willing  to  give  serious  and  long-continued  attention 
to  the  study  of  certain  branches  of  mathematics.  In  the  earlier  parts  of  the 
argument  the  reasoning  is  rather  technical  and  abstruse  in  character  and  the 
general  steps  are  intelligible  only  to  those  who  have  a  considerable  acquaintance 
with  a  certain  range  of  mathematical  ideas.  After  a  time  the  exposition  comes 
down,  if  not  to  earth,  at  least  to  the  solar  system  and  cases  begin  to  appear  in 
which  it  is  possible  to  find  means  for  choosing  between  the  theory  of  Newton 
and  that  of  Einstein. 

Three  crucial  phenomena  have  been  brought  to  light  by  means  of  which  to 
test  between  the  two  theories.  We  shall  now  speak  briefly  of  each  of  these. 

For  a  long  time  astronomers  have  known  that  there  is  a  certain  forward 
advance  in  the  perihelion  position  of  the  planet  Mercury  which  can  not  be 
accounted  for  on  Newton’s  theory.  It  amounts  to  about  42  seconds  of  angular 
measure  per  century.  This  is  well  accounted  for  by  Einstein's  theory. 

Einstein  predicted,  on  the  basis  of  his  theory,  that  a  ray  of  light  from  a 
star  which  is  seen  apparently  close  to  the  edge  of  the  sun  would  be  found  to  be 

SUPPLEMENT  I 

beni  out  of  a  straight  path  and  that  the  deflection  thus  caused  would  turn  out 

SeC°n^  °f  T'f  n,eaSUre’  the  bendSn*  ^'"8  i"  ^ch  a  direction 
ttiat  Ae  star  could  actually  be  seen  when  just  behind  the  edge  of  the  sun.  The 

pred.ct.on  has  been  verified  with  a  good  degree  of  precision,  observations  having 
been  taken  at  two  eclipses  of  the  sun. 

A  third  crucial  phenomenon  is  associated  with  the  vibrations  of  an  atom 
m  a  gravitational  field.  Since  the  periods  of  an  atom  furnish  a  sort  of  natural 
clock  it  should  give  an  invariant  measure  of  an  interval  of  time.  Proceeding 
from  this  hypothesis  one  concludes  that  an  atom  vibrates  more  slowly  on  the 
sun  than  on  the  earth,  due  to  the  influence  of  the  larger  gravitational  field  of 
toe  sun.  Hence  the  lines  of  the  spectrum  should  be  displaced  towards  the  red. 

or  e  part  of  the  spectrum  usually  observed  this  amounts  to  about  .008 
tentt.-meters  (a  tenth-meter  -lO"”  meters).  For  a  long  time  there  was  grave 
doubt  whether  this  phenomenon  is  actually  existent;  but  the  evidence  for  its 
existence  now  (1933)  seems  to  be  conclusive. 

Moreover  m  recent  years  it  has  come  to  be  recognized  that  the  stars  known 
as  wh.te  dwarfs  have  masses  which  are  comparable  with  that  of  the  sun,  while 
their  radu  are  much  smaller.  The  companion  of  Sirius  is  a  star  whose  radius  is 
about  1/35  of  that  of  our  sun.  Computation  shows  that  the  shift  in  the  lines  of 
the  spectrum  produced  by  light  passing  near  this  star  should  be  about  .30 
tenth-meters.  This  matter  was  put  to  the  test  at  Mount  Wilson  Observatory 
and  an  actual  shift  of  .32  tenth-meters  was  found.  One  would  conclude  then 
that  it  is  now  hardly  possible  to  doubt  the  actual  existence  of  the  spectral  shift 
predicted  by  the  Einstein  theory. 

Whatever  may  be  the  final  verdict  concerning  the  validity  of  the  theory  of 
relativity  as  a  whole,  it  has  certainly  made  a  fundamental  and  permanent  con- 
tnbution  to  astronomy  in  developing  a  modification  of  Newton’s  law  of  gravi¬ 
tation.  It  has  been  checked  experimentally  in  three  very  different  ways  and  is 
thus  estabhshed  on  a  rather  secure  basis.  Three  such  conquests  as  those  just 
recorded  have  probably  never  before  been  made  so  nearly  simultaneously  by 
a  single  theory  developed  from  one  point  of  view  consistently  maintained 

SUPPLEMENT  II 

THE  THEORY  OF  TYPES1 
by  Paul  Weiss* 

It  would  seem  from  the  interpretation  that  Whitehead  and  Russell  put  on 
the  theory  of  types,  that  it  is  impossible  or  meaningless  to  state  propositions 
which  have  an  unrestricted  possible  range  of  values,  or  which,  in  any  sense, 
are  arguments  to  themselves.  Thus  on  the  acceptance  of  the  principle  that 
statements  about  all  propositions  are  meaningless,2  it  would  be  illegitimate  to 
say,  “all  propositions  are  representable  by  symbols,”  “all  propositions  involve 
judgment,”  “all  propositions  are  elementary  or  not  elementary,”  and  if  no 
statement  could  be  made  about  all  the  members  of  a  set,8  it  would  be  impossible 
to  say,  “all  meanings  are  limited  by  a  context,”  “all  ideas  are  psychologically 
conditioned,”  “all  significant  assertions  have  grammatical  structures,”  etc., 
all  of  which  are  intended  to  apply  to  themselves  as  well.  The  theory  seems 
also  to  make  ineffective  a  familiar  form  of  refutation.  General  propositions 
are  frequently  denied  because  their  enunciation  or  acknowledgment  depends 
on  the  tacit  supposition  of  the  truth  of  a  contradictory  or  contrary  proposition. 
Such  refutations  assume  that  the  general  proposition  should  be  capable  of 
being  an  argument  of  the  same  type  and  to  the  same  function  as  its  own  argu¬ 
ments,  so  that  according  to  Whitehead  and  Russell,  they  fallaciously  refute 
“by  an  argument  which  involves  a  vicious  circle  fallacy”.4 

That  these  limitations  on  the  scope  of  assertions  or  on  the  validity  of 
refutations  are  rarely  heeded  is  apparent  even  from  a  cursory  examination 
of  philosophical  writings  since  1910.  Thus  Russell,  apropos  to  Bergson’s 
attempt  to  state  a  formula  for  the  comic  says,6  “it  would  seem  to  be  impossible 
to  find  any  such  formula  as  M.  Bergson  seeks.  Every  formula  treats  what  is 
living  as  if  it  were  mechanical,  and  is  therefore  by  his  own  rules  a  fitting  object 
of  laughter.”  The  characterisation  of  all  formulae,  even  though  it  refers  to  a 
totality,  seems  to  Mr.  Russell  to  be  of  the  same  type  as  the  formulae  characterised. 

x  Chap.  II.,  Principict  Mathematica. 

'[Reprinted  from  Mind:  a  Quarterly  Review  of  Psychology  and  Philosophy . 
Vol.  XXXVII ./  N.S.,  No .  147 ;  with  minor  corrections.] 

*P.  37,  ibid,  (second  edition).  aP.  37,  ibid,  4  P.  38,  ibid. 

•  “Prof.  Guide  to  Laughter,”  Cambridge  Review ,  Vol.  32,  1912,  and  Jour  dams 
Philosophy  of  Mr.  B'tr'nd  R*ss*ll,  pp.  86-7. 

SUPPLEMENT  II 

If  the  theory  were  without  any  embarrassments  of  its  own,  and  were 
indispensable  for  the  resolution  of  the  so-called  paradoxes1  (which  no  one 
seems  to  believe),  there  would  be  nothing  to  do  but  to  acknowledge  the  impos¬ 
sibility  of  cosmic  formulations,  as  well  as  the  inadequacy  of  philosophic 
criticisms,  and  to  pass  charitably  over  such  remarks  as  Russell's  as  mere 
accidents  in  a  busy  life.  However,  the  statement  of  the  theory  itself  involves 
the  following  difficulties  in  connection  with  (1)  its  scope,  (2)  its  applicability 
to  propositions  made  about  it,  and  (3)  its  description. 

1.  It  is  either  about  all  propositions  or  it  is  not. 

A.  If  it  were  about  all  propositions  it  would  violate  the  theory  of  types 

and  be  meaningless  or  self-contradictory. 

B.  If  it  were  not  about  all  propositions,  it  would  not  be  universally 

applicable.  To  state  it,  its  limitations  of  application  would  have  to 
be  specified.  One  cannot  say  that  there  is  a  different  theory  of  types 
for  each  order  of  the  hierarchy,  for  the  proposition  about  the  hier¬ 
archy  introduces  the  difficulty  over  again, 

2.  .Propositions  about  the  theory  of  types  (such  as  the  present  ones,  as 
well  as  those  in  the  Principia )  are  subject  to  the  theory  of  types,  or  they  are  not. 

A.  If  they  were,  the  theory  would  include  within  its  own  scope  propositions 
of  a  higher  order,  and  thus  be  an  argument  to  what,  is  an  argument 
to  it.2 

B.  If  they  were  not,  there  would  be  an  unlimited  number  of  propositions, 
not  subject  to  the  theory,  that  could  be  made  directly  or  indirectly 
about  it.  Among  these  propositions  there  might  be  some  which 
refer  to  a  totality  and  involve  functions  which  have  arguments 
presupposing  the  function. 

3.  The  statement  of  the  theory  of  types  is  either  a  proposition  of  a 
propositional  function,  neither  or  both. 

A.  If  it  were  a  proposition,  it  would  be  either  elementary,  first  order, 

general,  etc.,  have  a  definite  place  in  a  hierarchy  and  refer  only  to 
those  propositions  which  are  of  a  lower  order.  If  it  were  held  to  be 
a  proposition  of  the  last  order,  then  the  number  of  orders  would 
have  a  last  term,  and  there  could  not  be  meaningful  propositions 
made  about  the  theory.  The  Principia  should  not  be  able  to  say, 
on  that  basis,  just  what  the  purpose,  character  and  application  of 
the  theory  is. 

B.  Similarly,  if  it  were  a  propositional  function,  it  would  have  a  definite 

_ _ p^ace  in  a  hierarchy,  being  derived  from  a  proposition  by  generalisa- 

.  ,,  Paradoxes,  though  contrary  to  common  opinion,  may  be  and  frequently  are 
true.  Paranoumena,  violating  principles  of  logic  or  reason,  if  they  are  not  mean! 
mgless,  are  false,  and  it  is  only  they  which  are  capable  of  logical  analysis  and 
resolution  What  the  Pnnctpta  attempts  to  do  is  to  solve  apparent  paranoumena 
with  a  real  paranoumenon.  p*i«moumena 

*  P.  39,  Principia  Mathematica. 

THE  THEORY  OF  TYPES 

tkm.  It  could  not  refer  to  all  propositions  or  propositional  functions, 
but  only  to  those  of  a  lower  order. 

C.  If  it  were  neither  it  could  not  be  true  or  false,  nor  refer  to  anything 

that  was  true  or  false.  It  could  not  apply  to  propositions,  for  only 
propositions  or  propositional  functions,  in  a  logic,  refer  to  propositions. 

D.  If  both  at  once,  it  would  be  necessarily  self-reflexive. 

a.  If  as  function  it  had  itself  as  value,  it  would  refer  to  itself.  But 
the  theory  of  types  denies  that  a  function  can  have  itself  as  value. 

b.  If  as  function  it  had  something  else  as  value,  it  would  conform 
to  the  theory,  which  insists  that  functions  have  something  else 
as  values.  The  theory  then  applies  to  itself  and  is  self-reflexive, 
and  thus  does  not  apply  to  itself.  As,  by  hypothesis,  it  is  a  value 
of  some  other  function,  there  must  be  propositions  of  a  higher 
order  and  wider  range  than  the  theory  of  types. 

It  is  no  wonder  that  the  perpetrators  of  the  theory  have  not  been  altogether 
happy  about  it!  What  is  sound  in  it — and  there  is  much  that  is — is  best 
discovered  by  forgetting  their  statements  altogether,  and  by  endeavouring  to 
analyse  the  problems  it  was  designed  to  answer,  without  recourse  to  their 
machinery.  The  result  will  be  an  acknowledgment  of  a  theory  of  types  having 
a  limited  application,  and  a  formulation  of  a  principle  which  will  permit  certain 
kinds  of  unrestricted  general  propositions. 

To  do  this  we  shall  deal  in  detail  with  two  apparent  paranoumena  dealt 
with  in  the  Principia,  where  the  difficulty  is  largely  methodological.  We  shall 
then  treat  of  Weyl’s  “heterological-autological”  problem,  where  the  difficulty 
is  due  to  a  confusion  in  meanings .  Those  problems  which  cannot  be  dealt  with 
under  either  heading  will  be  those  which  need  a  theory  of  types  for  their 
resolution. 

1.  Epimenides .  The  proposition  “All  Cretans  are  liars  must  be  false  if  it 
applies  to  Epimenides  as  well,  for  it  cannot  be  true,  and  only  as  false  has  it 
meaning.  If  it  were  true,  it  would  involve  its  own  falsity.  When  taken  as  false, 
no  contradiction,  or  even  paradox,  is  involved,  for  the  truth  would  then  be 
“ some  Cretans  tell  the  truth”.  (The  truth  could  not  be  “all  Cretans  tell  the 
truth”  for  Epimenides  must  be  a  liar  for  that  to  be  true  and  by  that  token  it 
must  be  false).  Epimenides  himself  would  be  one  of  the  lying  Cretans,  and  one 
of  the  lies  that  the  Cretans  were  wont  to  make  would  be  “all  Cretans  are  liars”. 
Thus  if  Epimenides  meant  to  include  all  his  own  remarks  within  the  scope 
of  the  assertion,  he  would  contradict  himself  or  state  a  falsehood.  If  it  be 
denied  that  a  contradictory  assertion  can  have  meaning,  he  must  be  saying 
something  false  if  he  is  saying  anything  significant.  Had  he  meant  to  refer  to 
all  other  Cretans  there  is,  of  course,  no  difficulty,  for  he  then  invokes  a  kind 
of  theory  of  types  by  which  he  makes  a  remark  not  intended  to  apply  to  himself. 
All  difficulty  disappears  when  it  is  recognised  that  the  formal  implication,  all 
Cretanic  statements  are  lies”  can  as  a  particular  statement  be  taken  as  one  of 
the  values  of  the  terms  of  this  implication.  Letting  Ep  !  p  represent  “Epimenides 
once  asserted  p"\  <t>  represent  “Cretanic”  and  p  represent  a  statement  or 

SUPPLEMENT  II 

proposition,  then  for  “All  Cretanic  statements  are  false  (or  lies),”  we  have: 

1.  <f>P  •  3  p  •  ^  P- 

And  as  Epimenides  is  a  Cretan,  for  any  assertion  he  makes  we  have : 

2.  Ep  !  p  .  ^  p  .  4>p. 

As  No.  1  is  an  argument  to  the  above— it  being  Epimenides’  present  remark— 
we  get: 

3.  Ep  !  {<pp  .  3  p  .  ^  p\  .  ^  .  <t>[<j>p  p\ 

No.  1,  as  a  Cretanic  statement,  is  an  argument  to  No.  1  as  a  formal  implication 
or  principle  about  Cretanic  statements,  so  that: 

3A.  <p{<t>p  .  p  ^  p\  .  ^  ^  [<f>p  •:D  P  p] 

No.  3  and  No.  3A  by  the  syllogism  yield: 

3B.  Ep  !  {<f>p  .  ^  p  .  ^  p\  .  ^  ^  {<pp  .  ^  p  .  ^ 
so  that  in  this  instance  Epimenides  lied. 

It  is  important  to  note  that  No.  1  states  a  formal  implication,  and  that 
No.  3,  No.  3A  and  No.  3B  employ  No.  1  as  a  particular  assertion  or  specific 
argument  to  their  functions.  No.  3A  is  an  instance  of  the  implication  expressed 
by  No.  1,  and  is  this  instance  because  of  the  particular  argument  it  does  have. 
It  states  the  fact  that  “  ‘all  Cretanic  statements  are  false’  is  a  Cretanic  State¬ 
ment,”  implies  that  “  ‘all  Cretanic  statements  are  false*  is  false”.  Substitution 
of  another  argument  would  give  a  different  instance;  though  of  course  of  the 
same  implication.  The  implication  contained  in  its  argument  does  not  have 
instances.  “  ‘Some  Cretanic  statements  are  false’  is  a  Cretanic  statement” 
or  “  ‘This  Cretanic  statement  is  false*  is  a  Cretanic  statement**  are  not 
instances  of  “  ‘All  Cretanic  statements  are  false*  is  a  Cretanic  statement,” 
but  of  “P  is  a  Cretanic  statement”.  These  three  propositions  have  different 
subjects;  they  are  different  values  of  the  same  propositional  function.  That 
these  subjects  have  relations  to  one  another  is  of  no  moment.  “My  wife  loves 
me”  and  “my  mother-in-law  is  old  (or  loves  me)”  are  two  distinct  and  logically 
independent  propositions,  even  though  there  is  a  relationship  between  the 
two  subjects. 

It  is  because  any  considered  general  proposition  is  at  once  an  individual 
fact,  and  a  formal  implication  or  principle,  with  many  possible  arguments,  that 
it  is  capable  of  being  taken  as  an  argument  to  itself.  All  propositions  about 
words,  logic,  truth,  meaning,  ideas,  etc.,  take  arguments  which  fall  in  these 
same  categories,  and  in  so  far  as  such  a  general  proposition  is  stated  in  words, 
determined  by  logic,  etc.,  it  should,  as  such  a  fact,  be  an  argument  to  itself 
as  a  formal  implication.  The  principle  must  be  false  if  this  cannot  be  done, 
for  it  is  sufficient,  in  order  to  overthrow  a  proposition  of  this  kind,  to  produce 
one  argument  for  which  it  does  not  hold.  One  may  limit  the  principle  by 
asserting  that  it  holds  for  “all  but . . .”,  in  which  case  it  is  a  restricted  general 
proposition.  Nominalism,  association  of  ideas,  scepticism,  the  theory  of  universal 
tautology,  the  denial  of  logic  are  defended  in  propositions  which  cannot  take 
themselves  as  arguments,  and  which  as  facts  are  arguments  to  contradictory 
principles.  Their  contradictory  principles  therefore  hold  sometimes  at  least, 

THE  THEORY  OF  TYPES 

•o  that  these  doctrines  must  be  false  if  they  are  put  forward  without  restriction, 
and  cannot  be  universally  true,  if,  in  Bradley's  words,  they  “appear". 

2.  “I  am  lying" — if  it  be  taken  in  isolation  from  all  fact — is  a  meaningless 
statement.  There  must  be  some  objective  truth  that  is  distorted,  and  unless 
it  is  provided  the  assertion  has  no  significance.  This  proposition  means  either, 
“I  am  lying  about  X";  “I  always  lie,"  or  “I  have  always  lied".  The  first 
Can  be  either  true  or  false  without  giving  rise  to  any  problem,  except  where 
“all  my  assertions"  is  made  an  argument  to  X,  in  which  case  it  is  equivalent 
to  either  the  second  or  third  formulation.  “I  always  lie"  involves  the  same 
situation  as  with  Epimenides,  and  the  proposition  is  false.  The  supposition 
of  its  truth  would  involve  a  contradiction;  the  supposition  of  its  falsity  means 
simply  that  I  sometimes  lie  and  sometimes  tell  the  truth.  If  what  is  meant  is 
that  “I  have  always  lied"  that  does  not  involve  a  contradiction,  for  what  is 
intended  is  a  restricted  proposition,  applying  to  all  but  the  present  one.  It  can 
be  true  because  it  does  not  apply  to  all  propositions;  if  it  were  false,  then  some¬ 
times  I  lied  and  sometimes  I  did  not.  In  short,  there  is  nothing  like  a  self- 
reflective  universal  liar,  which  is  an  interesting  moral  conclusion  to  derive 
from  a  logical  analysis.  Similarly,  there  cannot  be  a  thorough  scepticism  held 
by  the  sceptic  to  be  valid. 

Prof.  Whitehead  (to  whom  I  am  also  indebted  for  the  notation)  has  pointed 
out  to  me  that  wherever  a  conjunction  of  propositions  results  in  a  reductio 
ad  absurdutn ,  there  is  no  way  of  determining  on  logical  grounds  alone  which 
of  the  antecedents  fails,  or  is  false  (though  one  at  least  must  be).  Thus  in  the 
case  of  Epimenides  we  have : 

4.  {<pp  .  =>  p  .^p]  .  [Ep  !  p  .  =>  p  .  4>p\  .Ep\  {<t>p  *  p] 

(A)  (B)  (C) 

.  ^ ^  \4>p  ■ 3  P  •  ^  p\ 

(D) 

It  is  because  B  and  C  are  in  that  case  assumed  to  hold,  that  we  can  say 
that  A  must  fail.  If  the  truth  of  all  these  antecedents  were  undetermined,  we 
should  have  merely  the  general  rule:  a  reductio  ad  absurdum  has  as  a  necessary 
condition  the  conjunction  of  one  or  more  false  propositions.  Transposition — 

4'.  \<pp  .  =>  p  .  ^  p]  .  =>  .  ^  {<w> .  3  p  .  ^  p} 

(D)  (A) 

.  v  .  {Ep  !  p  .  ji .  <pp}  .  v  .  ^  Ep  !  ( <t>p  .  3  P  ■  p\ 

(B)  (C) 

makes  it  apparent  that  to  deny  the  conclusion  of  a  reductio  ad  absurdum  is  to 
imply  that  at  least  one  of  the  antecedents  is  false. 

In  connection  with  the  reductio  ad  absurdum  involved  in  the  assertions, 
“I  always  lie"  and  “I  always  doubt,"  No.  4B  reduces  to  the  tautologies:  “If  I 
assert  p ,  p  is  my  assertion,"  and  “If  I  doubt,  the  doubt  is  mine".  In  these 
cases,  the  only  alternatives  left  are  the  denial  of  the  fact  of  the  assertion  (No, 
4C),  or  the  truth  of  the  principle  itself  (No.  4A). 

SUPPLEMENT  II 

3.  Weyl’s  heterological-autological  contradiction1  is  the  result  of  a  material 
fallacy  of  amphiboly  in  connection  with  the  employment  of  adjectives.  The 
simplest  form  of  such  a  fallacy  is  due  to  a  failure  to  distinguish  between  an 
adjective  as  substantive  and  an  adjective  as  attribute.  Thus  if  we  treat  both 
the  subject  and  attribute  in  “large  is  small’'  and  “small  is  large"  as  attributes 
united  by  a  copula  expressing  identity  (instead  of  reading  it  as  “large  is  a  small 
word,"  “small  is  a  large  word")  we  could  say  “whatever  is  small  is  large,  and 
whatever  is  large  is  small”.  No  one,  I  believe,  since  the  Megarics,  has  been 
troubled  by  this  particular  confusion. 

The  present  problem  is  the  result  of  a  confusion,  not  between  substantive 
and  adjective,  but  between  an  adjective  which  expresses  a  property,  and  an 
adjective  which  expresses  a  relation  between  this  property  and  the  substantive. 
All  words  can  be  described  in  terms  of  a  property — they  are  long,  short,  beau¬ 
tiful,  melodious,  etc.,  words.  They  can  be  classified  in  accordance  with  these 
properties,  giving  us  the  class  of  long  words,  short  words,  etc.  They  can  also 
be  classified  as  either  “autological”  or  “heterological,"  depending  on  whether 
or  not  the  same  word  is  at  once  substantive  and  property-adjective;  the  terms 
‘autological"  and  “heterological"  expressing  relationships  between  the  sub¬ 
stantive  and  adjective. 

The  autological  class  is  made  up  of  words,  each  of  which  expresses  a  property 
which  it  possesses;  though  all  of  them  have  unique  properties.  If  “short”  be 
short,  and  if  “melodious”  be  melodious,  they  would  both  be  members  of  the 
autological  class;  though  in  addition,  “short”  would  be  a  member  of  the  class 
of  short  words,  and  “melodious”  would  be  a  member  of  the  class  of  melodious 
words. 

The  heterological  class  is  made  up  of  words,  each  of  which  expresses  a 
property  which  it  does  not  possess.  If  “long”  be  short,  and  if  “fat"  be  thin, 
they  would  both  be  members  of  the  heterological  class;  although  here  also 
“long”  would  be  a  member  of  the  class  of  short  words,  and  “fat"  would  be  a 
member  of  the  class  of  thin  words.  Though  when  classified  according  to  the 
relationship  of  the  adjective  to  the  substantive,  “short"  would  be  an  autological 
word  and  “long"  a  heterological  word,  they  would  both  be  members  of  that 
class  which  was  defined  in  terms  of  the  properties  of  words — being  in  this 
case,  members  of  the  class  of  short  words. 

Now  if  heterologicality  were  a  property  that  a  word  could  have,  and  if  the 
word  “heterological”  had  that  property,  it  would  be  a  member  of  the  auto¬ 
logical  class,  for  it  would  then  possess  a  property  that  it  expressed.  But  it  would 
also  be  a  member  of  a  class  of  words  which  had  the  property  of  heterologicality. 
This  class  is  determined  by  taking  the  properties  of  words,  and  if  it  be  called 

“Briefly  stated  it  is:  all  words  which  express  a  property  they  possess  are 
autological  ;  all  words  which  express  a  property  they  do  not  possess  are  hetero¬ 
logical.  If  *heterologicar  is  heterological  it  expresses  a  property  it  possesses  and 
is  thus  autological ;  if  it  is  autological,  it  expresses  a  property  it  does  not  possess 
and  is  therefore  heterological.  Dos  Kontinuum,  p.  2. 

THE  THEORY  OF  TYPES 

"heterological,”  must  be  distinguished  from  that  class  which  was  determined 
not  by  properties,  but  by  the  relationship  between  properties  and  substantives. 

If  there  were  a  property  like  autologicality  and  if  “heterological”  had  that 
property,1  it  would  be  a  member  of  the  heterological  class,  for  it  would  express 
a  property  which  it  did  not  possess.  But  it  would  also  be  a  member  of  the  class 
of  words  which  possessed  autologicality  and  could  thus  be  classified. 

Thus  if  “heterologicar*  had  the  property  of  autologicality,  it  would  be  in 
the  heterological  class  owing  to  the  relation  which  held  between  the  property 
and  substantive  (or  between  a  property  it  possessed  and  the  property  it  ex¬ 
pressed);  but  it  would  be  in  the  class  of  autological  words,  owing  to  a  property 
it  possessed.  If  it  had  the  property  of  heterologicality,  it  would  be  in  the  auto¬ 
logical  class  on  the  basis  of  the  relation,  and  in  the  class  of  heterological  words 
on  the  basis  of  property  classification.  There  is  no  difficulty  in  considering  some¬ 
thing  as  a  member  of  two  distinct  classes,  owing  to  the  employment  of  different 
methods  of  classification.  There  is  no  contradiction  in  saying:  “  ‘heterological* 
expresses  the  property  heterologicality,  possesses  the  property  autologicality, 
and  the  relation  between  these  properties  is  heterological,  or  that  it  expresses 
and  possesses  the  property  heterologicality  and  the  relation  between  them  is 
autological.’*  Similarly,  Richard’s  contradiction,  Berry’s  contradiction,  and 
that  involving  the  least  indefinable  ordinal,  are  resolvable  by  recognising  that 
“nameable”  and  “indefinable”  are  used  in  two  sharply  distinguishable  senses. 
They  do  not  require  a  hierarchy,  but  a  discrimination  in  the  methods  of 
description. 

When  a  distinction  is  made  between  a  class  and  its  membership  (the  dis¬ 
tinction  between  a  number  of  numbers  and  a  number  is  a  particular  case  of 
this),  and  between  a  relation  of  objects  and  a  relation  of  relations,  the  require¬ 
ments  for  the  solution  of  the  other  mathematical  problems  are  provided.  A 
class  is  other  than  its  members,  and  a  relation,  like  all  universals,  transcends 
any  given  instance  or  totality  of  instances.  As  they  have  characters  of  their 
own,  universals  can  be  described  in  terms  of  other  universals,  which  in  turn 
transcend  them.  Arguments  are  of  a  different  “type”  than  functions,  just  so 
far  as  they  have  different  logical  characteristics,  i.e.  are  different  kinds  of  logical 
facts.  The  class  which  is  an  argument  to  a  function  about  classes  has,  as  argu¬ 
ment,  a  different  logical  import  than  the  function,  and  its  arguments  have  a 
different  import  from  it.  This  is  true  of  all  functions,  restricted  and  unrestricted 
alike,  for  it  means  simply  that  they  are  discriminable  from  their  arguments. 
They  can,  despite  this  difference,  have  characteristics  in  common  with  their 
arguments,  and  are  to  that  extent  unrestricted.  Thus  in  the  case  of  “the  class 
of  those  classes  which  are  identical  with  themselves,”  the  class  of  classes  can  be 

1 ‘Heterological,’  in  fact,  has  the  properties  of  being  long,  polysyllabic,  etc., 
and  it  is  questionable  whether  there  are  properties  like  autologicality  and  hetero¬ 
logicality  possessed  by  words.  If  there  be  no  such  properties,  “heterological’*  is  a 
member  of  the  class  of  long  words,  polysyllabic  words,  etc.  In  addition  it  would 
be  one  of  the  terms  related  by  the  heterological  relation,  which  fact  would  not 
make  it  have  the  property  of  heterologicality. 

SUPPLEMENT  II 

taken  simply  as  a  class,  without  logical  embarrassment.  Yet  a  class  of  classes 
differs  from  a  class,  and  must  therefore  be  capable  of  a  different  characterisation, 
and  thusabobean  argument  toa  function  of  adifferent  type.  With  some  classes. 

Srrr  P°  t0  CTider  them  “  arguments  to  their  own  functions, 
Without  uncovering  a  contradiction.  In  such  cases  (e.S.  the  class  of  those  classes 

hv  n°t  ™^mbers  °f  themselves,  and  the  relations  which  are  connected 

by  their  contradictories),  ,t  is  the  difference  between  the  function  and  the 
argument  that  is  of  moment.  That  some  functions  cannot  take  themselves  as 

SXwX  not  lndlcate  that  M  functions  are  restricted  in  scope,  but 
simply  that  they  are  non-restruted.  Some  classes  and  functions  are  restricted 

arE  ^  T°  Say  that  a”  are  restricted  because  some  are  is  an  obvious 

Whenever,  as  individual,  a  general  proposition  is  in  the  class  of  those  ob- 

eiSer°l7hlCh  U  bUt  Cann°t  136  Considered  as  an  argument  to  itself,  it  is 

sntdfiS  T"  d  “  SCOpe‘  If  the  second’ its  ran£e  °f  arguments  must  be 
specified.  Accordingly,  we  can  state  as  a  necessary  condition  for  the  truth  of  a 

general  proposition,  whose  scope  is  unspecified,  that  when  it  has  a  character 

to  iiff  Tho°  7  R  CharaCte.rS  abou*  »Wch  h  sPeaks-  it  must  be  an  argument 
be  In  lie  t  f  frgS°n  ad^uate'y  described  the  comic,  his  formula  should 
it  h  mV  °  tVT,’  and  lf  1116  theory  of  types  is  universal  in  application, 

di cates  that  T  t  5  SUbjeCt.  ?  ^  Conformity  to  this  condition  in¬ 
dicates  that  the  unrestricted  proposition  is  possibly  true;  not  that  it  is  neces- 

7a  ,rUe'  °.  demonstrate  that  such  a  proposition  was  necessarily  true,  it 

would  be  essential  to  show  that  the  supposition  of  its  falsity  assumes  its  truth. 

That  there  is  danger  in  applying  this  rule  can  be  seen  from  the  consideration 

l!sde^LSUC-?i  Pr°PT°n  ar,  “EvCrything  is  made  «P  of  language  elements”. 
thlt tX  ^  C  UP  °f  language  elements’  and  would  seem  to  demonstrate 
that  the  proposition  was  necessarily  true.  Supposition  of  the  falsity  of  a  propo- 

toe°realmWon'  “  T^'  ^  “  S°  ^  **  the  ProPOsition  applies  to 

die  realm  of  language.  If  it  applies  to  everything,  supposition  of  its  falsity 

involves  the  positing  of  the  objects  of  assertions;  not  the  assertions.  A  neces¬ 
sary  unrestricted  proposition  about  everything  can  be  supported  only  by  a 
demonstration  that  the  supposition  of  an  argument  for  which  it  does  not  hold 

lovir  f  ;C0,intradir°ry'  If,  thC  proP°sition  has  to  do  with  grammar,  meaning, 
logic,  judgment,  etc.,  the  conditions  for  a  necessarily  true  and  unrestricted 

dP3^0n”'"db':  >■  2.r„ylS; 

den  al  is  an  argument  to  it.  That  “any  possible  denial”  rather  than  “any  given 

tinn,  “AneqW,  ' 18  aPParent  fr°m  tbe  consideration  of  the  following  proposi- 

e  X  woto,-'  V  r  6  UP  °f  Cight  WOrds'"  “N°  sentence  is  made  uV  of 

ght  words  .  Each  of  these  contains  eight  words.  It  is  because  of  the  fact 

that  we  can  formulate  propositions  such  as,  “It  is  false  that  every  proposition 

s  e  ma  e  up  of  eight  words,”  that  the  condition  is  seen  not  to  have  been  met. 

An  unrestricted  proposition  applies  to  every  member  of  the  category,  and 

has  some  aspect  of  itself  as  value.  It  is  in  some  sense  then  a  determinated  the 

category  which  it  determines.  If  the  proposition  refers  to  some  other  category 

THE  THEORY  OF  TYPES 

than  the  one  to  which  it  as  fact,  or  some  aspect  of  it  as  fact,  belongs,  it  is  re¬ 
stricted.  Thus  “all  men  are  mortal”  is  neither  man  nor  mortal,  and  as  condition 
does  not  determine  itself  as  fact.  Any  proposition  referring  to  that  statement 
would  be  of  a  different  type,  and  would  deal  with  its  truth,  falsity,  constituents, 
historical  place,  logical  structure,  etc.  Though  the  unrestricted  propositions 
have  no  limitations,  the  category  to  which  they  refer  may  have.  Epimenides’ 
remark,  for  example,  referred  only  to  Cretans.  As  his  assertion  was  a  deter¬ 
minate  in  the  category,  and  as  his  statement  of  the  supposed  conditions  imposed 
on  the  members  of  that  category  was  not  a  possible  argument  to  the  general 
proposition,  the  general  proposition  was  seen  to  be  false  or  restricted.  Had  he 
said,  “All  Cretans  tell  the  truth,”  he  would  have  stated  an  unrestricted  propo¬ 
sition  which  was  possibly  true.  It  could  not  be  said  to  be  necessarily  true  unless 
Cretans  and  lie,  against  the  evidence  of  history,  were  actually  contradictories. 

Accordingly,  we  shall  say:  All  true  unrestricted  propositions  are  arguments 
to  themselves;  or  by  transposition ,  those  propositions  which  are  not  arguments  to 
themselves  are  either  restricted  or  false .  As  this  proposition  can  take  itself  as 
argument  it  is  possibly  true.  Unless  no  proposition  is  possible  which  does  not 
conform  to  it,,  it  cannot  be  said  to  be  necessarily  true.  I  have  not  been  able  to 
demonstrate  this  and  therefore  accept  it  as  a  definition  or  “methodological 
principle  of  validation”.  The  theory  of  types,  in  its  most  general  form,  may  be 
stated  as:  A  proposition  or  function  of  order  n,  which  cannot  be  an  argument  to 
itself ,  is,  as  fact,  an  argument  of  a  proposition  or  function  of  order  n- f  1. 

In  accordance  with  the  scheme  of  the  criticism  of  the  theory  of  types,  we 
can  describe  our  principle  as  (1)  applying  to  all  propositions,  including  (2)  those 
which  refer  to  it.  (3)  It  is  a  formal  implication  with  itself  as  one  of  its  argu¬ 
ments.  The  theory  of  types,  on  the  other  hand,  (1)  does  not  apply  to  all  propo¬ 
sitions,  but  only  to  those  which  are  restricted,  (2)  may  apply  to  those  proposi¬ 
tions  which  refer  to  it,  and  (3)  is  a  formal  implication  which  cannot  take  itself 
as  argument. 

The  theory  of  types  cannot  be  an  unrestricted  proposition  about  all  re¬ 
stricted  propositions.  As  an  unrestricted  proposition  it  must  take  itself  as 
argument;  but  its  arguments  are  only  those  propositions  which  are  not  argu¬ 
ments  to  themselves.  It  cannot  therefore  be  unrestricted  without  being  re¬ 
stricted.  Nor  can  it  be  a  restricted  proposition  about  all  restricted  propositions 
for  it  would  then  be  one  of  the  restricted  propositions,  and  would  have  to  take 
itself  as  argument — in  which  case  it  would  be  unrestricted.  Hence  it  cannot 
be  restricted  without  being  unrestricted.  Three  possible  solutions  may  be  ad¬ 
vanced.  The  first  is  that  the  theory  of  types  is  restricted  and  does  not  apply 
to  all  restricted  propositions,  but  only  to  some  of  them.  It  is  not  an  argument 
to  itself  but  to  some  other  proposition  about  restricted  propositions.  This  in 
turn  will  have  to  be  restricted  and  refer  only  to  some  propositions,  and  so  on, 
giving  us  theories  of  types  of  various  orders.  The  proposition  made  about  the 
totality  of  these  orders  would  be  of  a  still  higher  order  and  would  in  turn  pre¬ 
suppose  a  higher  order  ad  infinitum.  The  theory  of  types  thus  depends  on 
theories  of  types  of  theories  of  types  without  end.  This  seems  probable  on  the 

SUPPLEMENT  II 

ground  that  the  theory  is  based  on  the  recognition  that  no  proposition  can  be 
made  about  all  restricted  propositions,  so  that  it  must  by  that  very  fact  admit 
that  it  cannot  apply  to  all  of  them.  Instead,  therefore,  of  the  theory  of  types 
applying  to  all  propositions,  and  determining  them  in  various  orders,  it  does  not 
even  apply  to  all  of  a  given  class  of  them.  This  interpretation  would  not  affect 
unrestricted  propositions,  and  would  merely  show  that  the  determination  of 
restricted  propositions  is  subject  to  determinations  without  end. 

The  second  possibility  is  suggested  by  the  consideration  of  a  proposition 
such  as:  “all  truths  are  but  partially  true”.  If  that  were  absolutely  true,  it 
would  contradict  itself,  and  if  it  were  not,  could  apply  only  to  some  truths. 
Considered  as  referring  to  the  necessary  limitations  which  any  finite  statement 
must  have,  it  would  take  itself  as  argument  in  so  far  as  it  was  finite,  thus  indi¬ 
cating  that  it  was  absolutely  true  about  finite  propositions,  and  yet  not  abso¬ 
lutely  true  as  regards  all  truths.  By  pointing  out  the  limitations  of  a  finite 
statement  it  indicates  that  there  is  an  absolute  truth  in  terms  of  which  it  is 
relatively  true.  On  this  interpretation,  any  condition  which  imposes  universal 
limitations  is  unlimited  in  terms  of  what  it  limits,  but  limited  in  turn  by  some 
other  condition.  One  might  hold,  therefore,  that  the  theory  would  be  unre¬ 
stricted  as  regards  restricted  propositions,  and  restricted  as  regards  all  propo¬ 
sitions,  and  would  point  to  a  higher  principle  which  limits  it. 

The  third  possibility  is  to  allow  for  “intensive”  propositions  which  are 
neither  restricted  nor  unrestricted,  being  incapable  of  any  arguments.  The 
theory  of  types  could  be  viewed  as  such  an  intensive  proposition,  and  what  we 
have  called  its  arguments,  would  merely  “conform”  to  it.  This  interpretation 
means  the  downfall  of  a  completely  extensional  logic,  and  a  determination  of  an 
extensional  logic  as  subordinate  to  an  intensional  one. 

There  are  difficulties  in  each  of  these  interpretations.  The  last  seems  to  me 
to  be  best.  In  any  of  these  cases,  however,  a  restricted  proposition  which  refers 
to  some  other  than  the  restricted  aspect  of  the  theory  would  be  subject  to  the 
theory  and  the  principle  we  have  laid  down  about  unrestricted  propositions 
could  still  hold.  Those  restricted  propositions  which  refer  to  the  restricted 
character  of  the  theory  would  not  be  an  argument  to  it  on  the  first,  would  be 
an  argument  to  it  on  the  second,  and  would  neither  be  nor  not  be  an  argument 
to  it  on  the  third  solution. 

To  briefly  summarise:  The  theory  of  types  must  be  limited  in  application. 
Not  all  the  problems  it  was  designed  to  answer  require  it;  another  principle  of 
greater  logical  import  is  desirable;  while  for  the  resolution  of  the  problems  in 
which  it  is  itself  involved,  very  drastic  remedies  are  necessary.  No  matter  how 
the  theory  fares,  the  possibility  of  the  methodological  principle  and  the  pos¬ 
sibility  of  other  solutions  for  the  so-called  paradoxes,  indicate  that  it  is  at  least 
not  as  significant  an  instrument  as  it  was  originally  thought  to  be. 

SUPPLEMENT  III 

A  NON-ARISTOTELIAN  SYSTEM  AND  ITS  NECESSITY  FOR 
RIGOUR  IN  MATHEMATICS  AND  PHYSICS* 

by  Alfred  Korzybski 

We  are  here  dealing  with  a  concrete  mathematical  problem  which  is  not 
trivial,  but  at  the  same  time  is  solvable,  and  I  cannot  imagine  that  any 
mathematician  can  find  the  courage  to  elude  its  honest  solution  by  means 
of  a  metaphysical  dogma,  (549)  Hermann  weyl 

I  protest  against  the  use  of  infinite  magnitude  as  something  completed, 
which  in  mathematics  is  never  permissible.  Infinity  is  merely  a  fag  on  de 
parler t  the  real  meaning  being  a  limit  which  certain  ratios  approach  in¬ 
definitely  near,  while  others  are  permitted  to  increase  without  restrictions. 

<74>  K.  F.  GAUSS 

A  very  extensive  literature  shows  that  the  problems  of  ‘infinity*  pervade 
human  psycho-logical  reactions,  starting  from  the  lowest  stage  of  human  de¬ 
velopment  up  to  the  present  and  that  without  some  theory  of  ‘infinity*,  modern 
mathematics  would  be  impossible.  Up  to  date,  no  satisfactory  theory  of  in¬ 
finity,  oti  which  all  mathematicians  could  agree,  has  been  produced.  The  results 
are  rather  bewildering  because  what  appears  to  some  prominent  mathematicians 
as  perfectly  sound  mathematics  is  evaluated  by  other  equally  prominent  scien¬ 
tists  as  a  ‘mental*  disease  (Poincare);  or  we  find  opinions  that  a  large  portion 
of  mathematics  is  devoid  of  proof  and  has  to  be  accepted  on  faith;  or  that  some 
parts  of  mathematics  must  be  treated  as  non-sense  (Kronecker,  Brouwer, 
Weyl  .  ,).  ‘There  are  eminent  scholars  on  both  sides  and  the  chance  of  reaching 
an  agreement  within  a  finite  period  is  practically  excluded’,  says  Brouwer,  and 
certainly  such  a  state  of  affairs  does  not  allow  us  to  have  any  satisfactory  modern 
standards  of  proof  and  rigour;  the  last  thing  we  should  expect  in  mathematics. 

The  majority  of  those  mathematicians  who  take  interest  in  the  soundness 
of  their  science  seem  to  believe  that  the  main  difficulty  centres  around  the 
validity  of  the  ‘law  of  excluded  third’  (‘A  is  B,  or  not  B’)  of  the  accepted,  sharply 
two-valued,  chrisippian  form  of  A  ‘logic*.  They  disregard  the  fact  that  we  are 
born,  bred,  educated,  speak  a  language,  live  under  conditions,  institutions  .  , 
which  still  remain  desperately  A  or  even  pre-aristotelian.  If  we  attempt  to  re¬ 
ject  one  of  the  two-valued  ‘laws  of  thought’  or  postulates  of  the  ,4 -system,  but 
retain  A  or  pre-aristotelian  elementalistic  ‘psychologies’,  ‘logic*,  and  s.r ,  no 
agreement  in  ‘a  finite  period'  can  be  expected,  and  the  present  mathematical 
chaos  would  continue. 

♦Paper  presented  before  the  American  Mathematical  Society  at  the  New 
Orleans,  Louisiana,  Meeting  of  the  A.A.A.S.  December  28,  1931.  I  continue  to  use 
the  abbreviations  introduced  in  this  book. 

SUPPLEMENT  III 

Among  the  more  important  schools  we  may  distinguish  roughly:1 

1)  The  logistic  school  represented  by  Peano,  Russell,  and  Whitehead,  who 
accept  the  chrisippian,  two-valued,  restricted  form  of  the  el  'logic*  and  so  may 
be  called  the  chrisippian  school . 

2)  The  axiomatic  school,  represented  by  Hilbert  and  his  followers,  which 
may  be  called  the  aristotelian  school . 

.  Th*  *'ntuitionar  school  represented  by  Brouwer  and  Weyl  who  question 
the  law  of  excluded  third’,  and  so  may  be  called  the  non-ckrisippian  school. 

4)  The  Polish  school  of:  (a)  ‘intuitional’  formalism  with  Lukasiewicz, 
iarski,  Lesmewski  as  representatives,  which  may  be  called  the  non-aristotelian 
school.  Lukasiewicz  generalized  the  A  'logic'  to  three-valued  ‘logic’  which 
TS  ,?10d^'t,y'  ,l“kfsiewicz  and  Tarski  finally  produced  a  general  many- 
"T  (of  twhlch  the  two-valued  represents  only  a  limiting  case.  LeSniewsW 

4  ^  m°?  genera‘  ‘l0giCa1’ SyStem’ by  introducing  variable 
funk  tors ,  .  (6)  The  restricted  semantic  school  represented  by  Chwistek  and 

his  pupils,  which  is  characterized  mosdy  by  the  semantic  approach,  and  bv 
faying  special  attention  to  the  number  of  values,  establishing  the  thesis  that 
the  older  freedom  from  contradictions’  depends  on  one-valued  formulations  as 
discovered  by  Skarzenski  and  quoted  by  Chwistek.  This  school  has  already 
produced  new  foundations  (still  elementalistic)  for  ‘logic’  and  mathematics,  and 
leads  to  generalized  arithmetics  and  analysis. 

f,  average  prevalent  mathematical  technician,  who  does  not  realize 

that  he  belongs  to  the  numerically  large  class  which  may  be  called  the  ‘Christian 
science  school  of  mathematics,  which  proceeds  by  faith  and  disregards  entirely 

any  problems  of  the  epistemological  foundations  of  their  supposed  ‘scientific’ 
activities* 

It  should  be  noticed  that  all  existing  mathematical  schools  accept  implicitly 
at  least,  A  dementahsm  and  do  not  challenge  identity,  a  principle  which  happens 
to  be  mvambly  false  to  facts  and  which  therefore  should  be  entirely  abolished. 

J,  .e  above  classification  suggests  that,  in  spite  of  great  achievements  in 
the  field  of  mathematical  foundations,  no  school  can  expect  to  be  convincing 
or  accepted  by  other  schools  as  long  as  we  all  flounder  in  the  A  and  el  ambigu¬ 
ities  which  prevent  any  possibility  of  agreement.  It  becomes  obvious  also  that 
when  a  A  and  non-el  system  is  formulated  it  will  necessitate  a  new  paradox-free 

oundation  for  mathematics  and  so  a  new  school  of  mathematics  will  arise  which 
may  be  called : 

6)  The  general  semantic,  non-aristotelian,  non-ekmentalistic  school  of  mathe¬ 
matics.  It  is  premature  to  give  the  names  of  the  leading  pioneers  in  this  field 
at  present. 

described  by  the  term  non-aristotelian,  yet  still  elementalistic  'logic’. 

b?vv-raiu^u  uCv 

‘logic’  is  better 

A  PHYSICO-MATHEMATICAL  RIGOUR 

In  a  ^-system,  the  ‘logical1  problems  of  freedom  from  contradiction  become 
also  semantic  problems  of  one-valued  meanings  made  possible  only  under  oo- 
valued,  A,  non-el  general  semantics,  and  the  recognition  of  the  A  muUiordinality 
of  terms  , .  A  A -system  introduces  some  fundamental  innovations,  such  as  com¬ 
pletely  rejecting  identity,  elementalism  .  ,  and  becomes  based  on  tn.o  structure 
and  order,  ard  so  ultimately  becomes  non-el.  The  A,  (3 +1) -dimensional  el, 
(in  the  main)  intensional  system  becomes  a  four-dimensional,  non-el ,  (in  the 
main)  extensional  system.  In  such  a  system  we  cannot  use  the  formulations  of 
elementaUstic  ‘logics’  and  ‘psychologies’,  but  must  have  A,  non-el  general 
semantics ,  which  when  generalized  become  an  entirely  general  discipline  ap¬ 
plicable  to  all  life,  as  well  as  to  generalized  mathematics.  For  the  above  reasons 
I  shall  use  the  word  ‘logic’,  in  its  el  sense,  with  quotation  marks;  and  use  the 
term  general  semantics  for  a  non-el,  A  discipline  corresponding  to  the  el,  A 
or  A  ‘logics’. 

Investigations  show  that  the  primitive  man  (and  the  ‘mentally’  ill)  use 
one-valued  semantics  which  have  left  more  or  less  marked  traces  in  all  of  us, 
reflected  even  in  science  and  mathematics.  The  elimination  of  these  primitive 
traces  clears  the  foundation  for  an  adult  civilization,  a  theory  of  sanity,  and  the 
elimination  of  the  scientific  and  mathematical  paradoxes. 

To  assume  that  because  a  many-valued  ‘logic’  has  been  produced,  all  the 
problems  of  mathematical  infinity,  irrational  numbers,  continuity,  mathematical 
induction,  validity  of  mathematical  proof,  mathematical  existence  .  ,  have  been 
solved,  would  be  a  mistake.  The  aim  of  the  present  paper  is  to  analyse  some  of 
the  fundamental  complexities  produced  by  the  unconscious  operation  of  the 
one-valued  semantic  identification  concealed  in  the  formulation  of  the  ‘law  of 
identity’,  which  have  escaped  notice  until  now,  and  which  would  make  the 
application  of  a  many-valued  'logic'  or  oo-valued  semantics  and  agreement 
impossible.  Here,  as  in  the  E  and  $  systems,  only  the  most  general  formula¬ 
tions  help  us  to  discriminate  between  the  particular  cases,  and  so  to  eliminate 
the  undesirable  traces  of  one-valued  semantics  by  building  a  ^-system,  of 
which  the  A  and  pre-A  represent  only  particular  cases. 

Let  me  recall  the  ‘philosophical  grammar’  of  our  language  which  we 
solemnly  call  the  ‘laws  of  thought',  as  given  by  Jevons:2 

1)  The  law  of  identity.  Whatever  is,  is. 

2)  The  law  of  contradiction.  Nothing  can  both  be,  and  not  be. 

3)  The  law  of  excluded  third.  Everything  must  either  be,  or  not  be. 

These  ‘laws’  have  different  ‘philosophical’  interpretations  which  help  very 

little  and  for  my  purpose  it  is  enough  to  emphasize  that:  (1)  The  second  ‘law’ 
represents  a  negative  statement  of  the  first,  and  the  third  represents  a  corollary 
of  the  former  two;  namely,  no  third  possible  between  two  contradictories. 
(2)  The  verb  ‘to  be’,  or  *is\  and  ‘identity’  play  a  most  fundamental  role  in 
these  formulations.  We  should  not  be  surprised  to  find  that  the  investigation 
of  these  terms  may  give  us  a  long  sought  solution.  Such  an  investigation  is 
very  laborious  and  difficult.  ‘The  complete  attempt  to  deal  with  the  term  is 
would  go  to  the  form  and  matter  of  everything  in  existence,  at  least,  if  not  to 

SUPPLEMENT  III 

the  possible  form  and  matter  of  all  that  does  not  exist,  but  might.  As  far  as 
it  could  be  done,  it  would  give  the  grand  Cyclopaedia,  and  its  yearly  supplement 
would  be  the  history  of  the  human  race  for  the  time’,  said  Augustus  de  Morgan 
in  his  Formal  Logic,  and  this  opinion  I  found  fully  justified. 

So  I  must  be  brief,  and  state  but  roughly,  that  in  the  Indo-european 
languages  the  verb  ‘to  be’  has  at  least  four  entirely  different  uses:  (1)  as  an 
auxiliary  verb,  ‘Smith  is  coming’;  (2)  as  the  ‘is’  of  predication,  ‘the  apple  is 
red’;  (3)  as  the  ‘is’  of  ‘existence’,  ‘I  am’;  (4)  as  the  ‘is’  of  identity,  ‘the  apple 
is  a  fruit.  The  fact  that  four  semantically  entirely  different  words  should 
have  one  sound  and  spelling  appears  as  a  genuine  tragedy  of  the  race;  the 
more  so  since  the  discrimination  between  their  uses  is  not  always  easy. 

The  researches  of  the  present  writer  have  shown  that  the  problems  involved 
are  very  complicated  and  cannot  be  solved  except  by  a  joint  study  of  mathe¬ 
matics,  mathematical  foundations,  history  of  mathematics,  ‘logic’,  ‘psychology’, 
anthropology,  psychiatry,  linguistics,  epistemology,  physics  and  its  history,’ 
colloidal  chemistry,  physiology,  and  neurology;  this  study  resulting  in  the 
discovery  of  a  general  semantic  mechanism  underlying  human  behaviour, 
many  new  interrelations  and  formulations,  culminating  in  a  ^[-system.  This 
semantic  mechanism  appears  as  a  general  psychophysiological  mechanism  based 
on  four-dimensional  order,  present  and  abused  in  all  of  us,  the  primitive  man, 
the  infant,  the  ‘mentally’  ill,  and  the  genius  not  excluded.  It  gives  us  an  ex¬ 
tremely  simple  means  of  training  our  s.r,  which  can  be  applied  even  in  elementary 
education. 

The  scientific  problems  in¬ 

(a) 

volved  are  very  extensive  and 

Paris 

Dresden 

Warsaw 

can  be  dealt  with  only  in  a  large 

* 

* 

* 

volume.  Here  I  am  able  to  give 

(b) 

only  a  very  sketchy  summary 

Dresden 

Paris 

Warsaw 

without  empirical  data,  omit¬ 

* 

* 

* 

ting  niceties  and  technicalities. 

If  we  consider  an  actual  territory  (a)  say,  Paris,  Dresden,  Warsaw,  and 
build  up  a  map  (b)  in  which  the  order  of  these  cities  would  be  represented  as 
Dresden,  Paris,  Warsaw;  to  travel  by  such  a  map  would  be  misguiding,  wasteful 
of  effort ,  .  In  case  of  emergencies,  it  might  be  seriously  harmful ,  .  We  could 
say  that  such  a  map  was  ‘not  true’.  ,  or  that  the  map  had  a  structure  not  similar 
to  the  territory,  structure  to  be  defined  in  terms  of  relations  and  multi¬ 
dimensional  order.  We  should  notice  that: 

A)  A  map  may  have  a  structure  similar  or  dissimilar  to  the  structure 

of  the  territory.  ^ 

B)  Two  similar  structures  have  similar  ‘logical’  characteristics.  Thus,  if 

in  a  correct  map,  Dresden  is  given  as  between  Paris  and  Warsaw,  a  similar 
relation  is  found  in  the  actual  territory.  ^2) 

C)  A  map  is  not  the  territory.  p) 

A  PHYSICO-MATHEMATICAL  RIGOUR 

75 1 

D)  An  ideal  map  would  contain  the  map  of  the  map,  the  map  of  the  map 
of  the  map  .  ,  endlessly.  This  characteristic  was  first  discovered  by  Royce. 
We  may  call  it  self-reflexiveness.  (4) 

Languages  share  with  the  map  the  above  four  characteristics. 

A)  Languages  have  structure,  thus  we  may  have  languages  of  elementalistic 

structure  such  as  ‘space’  and  ‘time’,  ‘observer’  and  ‘observed’,  ‘body’  and  ‘soul’, 
‘senses’  and  ‘mind’,  ‘intellect’  and  ‘emotions’,  ‘thinking’  and  ‘feeling’,  ‘thought’ 
and  ‘intuition’.  ,  which  allow  verbal  division  or  separation.  Or  we  may  have 
languages  of  non-elementalistic  structure  such  as,  ‘space- time’,  the  new  quantum 
languages,  ‘time-binding’,  ‘different  order  abstractions’,  ‘semantic  reactions’.  , 
which  do  not  involve  verbal*  division  or  separation  .  ;  also  mathematical 
languages  of  ‘order’,  ‘relation’,  ‘structure’,  ‘function’,  ‘variable’,  ‘invariant’, 
‘difference’,  ‘addition’,  ‘division’.  ,  which  apply  to  ‘senses’  and  ‘mind’,  that  is, 
can  be  ‘seen’  and  ‘thought  of’,  .  (5) 

B)  If  we  use  languages  of  a  structure  non-similar  to  the  world  and  our 

nervous  system,  our  verbal  predictions  are  not  verified  empirically,  we  cannot 
be  ‘rational’  or  adjusted  , .  We  would  have  to  copy  the  animals  in  their  wasteful 
and  painful  ‘trial  and  error’  performances,  as  we  have  done  all  through  human 
history.  In  science  we  would  be  handicapped  by  semantic  blockages,  lack  of 
creativeness,  lack  of  understanding,  lack  of  vision,  disturbed  by  inconsistencies, 
paradoxes  ,  .  (6) 

C)  Words  are  not  the  things  they  represent.  (7) 

D)  Language  also  has  self-reflexive  characteristics.  We  use  language  to 

speak  about  language,  which  fact  introduces  serious  verbal  and  semantic 
difficulties,  solved  by  the  theory  of  multiordinality.  (8) 

The  above  unusually  simple  considerations  lead  to  unexpectedly  far- 
reaching  consequences. 

A)  From  (7)— it  follows  that  the  objective  levels  which  include  the  events, 

ordinary  objects,  objective  actions,  processes,  immediate  feelings,  ‘instincts’, 
‘ideas’,  s,r  in  general .  ,  represent  un-speakable  levels,  are  not  words .  (9) 

B)  From  (9) — that  the  use  of  the  ‘is’  of  identity ,  as  applied  to  objective, 

un-speakable  levels,  appears  invariably  structurally  false  to  facts  and  must  be 
entirely  abandoned.  Whatever  we  might  say  a  happening  ‘is’,  it  is  not:  (10) 

C)  From  (10) — structure  appears  as  the  only  possible  link  between  the 

obj ecti ve,  un-speakable,  and  the  verbal  levels.  (11) 

D)  From  (11) — the  only  possible  ‘content  of  knowledge’  becomes 

exclusively  structural .  (12) 

E)  From  (12) — the  only  aim  of  ‘knowledge’  and  science  appears  as  the 

empirical  search  for,  and  verbal  formulation  of,  structure.  (13) 

F)  The  only  method  for  acquiring  ‘knowledge’  is  found  in  an  empirical 
investigation  of  the  potentially  unknown  structure  of  the  world,  ourselves 
included,  only  afterwards  adjusting  the  structure  of  languages  so  that  they 
would  be  similar,  and  so  of  maximum  usefulness;  instead  of  the  delusional 

SUPPLEMENT  III 

reversed  order  of  ascribing  to  the  world  the  structure  of  an  inherited  primitive 
language.  (Uj 

G)  The  investigation  of  the  potentially  known  structure  of  languages  in 
which  we  predict  and  then  verify  the  predictions  empirically,  appears  as  an 
important  method  for  the  discovery  of  the  structure  of  the  world.  (15) 

H)  Investigations  disclose  that  all  A ,  el  languages  and  disciplines  built 
on  them  (older  'psychologies',  'logics'.,  and,  based  on  them,  economics, 
sociology,  politics,  ‘ethics’.  ,  reflected  in  turn  in  our  institutions,  systems . , ) 
are  not  structurally  similar  to  the  world  and  our  nervous  system,  as  they 
verbally  divide  what  empirically  cannot  be  divided.  Under  such  conditions 
neither  a  higher  grade  civilization,  nor  general  sanity,  nor  paradox-free  science 
and  mathematics  are  possible.  In  el  languages,  our  verbal  predictions  are  not 
verified  empirically,  and  not  being  able  to  foresee  we  must  proceed  by  animal* 
istic  ‘trial  and  error’. 

I)  Mathematics  appears  as  a  very  limited  but  the  only  language  in 
existence,  in  the  main  similar  in  structure  to  the  world  around  us  and  the 

nervous  system. 

J)  From  the  study  of  mathematics,  mathematical  physics,  and  physics, 

we  learn,  and  will  continue  to  learn,  the  fundamentals  of  m.o  structure.  It  is 
no  mystery  that  all  chemistry  has  become  a  branch  of  physics,  all  physics  can 
be  made  a  branch  of  geometry,  all  geometry  a  part  of  analysis,  and  all  analysis 
a  part  of  general  semantics.  The  present  work  shows  that  the  analysis  of  all 
human  problems  of  daily  life  or  science  becomes  dependent  on  general  semantics 
which  on  the  verbal  levels  becomes  generalized  mathematics.  Thus  mathe¬ 
matics,  mathematical  physics,  and  physics  become  the  most  important 
disciplines  from  which  we  learn  most  about  structure, — the  only  ‘content  of 
knowledge*.  ^g^ 

K)  The  older  el  ‘psychologies’  and  ‘logics’  for  their  maximum  usefulness 
must  be  transformed  into  unified  non-el  psycho-logics  and  general  semantics, 
possible  only  after  studying  all  forms  of  human  behaviour,  mathematics 
included. 

L)  The  study  of  mathematics  as  a  form  of  human  behaviour,  appears 
necessary  prior  to  the  possibility  of  formulating  any  laws  of  semantics.  (20) 

M)  The  problem  of  mathematical  foundations  do  not  belong  to  mathe¬ 

matics  but  to  psycho-logics  which  would  not  disregard  anthropology,  and 
would  not  be  vitiated  by  our  persistence  in  the  use  of  structurally  inappropriate 
el  ‘psychologies’,  'logics’,  and  an  innocence  of  mathematics.  (21) 

N)  The  intuitional’  and  the  'intuitional’  formalist  schools  of  mathematics 

must  be  considered  as  a  legitimate,  yet  not  properly  formulated,  protest 
against  the  older  elementalism.  (22) 

O)  The  general  semantic  school  will  represent  the  non-el  and  A  school 

of  mathematics.  (23) 

P)  The  present  crisis  of  mathematics  ultimately  depends  on  the  meanings 
and  use  of  a  few  terms  such  as  ‘all’,  ‘there  is',  ‘infinite’.  ,  which  solution  depends 
on  a  non-el  theory  of  meanings,  which  ultimately  can  be  solved  by  transforming 

A  PHYSICO-MATHEMATICAL  RIGOUR 

what  might  be  called  the  (3  +  l)-dimensional  el ,  ^-system,  which  divides 
‘space*  and  ‘time*.  ,  (an  attitude  which  is  carried  all  through  the  system), 
into  a  four-dimensional  non-elf  A  -system  (an  attitude  which  is  also  carried  all 
through  the  system).  (24) 

Q)  From  (8) — it  follows  that  statements  about  statements  represent 

results  of  new  neurological  processes,  that  their  content  varies,  and  that  we 
must  discriminate  and  not  identify  these  different  meanings.  In  other  words, 
only  through  consciousness  of  abstracting  which  represents  the  most  general 
s.r  of  discrimination,  or  the  elimination  of  identification,  can  we  assign  single 
values  to  words  which  have  an  essentially  many- valued  character.  Identification 
confuses  these  many  meanings  into  one.  (25) 

R)  We  must  differentiate  between  descriptive  and  inferential  words  and 

phrases,  and  never  use  inferential  terms  as  descriptive,  without  realizing  that 
we  are  doing  so.  (26) 

S)  Certain  words  or  phrases  used  to  speak  about  languages,  such  as  ‘all 
statements',  ‘proposition  about  all  propositions’.  ,  lead  to  self-contradictions. 
We  cannot  speak  about  ‘all’  propositions  without  some  limitations,  if  we 
proceed  introducing  new  propositions.  Even  St.  Paul  felt  the  necessity  for 
limiting  the  values  of  ‘all’.*  We  are  compelled  to  introduce  some  equivalents 
to  the  biblical  ‘illegitimate  totalities’  or  the  theory  of  types  of  Russell.  (27) 

T)  Analysis  finds  that  certain  of  the  most  important  terms  we  use;  such 
as,  ‘yes’,  ‘no’,  ‘true’,  ‘false’,  ‘all’,  ‘fact’,  ‘reality’,  ‘existence’,  ‘definition’,  ‘rela¬ 
tion’,  ‘structure’,  ‘order’,  ‘number’,  ‘is’,  ‘has’,  ‘there  is’,  ‘variable’,  ‘infinite’, 
‘abstraction’,  ‘property’,  ‘meaning’,  ‘value’,  ‘love’,  ‘hate’,  ‘knowing’,  ‘doubt’.  ,  .  , 
may  apply  to  all  verbal  levels  and  in  each  particular  case  may  have  a  different 
content  or  meanings  and  so  in  general  no  single  content  or  meaning .  I  call  such 
terms  multiordinal  terms  (m.o).  The  definition  of  such  terms  is  always  given 
in  other  m.o  terms  preserving  their  fundamental  multiordinality.  In  other 
words,  a  m.o  term  represents  a  many-valued  term.  If  the  many  values  are 
identified,  or  disregarded,  or  confused,  we  treat  a  fundamentally  many- valued 
term  as  one-valued,  and  we  must  have  every  kind  of  paradox  through  such  an 
identification.  All  known  paradoxes  in  mathematics  and  life  can  be  manu¬ 
factured  by  the  disregard  of  this  fundamental  multiordinality.  Vice  versa,  by 
formulating  the  general  semantic  problem  of  multiordinality  we  gain  means 
to  discriminate  between  the  many  meanings  and  so  assign  a  single  meaning 
in  a  given  context.  A  m.o  term  represents  a  variable  in  general,  and  becomes 
constant  or  one-valued  in  a  given  context,  its  value  being  given  by  that  context. 
Here  we  find  the  main  importance  of  the  semantic  fact  established  by 
Skarzenski,**  that  the  ‘logical’  freedom  from  contradiction  becomes  a  semantic 

♦Professor  Cassius  J.  Keyser  drew  my  attention  to  a  passage  in  the  first  letter 
of  St.  Paul  to  the  Corinthians,  Chapter  15,  line  27.  ‘For  he  hath  put  all  things 
under  his  feet.  But  when  he  saith  all  things  are  put  under  him,  it  is  manifest  that 
he  is  excepted,  which  did  put  all  things  under  him.’  Italics  are  mine. 

♦♦Quoted  by  Chwistek  in  his  Neue  Grundlagen  der  Logic  und  Mathematik . 

SUPPLEMENT  III 

problem  of  one-value.  But  for  application  we  must  have  a  four-dimensional, 
non-elr  At  extensional  system,  based  on  structure  .  ,  and  the  complete  elimina¬ 
tion  of  identity.  (28) 

U)  That  the  disregard  of  multiordinality,  orders  of  abstractions,  may  lead 

to  identification  and  therefore  false  evaluation  resulting  in  disagreement  and 
maladjustment.  (29) 

V)  From  (25-29) — it  follows  that  identification  or  confusion  of  higher 

order  abstractions  must  be  eliminated.  Because  of  (7,  9,  10,  25-29)— all 
identification  must  be  eliminated.  (30) 

W)  The  elimination  of  identification  on  all  levels,  or  a  complete  and 

unconscious  discrimination  between  different  orders  of  abstractions,  including 
as  a  special  important  case  the  multiordinality  of  terms,  results  in  general 
consciousness  of  abstracting  which  in  turn,  solves  the  paradoxes  of  life  and 
mathematics  and  leads  to  generalized  mathematics  along  the  lines  suggested 
by  Chwistek.  (31) 

X)  The  realization  of  the  inherent  multiordinality  of  some  of  the  most 

important  terms  we  have,  gives  us  an  enormous  flexibility  of  language.  It 
makes  the  number  of  our  words  indefinitely  great.  When  both  the  writer  and 
the  reader  recognize  this  multiordinality,  and  look  for  the  meaning  in  the 
context  and  discriminate  between  the  orders  of  abstractions,  indicated  by  the 
context,  confusion  becomes  impossible.  (32) 

Y)  The  test  for  multiordinality  is  simple.  We  take  any  statement  and 

test  it  to  see  whether  a  given  term  applies  to  it.  Then  we  make  a  statement 
about  this  statement  and  again  test  if  this  term  applies  to  the  new  higher  order 
statement.  If  it  does,  the  given  term  must  be  considered  multiordinal,  because 
this  procedure  may  be  repeated  indefinitely.  (33) 

Z)  The  complete  elimination  of  identification  does  not  allow  us  to  use  the 

term  ‘is’  of  identity,  and  so  we  must  use  operational,  functional,  actional, 
behaviouristic  .  ,  languages,  requiring  new  attitudes  and  new  s.r,  impossible 
without  the  formulation  of  a  ^-system.  (34) 

Zi)  The  s.r  of  those  who  produced  the  general  theory  of  relativity,  the 
unified  field  theory,  the  new  quantum  mechanics,  the  new  revision  of  the 
foundation  of  mathematics  .  ,  depend  on  new  At  non-el ,  and  non-identity, 
operational,  actional .  ,  attitudes.  (35) 

Z2)  As  the  A -system  is  based  on  the  general  elimination  of  the  ‘is’  of 
identity,  or  on  ‘is  not’,  it  is  impossible  to  reject  these  premises  without  pro¬ 
ducing  impossible  data,  and  a  theory  of  agreement  ‘in  a  finite  period’  then 
becomes  a  possibility.  (36) 

Z3)  The  old  ‘unknowable’  becomes  abolished  and  limited  to  the  simple 
and  natural  fact  that  the  objective  levels  are  not  words.  (37) 

Observation  and  experience,  scientific  and  otherwise,  show  that  in  nature 
we  find  a  definite  order,  which  establishes  a  natural  order;  namely,  that  the 
sub-microscopic  process,  called  the  event  or  the  scientific  object,  came  first; 
only  later  abstracting  organisms  happened  and  objects  which  represent  the 
results  of  abstracting  by  amoebas  or  men,  came  next.  In  the  process  of  evolution 

A  PHYSICO-MATHEMATICAL  RIGOUR 

we  find  object  first,  label  next.  Descriptions  first,  inferences  next.  The  above 
natural  order  establishes  also  a  natural  order  of  evaluation.  Proper  evaluation 
becomes  the  foundation  for  survival,  non-el  s.r;  the  more  so  since  evaluation 
requires  asymmetrical  relations  of  ‘more’  or  ‘less*.  ,  impossible  to  handle 
properly  in  an  A  -system.  Thus  the  most  important  level  is  represented  by 
the  sub-microscopic  processes.  What  the  organism  needs  is  not  the  three- 
dimensional  shadow  of  a  four-dimensional  event,  not  the  abstraction  of  low 
order  produced  by  our  nervous  systems,  called  the  object,  but  the  sub- 
microscopic  dynamic  processes  without  which  the  desired  end-results  would 
not  happen.  The  animal,  the  primitive,  the  infant,  the  ignorant  man  identify 
the  two;  live  in  a  delusional  world.  Similarly  the  objective  levels  are  more 
important  than  the  verbal  levels,  and  descriptions  are  more  important  than 
inferences.  If  we  identify  any  orders  while  the  natural  order  is  established  by 
the  asymmetrical  relation  of  ‘more’,  the  semantic  process  of  evaluation  is 
reversed  and  appears  pathological  in  different  degrees.  If  n>6  and  we  make 
them  delusionally  equal  in  value  (identify),  then,  in  the  false-to-fact  relation 
a=  b  we  have  either  over-evaluated  the  right-hand  side  or  under-evaluated  the 
left-hand  side;  in  both  cases  reversing  the  natural  order  of  evaluation.  It  is 
important  to  notice  that  by  basing  our  s.r  on  a  natural  order  of  evaluation, 
general  semantics  become  a  generalized  science  of  order  and  values,  a  very 
secure  guide  in  life,  indispensable  for  sanity,  as  experiments  have  shown,  and 
include  also  generalized  mathematics. 

Another  very  serious  mechanism  of  identification  is  found  in  language. 

A)  Thus  we  have  only  one  name ,  say  ‘apple’  for  the:  (a)  un-speakable, 

un-eatable  event  or  scientific  process;  (6)  the  un-speakable  but  eatable  abstrac¬ 
tion  of  low  order,  the  object;  (c)  the  un-speakable  and  un-eatable  ‘mental’ 
picture,  or  higher  order  abstraction,  on  semantic  levels;  (d)  and  for  a  definition 
on  verbal  levels.  (38) 

B)  The  multiordinality  of  terms  was  not  discovered  until  1925  and  is  still 

generally  unknown.  It  presents  a  serious  difficulty  facilitating,  perhaps  even 
necessitating,  identification  unless  prevented  by  special  formulations  and 
training.  Multiordinal  terms  sound  and  look  alike  on  all  levels;  experience 
has  shown  how  easy  it  is  to  confuse  their  orders  and  identify  the  many  values 
into  one.  (39) 

C)  The  differentiation  between  descriptions  and  inferences,  and  particu¬ 

larly  between  descriptive  and  inferential  words  as  such,  is  also  novel,  and  was, 
until  the  present  Z -system  was  formulated,  largely  disregarded,  which  again 
led  to  identifications  and  false  evaluations.  (40) 

Investigations  show,  that  in  all  known  primitive  peoples  and  in  the 
‘mentally*  ill,  we  find  literal  identification  of  different  orders  of  abstractions, 
which  accounts  for  these  semantic  states.  Even  their  ‘perceptions’  are  different 
from  those  of  the  so-called  ‘normal’,  ‘civilized’  man,  because  higher  order 
abstractions  are  projected  and  identified  with  lower  order  abstractions.  They 
identify  or  ascribe  one  value  to  essentially  many-valued  different  orders  of 

SUPPLEMENT  III 

abstractions  and  so  become  impervious  to  contradictions  with  'reality*  and 
impervious  also  to  higher  order  experience. 

The  infant,  and  the  rest  of  us,  identify  a  great  deal  because  of  the  reasons 
given  above.  Investigations  show  that  most  of  human  difficulties,  public, 
private,  or  scientific  are  due  to  this  A  s.r,  which  accounts  for  the  infantile  state 
of  our  commercial  so-called  civilization.  Identification  abolishes  the  natural 
order  of  evaluation,  but  so  does  also  an  unconscious  assumption  of  an  ‘infinite 
velocity*  of  a  process.  The  A  trilogy  involved  some  fanciful  'infinity*  assump¬ 
tions.  Thus  in  the  ^-system  the  velocity  of  nerve  currents,  which  is  known 
to  be  126  metres  per  second  in  the  human  nervous  system,  is  at  present  assumed 
unconsciously  as  'infinite*,  made  evident  by  the  elementalism  of  'intellect*  or 
‘emotions’.  ,  as  something  'by  themselves*  and  detached.  In  the  jE-system 
the  length  of  a  line,  the  space  constant,  and  the  natural  unit  of  length  were 
assumed  'infinite*.  In  the  JV-system  the  velocity  of  light,  known  to  be  finite, 
was  unconsciously  assumed  to  be  ‘infinite*.  In  the  A  trilogy  these  unjustified 
or  meaningless  'infinities*  have  been  eliminated.  'Infinite  velocity'  of  a  process 
has  no  meaning .  It  represents  only  a  play  upon  symbols.  Velocity  is  defined 
as  v—s/t.  If  we  assume  /— 0  and  write  v=s/0~oot  this  ‘velocity*  lacks  one  of 
the  fundamental  factors  of  its  definition;  namely,  t,  and  so  such  an  expression 
ceases  to  define  anything  at  all  and  has  no  meaning,  although  it  may  be  a 
symbol  for  a  semantic  disturbance.  But  the  results  of  such  delusional  s.r  are 
far  reaching,  no  matter  how  mild  they  might  be  in  degree.  In  a  process  propa¬ 
gated  with  'infinite*  velocity  there  would  be  no  transition  or  delay  in  action, 
and  therefore  such  a  process  would  not  be  ordered .  Vice  versa,  the  disregard  of 
order  in  our  observations  must  introduce  some  mythological  'infinities*  some¬ 
where.  So  we  see  that  the  semantic  process  of  identification  is  intimately 
connected  with  'infinity*  assumptions,  both  abolishing  order.  Training  in  natural 
order  trains  s.r  away  from  delusional  evaluation,  abolishes  pathological  identi¬ 
fication  of  different  degrees  and  fanciful  'infinities’. 

Thus  we  see  that  the  problems  of  mathematical  'infinity*  are  extremely 
complex  and  involve  many  fundamental  considerations  never  analysed  before 
in  connection  with  the  semantic  process  of  identification.  Once  these  problems 
are  analysed  and  formulated  from  a  A,  non-elr  structural  point  of  view  the 
problems  of  'excluded  third*  become  secondary  in  importance,  easily  managed 
under  the  creative  freedom  of  the  coveted  ‘consciousness  of  abstracting*. 

Let  me  recall  for  continuity,  that  the  mathematicians  recognize  at  present, 
two  kinds  of  'infinities*.  One  with  which  we  are  familiar  from  our  school  days, 
symbolized  by  oo,  Cantor  calls  ‘potential*  infinity  and  defines  as  a  variable 
finite,  the  misunderstanding  of  which  introduces  paradoxes  even  in  high  schools; 
the  other,  the  'actual*  infinity,  which  introduces  paradoxes  in  universities. 
All  these  paradoxes  are  due,  as  the  present  enquiry  shows,  to  fundamental 
fallacies  in  connection  with  semantic  processes  of  identification  which  we  learn 
at  home  and  in  elementary  schools. 

The  process  of  identification  of  different  orders  of  abstractions  may  be 
due  to  pathological  conditions,  to  ignorance,  to  ‘thoughtlessness’,  to  lack  of 

A  PHYSICO-MATHEMATICAL  RIGOUR 

observation,  to  unconscious  false  assumptions,  to  hastiness,  to  superficiality, 
to  habits  of  speech,  to  the  structure  of  language  used  ,  .  In  fact,  under  the 
A -system  it  is  practically  impossible  to  avoid  it,  as  we  can  witness  it  in  such  a 
comparatively  advanced  field  as  mathematics.  The  label  ‘identification’  is 
applied  to  the  semantic  process  of  wrong  evaluation  going  on  inside  of  our 
skins  on  the  un-speakable  objective  levels,  when  we  are  not  aware  of  the 
differences  between  different  orders  of  abstractions.  When  making  it  conscious, 
we  may  speak  of  the  confusion  of  the  orders  of  abstractions.  To  make  such  a 
process  conscious,  we  must  train  in  the  differentiation  or  discrimination  between 
different  orders  of  abstractions,  and  distinguish  the  different  orders  by  actually 
learning  how  to  order  them.  Such  training  results  in  general  consciousness  of 
abstracting  which  is  not  inborn,  nor  fully  acquired,  even  in  university  training, 
but  which  requires  special  training.  Experiments  in  this  field  are  extremely 
encouraging;  in  a  number  of  cases,  pathological  individuals  have  become 
‘normal’  and  the  ‘unchangeable’  human  nature  has  been  actually  changed. 
Infantile  reactions  in  adults  are  abolished ,  and  this  training  becomes  a  general 
and  simple  method  for  prevention  of  future  semantic  disturbances  of  false 
evaluation  which  must  result  in  maladjustment. 

To  stop  identification  we  must  discriminate  or  differentiate  to  the  limit 
between  what  appears  always  as  four-dimensional,  absolute  individual  stages 
of  processes  and  situations  on  all  levels,  verbal  included.  Let  us  follow  briefly 
such  an  actual  performance.  If  we  realize  (7) — we  accept  (11-15) — and  on 
structural  grounds  reject  the  elementalism  of  the  A  trilogy  as  expressed  in  its 
‘psychology’,  ‘logic’,  the  division  of  ‘space’  and  ‘time’,  .  We  accept  the  non- 
elementalism  of  the  A  trilogy  as  expressed  in  the  new  terms  in  the  present 
work  and  accept  also  ‘space-time’, .  The  difference  is  very  serious  in  all  fields, 
when  carried  consistently  all  through  the  system.  As  we  actually  deal  with 
four-dimensional  dynamic  processes  which  must  be  considered  continually 
different,  and  with  world  conditions  changing  also  continually,  statements 
about  such  structural  conditions,  in  an  extensional  sense,  must  be  considered 
as  involving  variables,  generating  propositional  functions,  doctrinal  or  system- 
functions,  funktors  ,  .  But  propositional  functions*  which  involve  variables, 
are  neither  ‘true’  nor  ‘false*,  but  ambiguous,  and  to  have  a  proposition  we 
must  assign  a  value  to  the  variable  by  at  least  permanently,  in  principle, 
assigning  a  date  to  it.  We  must  also  introduce,  in  principle,  and  as  a  semantic 
attitude,  numerical  subscripts  to  our  words.  Thus  ‘apple’  in  the  A  -system 
represents  a  name  attached  to  an  intensional  definition ,  and  space-time  con¬ 
siderations  do  not  enter.  The  term  is  applied  to  a  definition  which  might  be 
considered  as  one-valued  and  permanent.  Now  obviously  such  a  language  and 
s.r  are  structurally  non-similar  to  the  world  and  our  nervous  system. 

If  we  try  to  identify  a  name  for  a  definition,  implying  permanence,  with 
the  objective  level  which  is  made  up  of  absolute  individuals,  and  represents 
ever-changing  processes,  we  must  live  in  a  delusional  world  in  which  we  should 
expect  every  kind  of  paradoxes  and  psycho-logical  shocks. 

SUPPLEMENT  III 

In  a  ^-system,  for  structural  reasons,  we  must  retain  the  general  implica¬ 
tions  of  the  term ‘apple’,  so  we  retain  the  word.  We  must  make  our  language 
extensional  in  principle,  and  the  name  ‘apple’  an  individual  name ,  by  calling 
it  applei ,  apple2  ,  .  The  combination  of  letters  ‘a-p-p-l-e’  implying  similarities, 
the  subscripts  1,  2  .  ,  implying  individual  differences,  which  automatically 
prevent  identification.  But  this  is  not  enough.  Our  ‘applei’  represents  a  name 
applied  to  an  object  and  a  process;  its  meaning  becomes  only  one-valued  when 
we  assign  to  it  at  least  a  definite  date.  Thus  the  objective  ‘apple!  {D  j  193l  ’ 
may  be  a  very  appetizing  affair,  and  ‘applei  (Jan.  1932,’  an  un-edible  wet  splash, 
it  should  be  noticed  that  the  fundamental  difference  between  the  A  and  A 
systems  turns  out  to  be  a  difference  of  semantic  attitudes.  The  scientific  facts 
are  not  changed.  The  ‘apple’  of  ‘Adam’  or  our  own  did  not  differ  in  essential 
characteristics  under  discussion.  In  both  the  A  and  A  systems  we  actually 
deal,  in  principle,  with  many-valued  processes.  The  important  problem  is  to 
adjust  the  structure  of  our  verbal  processes  to  the  structure  of  the  world; 
hence  a  ^-system  must  be  made  extensional,  non-el ,  four-dimensional,.’ 
Here  once  more,  as  in  general  semantics,  the  ascribing  of  one  value  (or  at  least 
limited  to  a  small  range  of  values  in  practice),  in  a  given  situation  (context), 
e  immates  paradoxes  and  contradictions  on  the  older  ‘logical’  grounds.  We 
should  notice  that  the  multiordinal  terms  must  be  considered  as  names  for 
many-valued  s.r ,  depending  upon  the  order  of  abstractions;  hence  the  name 
multzordznal .  Names  for  happenings  on  the  objective  levels  apply  to  many¬ 
valued  processes  but  should  not  be  considered  multiordinal.  All  the  psycho¬ 
logies  of  the  differential  calculus,  ‘space-time’,  enter  here,  yet  the  whole  field 
is  covered  semantically  if  we  entirely  abandon  the  ‘is’  of  identity.  Instead  of 
training  in  ‘allness’  and  ‘isness’— ‘this  is  this’,  we  shall  train  in  non-allness, 
and  non-isness— ‘this  zs  not  this’,  in  connection  with  a  special  diagram  called 
the  Structural  Differential. 

.  ExPerience  and  experiments  show  that  the  above  seems  essential  for 
sanity.  It  is  interesting  to  notice  that  mathematics  has  produced  a  language 
similar  in  structure  to  the  human  nervous  system.  Roughly  the  central  part 
of  the  brain  which  we  call  the  thalamus  is  directly  connected  with  the  dynamic 
world  through  our  ‘senses'  and  with  those  semantic  manifestations  which  we 
usually  call  ‘affective’,  ‘emotions’.  ,  all  of  which  manifest  themselves  as  dynamic. 
The  cortex  which  gives  us  the  static  verbal  reactions  and  definitions,  is  not 
connected  with  the  outside  world  directly  but  receives  all  impulses  through 
the  thalamus.  On  semantic  levels  the  thalamus  can  only  deal  with  dynamic 
material,  the  cortex  with  static.  Obviously  for  the  optimum  working  of  the 
human  nervous  system,  which  represents  a  cyclic  chain,  where  the  lower  centres 
supply  the  material  for  the  higher  centres  and  the  higher  centres  should  influence 
the  lower,  we  must  have  means  to  translate  the  static  into  dynamic  and  the 
dynamic  into  static;  a  method  supplied  exclusively  by  mathematics. 

With  the  above  considerations  we  must  discriminate  between  our  semantic 
capacities  for  infinite  divisibility  of  finites,  and  for  the  generation  of  infinite 
postulated  processes  which  by  definition  cannot  be  exhausted .  If  we  use  a  three- 

A  PHYSICO-MATHEMATICAL  RIGOUR 

dimensional  A  language  and  apply  such  an  ‘all’  to  such  an  infinite  process  then 
we  simply  produce  a  self-contradiction.  If  we  apply  to  such  a  semantic  process 
a  four-dimensional  ‘all  with  a  date’,  then  we  have  arrested,  for  the  ‘time’  being, 
the  process,  or  taken  a  static  cross  section  of  the  infinite  process  at  that  date; 
but  then  we  deal  with  a  finite.  Once  we  are  constantly  conscious  of  abstracting 
in  different  orders,  these  subtle  differences  become  quite  clear  and  the  solutions 
of  the  problems  of  infinity  follow  a  similar  path  as  the  older  problems  of  the 
‘infinitesimal’,  which  also  was  self-contradictory,  unnecessary  for  mathematics. 
When  treated  as  a  variable  finite  it  was  satisfactory  and  sufficient,  and  has 
proven  to  be  a  most  creative  notion  in  mathematics.  In  the  problems  of  the 
irrational,  continuity .  ,  similar  subtle  identifications  or  non-discriminations 
of  el ,  At  three-dimensional  terms  with  At  non-el ,  four-dimensional  terms 
occur,  which  once  eliminated,  clear  up  not  only  the  paradoxes,  but  some  self¬ 
contradictory,  often  unconscious,  postulates  of  some  parts  of  mathematics. 

Lack  of  space  does  not  allow  me  to  go  into  further  details,  except  to  suggest 
how  some  subtle  discriminations  may  help  to  eliminate  identification.  In  my 
A -system  the  differentiation  between  orders  of  abstractions  on  physiological 
grounds,  the  introduction  of  multiordinality  of  terms,  four-dimensional  con¬ 
siderations  .  ,  as  a  structural  necessity  for  all  languages,  makes  the  theory  of 
types  unnecessary. 

For  a  better  understanding  of  the  present  work  we  must  at  least 
differentiate: 

A)  Between  numerical  experience  and  mathematics. 

B)  Between  languages  with  content  and  languages  without  content. 

C)  Between  creative  building  of  verbal  schemes  which,  for  the  sake  of 
generality,  have  no  content,  called  pure  mathematics,  and  the  application  of 
these  schemes  to  actual  problems,  with  content,  called  applied  mathematics. 

D)  Between  the  contentless  mathematics  and  the  investigation  of  the 
foundation  of  mathematics  which  represents  the  investigation  of  the  s.r  of 
mathematicians  and  belongs  to  a  future  non-el  psycho-logics  with  content. 

E)  Between  different  forms  of  complex  adjustment  which  we  have  in 
common  with  the  primitive  man,  and  even  the  higher  animals,  and  reasoning 
which  starts  with  conscious  observations,  passing  to  descriptions  and  in¬ 
ferences  ,  . 

F)  Between  the  dynamic  process  of  relating  (‘thinking’)  on  the  un¬ 
speakable  semantic  levels,  and  the  verbal  expression  of  ‘relations’. 

G)  Between  the  use  of  negative  terms,  disagreement,  contradiction;  and 
self-contradiction.  In  a  A -system  contradictions  take  the  form  of  self- 
contradictions. 

H)  Between  el  ‘logics’  expressed  in  terms  of  ‘true’,  ‘false’,  and  modality, 
and  the  investigations  of  one-,  two-,  three-,  and  oo-valued  s.r ,  which  become 
a  general  theory  of  values ,  and  which  may  some  day  include  all  human  interests. 

I)  Between  the  inherent  circularity  of  ‘human  knowledge’,  which  must 
start  with  sets  of  undefined  terms,  and  so  start  with  some  knowledge,  and 
circular  definitions  or  explanations  which  define  or  explain  nothing. 

SUPPLEMENT  III 

This  list  of  suggestions  is  not  exhaustive,  and  in  principle  appears  as 
inexhaustible.  I  selected  only  a  few  topics  of  immediate  need. 

We  should  also  notice  that  because  on  objective  levels  we  deal  structurally 
with  absolutely  individual  stages  of  processes  and  situations  and  by  necessity 
we  speak  in  higher  order  abstractions  and  generalities  and  use  many  multi¬ 
ordinal  terms  (without  the  use  of  which  no  speaking  is  possible),  so  any  positive 
statement  about  the  objective  levels  must  be  only  probable  in  different  degrees, 
which  introduces  a  fundamental  and  entirely  general  A  principle  of  uncertainty. 
Heisenberg’s  restricted  principle  in  physics  appears  only  as  a  special  case. 
For  structural  reasons  we  must  preserve  determinism  but  because  of  (11-15)“ 
the  older  two-valued  determinism  must  be  reformulated  into  the  oo-valued 
determinism  of  the  maximum  probability.  The  einsteinian  introduction  of 
non-elementalism  in  physics  has  resulted  in  the  automatic  elimination  of  some 
semantic  blockages  in  the  younger  physicists.  Some  of  the  semantic  results 
and  triumphs  of  science,  besides  the  new  quantum  mechanics,  can  be  found  in 
the  latest  (free  from  identification  of  the  term  'time’  with  some  objectivity) 
new  entropy  of  Tolman.3 

To  sum  up,  we  find  that  although  the  primitive  man  or  the  'mentally*  ill 
may  have  some  reactions  of  orientation,  or  capacity  for  relating,  which  we  have 
in  common  with  the  higher  animals,  yet  these  do  not  involve  'reasoning*  in 
the  sense  defined  before.  Thus  a  boxer,  football  player .  ,  does  a  great  deal  of 
reflexive  relating  and  wins  his  match,  but  this  cannot  be  considered  as  reasoning 
in  the  strict  sense  as  used  in  a  A -system.  If  we  attempt  to  discuss  something 
with  a  primitive  or  'mentally'  ill  individual  and  write  down  his  processes  of 
relating,  we  would  have  to  conclude  that  he  uses  one-valued  semantics  of  identi¬ 
fication  of  many  values  into  one,  or  a  semantics  of  inclusion  by  which  'everything 
is  everything  else’.  The  ‘law  of  contradiction',  or  any  'excluded*  ‘third’,  or 
*n- th’,  practically  never  appears  in  our  sense,  yet  it  is  complicated  by  the  use 
of  positive  and  negative  terms,  to  which  any  meanings  connected  with  some 
identifications  of  higher  orders  may  be  ascribed.  Although  his  prevailing 
semantic  processes  appear  as  a  complete  and  literal  identification ,  yet  because 
of  the  general  orienting  and  relating  capacities  of  organisms  and  the  character 
of  terms  used,  it  would  not  be  easy  or  profitable  to  attempt  an  el  formulation 
of  his  'laws  of  thought*.  But  a  semantic  formulation,  as  given  above,  is  very 
instructive  and  comparatively  simple. 

Our  existing  el  ‘logic’,  besides  the  two-valued  type  of  formulation,  involves 
many  different  'philosophical*  elucidations,  which  instead  of  clarifying  the 
status  of  ‘logic’,  in  general,  tends  only  to  conceal  the  important  issues  involved 
in  non-elementalism.  The  role  that  identification  plays  in  a  given  individual 
appears  always  as  a  deciding  factor  in  his  adjustment.  Unfortunately,  at 
present,  the  sinister  identification  is  not  counteracted  but  fostered  or  even 
induced  by  the  structure  of  the  languages  we  use,  different  mythologies  .  , 
and  our  whole  educational,  economic,  social  .  ,  systems. 

The  two- valued  At  el,  three-dimensional  'logic*  does  not  apply  to  the 
world  of  events,  to  the  objective  levels  .  ,  and,  for  the  reasons  already  explained, 

A  PHYSICO-MATHEMATICAL  RIGOUR 

does  not  apply  to  the  study  of  the  foundations  of  mathematics.  It  applies  to 
a  large  extent  to  contentless  technical  mathematics,  including  so-called  ‘formal 
logic*  of  that  system. 

Formalism  when  free  from  identification  becomes  a  unique  comparative 
tool  in  search  for  structure;  formalism  with  identification  of  different  orders 
of  abstractions,  a  symptom  of  semantic  disturbances,  often  of  a  morbid 
character.  It  should  be  realized  that  we  may  have  one-,  two-,  three-.  ,  many-, 
and  oo-valued  orientations,  which  with  the  exception  of  one-valued,  we  should 
utilize  when  conditions  warrant  a  particular  use  iri  a  particular  case.  Thus  in 
mathematics,  for  the  sake  of  having  mathematics  as  a  standard  of  evaluation, 
we  select  a  sharply  two- valued  orientation  by  which  in  the  old  language  * A  is  B 
or  not  B’,  to  allow  sharp  statements  that  for  instance,  1  +  1=2.  If  we  would 
deliberately  postulate  that  1+1  may  sometimes  be  equal  to  2  and  sometimes 
not  equal  to  2,  we  would  have  forms  of  representation  which  would  apply 
perhaps  more  readily  to  science  and  life,  hut  mathematics  as  such  would  be 
impossible,  and  we  would  be  deprived  of  this  sharp  tool  for  evaluation. 

It  is  interesting  to  notice  that  mathematicians,  by  the  use  of  two-valued 
semantics ,  (not  ‘logic*,  because  an  el  discipline  cannot  be  ‘lived  through*  at  all 
by  non-heavily  pathological  individuals),  have  produced  the  most  important 
disciplines.  Thus  we  have,  for  instance,  the  theory  of  ‘variance’  (the  theory 
of  function),  the  theory  of  invariance,  the  differential  calculus,  the  1,  2,  3, 
4,  and  ^-dimensional  systems,  and  a  host  of  other  verbal  structures  similar 
not  only  to  the  world,  but  to  the  human  nervous  system.  These  results  give  us 
means  not  only  to  enlarge  our  mastery  of  the  external  world,  but  when 
generalized  into  a  non-el ,  ^-system,  give  us  the  means  for  the  mastery  of  the 
inner  world,  leading  toward  sanity. 

It  is  amusing  to  discover,  in  the  twentieth  century,  that  the  quarrels 
between  two  lovers,  two  mathematicians,  two  nations,  two  economic  systems  .  , 
usually  assumed  insoluble  in  a  ‘finite  period’  should  exhibit  one  mechanism — 
the  semantic  mechanism  of  identification — the  discovery  of  which  makes 
universal  agreement  possible,  in  mathematics  and  in  life. 
