Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-63748-w
Gephyrin ﬁlaments represent the molecular
basis of inhibitory postsynaptic densities
Arthur Macha1, Filip Liebsch
1, Emanuel H. W. Bruckisch
1, Nele Burdina1,
Imke von Stülpnagel
1, Konrad Benting
1, Monika Gunkel
1,
Elmar Behrmann
1
& Guenter Schwarz
1,2
The multifunctional protein gephyrin clusters inhibitory receptors at the
postsynaptic membrane in the CNS. Gephyrin has been proposed to form the
inhibitory postsynaptic density by liquid-liquid phase separation, involving a
complex interplay between receptor binding and oligomerization via its con-
served G- and E-domains. Here we show by single particle cryo-EM analysis that
dimerization promotes the formation of gephyrin ﬁlaments in which two
E-domain dimers are linked by Z-shaped interfaces formed between two sub-
domains II (SDII) of adjacent dimers. Deletion of SDII, introduction of two
epilepsy-causing pathogenic variants, or neutralization of an opposing charge
in the interface abolish the formation of ﬁlaments, in vitro phase separation,
and synaptic receptor clustering in hippocampal neurons. In conclusion, this
work identiﬁes gephyrin E-domain ﬁlaments as the structural foundation
underlying gephyrin both phase separation and receptor clustering at inhibi-
tory postsynaptic densities.
Gephyrin (Geph) is the major scaffold protein at inhibitory synapses in
the central nervous system (CNS)1-3. It directly interacts with the
intracellular domains (ICDs) of the β-subunit of glycine receptors
(GlyR) as well as with various subunits of γ-aminobutyric acid type A
receptors (GABAARs)4-8. These interactions facilitate the incorporation
of inhibitory receptors into the postsynaptic density (PSD), which
involves many other interacting proteins such as tubulin, collybistin
and neuroligin9-13. The presence of a sufﬁcient number of inhibitory
receptors at the synaptic site is essential for efﬁcient inhibitory signal
transmission between neurons14,15.
Gephyrin was initially identiﬁed as a 93 kDa protein associated
with GlyR16-18. It is comprised of an N-terminal G-domain (GephG), an
E-domain (GephE), and a ﬂexible central linker region, referred to as
the C-domain (GephC) (Fig. 1a)4,19,20. Structural analyses showed that
isolated GephG forms trimers19,21, while GephE forms dimers4,20,22.
Biochemical studies suggest that full-length Geph is a trimer, mediated
by the central GephG trimer9,16,20. The interaction with the ICDs of
inhibitory receptors occurs at the dimerized GephE, in which the two
GephE subunits form two C-shaped hydrophobic binding pockets23,24.
In vitro interaction studies using gephyrin trimer and a peptide derived
from the ICD of the GlyR-β subunit (GlyR-loop) revealed biphasic
binding kinetics, characterized by distinct high-afﬁnity and low-afﬁnity
interactions with dissociation constants (KD) in the low nanomolar to
low micromolar range4,20. The ICDs of GABAARα1, GABAARα3,
GABAARβ2, and GABAARβ3 subunits bind to the same binding pocket
as the GlyR-loop, but with approximately 20-50 times lower afﬁnity5,7
Based on the distinct oligomerization properties of the G- and
E-domains of gephyrin, a hexagonal lattice has been proposed as the
structural basis for the inhibitory postsynaptic density22,25. While such
an ordered lattice has neither been observed in vitro nor in vivo, a
complex network of receptors at the synaptic cleft has been identiﬁed
by cryo-electron tomography that appears to be supported by a thin
electron-dense layer that would agree with a network of Geph26. Fur-
thermore, structural and functional data revealed that localized var-
iations in protein density of both receptors and scaffolding proteins
can lead to the formation of highly stable nanodomains within the
PSD27-30. On a conceptual level, liquid-liquid phase separation (LLPS)
has been proposed as an underlying principle of gephyrin clustering
and inhibitory synapse formation and linked to the unstructured and
charged GephC domain based on in vitro assays31,32. However, the
Received: 4 February 2025
Accepted: 26 August 2025
Check for updates
1Institute of Biochemistry, Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany. 2Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne
(CMMC), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
e-mail: ebehrman@uni-koeln.de; gschwarz@uni-koeln.de
Nature Communications|        (2025) 16:8293 
1
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;

b
a
N
C
GephG
GephC
GephE
c
d
e
f
g
Unindentiﬁed
GephG + GephE
GephE
c1
c2
c3
e1
e2
e3
e4
120 Å
60 Å
Unidentiﬁed
160 A
GephG + GephE
GephE + GephE
GephE
Unidentiﬁed
70%
17%
13%
35%
7%
29%
GephE dimer
GephG trimer +
GephE dimer
Unindentiﬁed
GephE dimer
GephG trimer + GephE dimer
GephE dimer + GephE dimer
30%
90
90°
90°
90°
N
318
341
G375
G375
367
463
498
654
736
III
C
I
I
II
III
IV
GlyR-loop
D422
D422
GephG
GephE
90°
Fig. 1 | GlyR-loop stabilizes GephE dimerization within gephyrin trimer.
a Gephyrin trimer domain structure overview showing G-domain (GephG), C-domain
(GephC) and E-domain (GephE). The respective crystal structures of GephG (green,
PDB: 1JLJ) and GephE (blue, PDB 2FU3) are shown in cartoon representation with faded
surfaces and size indicators. A graphical representation of the full-length gephyrin
trimer is depicted (middle panel). b Cartoon representation of isolated GephE dimer
in complex with GlyR-loop (PDB: 2FTS), highlighting subdomain (SD) division (color
code: SDI: red; SDII: green; SDIII: yellow; SDIV: blue) and position of GlyR-loop
(orange). The second monomer is shown in gray. Positions of G375 and D422 in SDII
are highlighted (magenta). c Representative 2D class averages of isolated Geph trimer
following negative stain SPA showing GephE with GephG (c1), isolated GephE (c2) and
undeﬁnable densities (c3). The pie chart indicates the relative distribution of particles
throughout the 2D class averages. d Surface representation of ﬁnal map using parti-
cles from classes with GephE + GephG (c1). GephE dimer (PDB 2FU3, blue) and GephG
trimer (PDB: 1JLJ, green) shown in cartoon representation were rigid-body ﬁtted into
the respective densities in the map. Scale bar: 50 Å. e Representative 2D class averages
of isolated Geph trimer in complex with GlyR-loop after negative stain SPA showing
GephE with GephG (e1), isolated GephE (e2), complex of two GephE dimers (e3) and
undeﬁnable densities (e4). The pie chart indicates the relative distribution of particles
throughout the 2D class averages. f Surface representation of ﬁnal map using particles
from classes with GephE + GephG (e1). GephE dimer (PDB 2FU3, blue) and GephG
trimer (PDB: 1JLJ, green) shown in cartoon representation were rigid-body ﬁtted into
the respective densities in the map. g Surface representation of ﬁnal map using par-
ticles from classes with GephE + GephE complex (e3). Two consecutive GephE dimers
shown in cartoon representation (PDB 2FU3, blue) were rigid body ﬁtted into the
respective densities in the map. Scale bar 50 Å. Cartoon bar diagrams illustrate the
Geph constructs used in this experiment (green: GephG, gray: GephC, light green:
SDII, red: position of amino acid substitution, orange: GlyR-loop).
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-63748-w
Nature Communications|        (2025) 16:8293 
2

molecular mechanism that enables Geph to self-assemble at the PSD
remained elusive for nearly three decades, and neither the hexagonal
lattice nor the LLPS hypothesis have been able to fully explain known
pathogenic variants of Geph, as highlighted by GephG375D and
GephD422N 14,33, which harbor mutations outside the known receptor and
oligomerization sites (Fig. 1b). In addition to its function in the CNS and
spinal cord, Geph also harbors an enzymatic function in molybdenum
cofactor biosynthesis34-36.
Here we elucidated a hitherto unknown molecular interface
formed between subregions of GephE, which not only rationalizes two
known pathogenic patient variants carrying point mutations in this
subregion, but also allowed the rational design of a third variant again
disrupting Geph oligomerization. Our negative stain EM data, in
combination with functional data, revealed that the presence of the
GlyR-loop stabilized intramolecular GephE dimerization within full-
length Geph. Subsequent cryo-EM data of the Geph-GlyR-loop com-
plex uncovered that Geph is able to form ﬂexible ﬁlaments, in which
dimerized GephE domains are connected via their subdomain II (SDII).
Geph variants either lacking SDII or carrying known pathogenic amino
acid exchanges consistently lose ﬁlament-forming capability, are
unable to engage in LLPS in vitro, and are deﬁcient in synapse forma-
tion in vivo. Moreover, the structural data allowed predicting a com-
plementary third variant showing the same kind of loss in ﬁlament
formation and phase separation. Collectively, our structural and
functional studies highlight Geph ﬁlament formation as an underlying
molecular mechanism of Geph-mediated postsynaptic clustering of
inhibitory neurotransmitter receptors.
Results
GlyR-loop stabilizes GephE dimerization within full-length Geph
Given that the full-length structure of gephyrin remains unknown, we
carried out single-particle analyses (SPA) of isolated wild-type
gephyrin trimers (GephWT). For this, GephWT was overexpressed in E.
coli and puriﬁed to homogeneity using afﬁnity chromatography
combined with analytical scale size-exclusion chromatography (aSEC)
(Supplementary Fig. 1a), and then prepared for negative stain EM.
Micrographs showed particles of varying sizes (Supplementary Fig. 2a)
with a high degree of heterogeneity; however, common architectural
principles could be identiﬁed after 2D classiﬁcation (Fig. 1a, c). A subset
of class averages, accounting for about 17% of particles, showed an
elongated bilobed structure adjacent to a round structure. Based on
the molecular dimensions of the GephG (PDB 1JLJ) and GephE (PDB
1JLJ) crystal structures, these shapes likely represent a GephG trimer
and GephE dimer, respectively (Fig 1c1). A second subset of class
averages, accounting for about 13% of particles, showed a single
elongated bilobed structure, likely representing a GephE dimer with-
out a resolved GephG trimer (Fig 1c2). A third subset of class averages
showed structures of varying shapes and sizes that could not be con-
ﬁdently assigned to any gephyrin domain (Fig 1c3). Approximately 70%
of all particles fell into this heterogeneous group of class averages,
suggesting that the majority of gephyrin trimers adopted hetero-
geneous conformations, consistent with structural ﬂexibility observed
in previous SAXS and AFM studies20. The particle subset showing
putative GephG and GephE densities in close proximity (Fig 1c1, green)
was further processed in 3D (Supplementary Fig. 2b), yielding an
intermediate-resolution negative stain EM density map that features
two distinct, disconnected densities that were conﬁrmed as GephE and
GephG by rigid-body ﬁtting known crystal structures (PDB 2FU3 and
PDB 1JLJ) indicating the presence of stable GephE dimers and GephG
trimers in our sample (Fig. 1d and Supplementary Fig. 2c). Neither
density corresponding to the third copy of GephE nor density that
might correspond to GephC could be identiﬁed.
We next investigated if the addition of GlyR-loop, as a mimic for
receptor ICD binding, affects the architecture of full-length GephWT.
For this we added a 3-fold excess of GlyR-loop to GephWT and
subsequently isolated the complex by aSEC before staining for nega-
tive stain EM (Supplementary Figs. 1a and 3). Micrographs appeared
similar to those obtained for the sample without the GlyR-loop (apo-
Geph), showing particles of varying sizes (Supplementary Fig. 3a),
which, after processing resulted in visually similar 2D class averages as
before (Fig. 1e). However, in contrast to apo-Geph, the relative number
of particles contributing to the heterogeneous group of class averages
was decreased more than two-fold (Fig 1e1-4), implying that the pre-
sence of the GlyR-loop reduced heterogeneity by stabilizing Geph in
deﬁned conformations. Again, the particle subset showing GephG and
GephE in close proximity (Fig 1e1) was further processed in 3D,
revealing a structure composed of two distinct densities that was
similar to the one obtained for apo-Geph (Fig. 1f and Supplementary
Fig. 3b). However, while nominal at the same resolution and only 50%
more particles contributed to the reconstruction, the structure was
much better deﬁned, particularly in the GephE region (Fig. 1d, f). Still,
stain granularity prevented the direct observation of GlyR-loop
binding.
Interestingly, 2D classiﬁcation revealed an additional subset of 2D
class averages that appeared to comprise linear assemblies of two or
more GephE dimers (Fig 1e3). We also processed this particle subset
showing linear assemblies (Fig 1e3) in 3D, resulting in an elongated
negative stain EM density that allowed rigid-body ﬁtting of two GephE
dimers, which appeared to be linked via their respective SDIIs (Fig. 1g
and Supplementary Fig. 3c).
In conclusion, our SPA analysis of full-length Geph revealed high
structural heterogeneity, which was decreased following the incuba-
tion with GlyR-loop. The presence of GlyR-loop, moreover, triggered
the formation of linear assemblies that appear to comprise two or
more directly interacting GephE dimers.
Full-length Geph forms ﬂexible ﬁlaments at high protein
concentrations
To uncover the molecular basis for the linear assemblies of Geph
observed in negative stain EM, we investigated full-length GephWT tri-
mers complexed with the GlyR-loop by cryo-EM. Under identical
sample preparation conditions as used for negative stain EM, except at
a 100-fold increased protein concentration, we obtained micrographs
that were densely packed with particles (Supplementary Fig. 4a).
Subsequent unsupervised 2D classiﬁcation resulted in a set of high-
quality 2D class averages featuring distinct secondary structure ele-
ments (Fig. 2a). While some 2D class averages were centered on the
GephE dimer, others were centered on a Z-shaped structural feature
connecting two GephE dimers (Fig. 2a and Supplementary Fig. 4b). 2D
class averages centered on the GephE dimer showed weak adjacent
density, indicating that these GephE dimers are likely incorporated
into larger linear assemblies, or ﬁlaments, in agreement with our
negative stain EM data (Figs. 1e3 and 2a). Therefore, we re-extracted
these particles using a box size twice as big as before and repeated the
unsupervised 2D classiﬁcation. The resulting 2D class averages con-
ﬁrmed the presence of slightly curved GephE ﬁlaments comprising
GephE dimers interconnected by a Z-shaped interface (Fig. 2a and
Supplementary Fig. 4c). We additionally observed 2D class averages
showing GephE dimers in close proximity to a smaller bilobed density,
which could be identiﬁed as a side view of the GephG trimer based on
in silico 2D back-projections of the GephG crystal structure (Fig. 2a, b).
However, subsequent 3D reconstruction of the GephE ﬁlament failed
due to the crowdedness of these grids and a high degree of pre-
ferential orientation of the particles (Supplementary Fig. 4d).
Given that Geph complexed with the GlyR-loop eluted in SEC
homogeneously at the expected elution volume of the trimeric Geph-
GlyR complex (Supplementary Fig. 1a), we concluded that the
observed GephE ﬁlaments must have been formed during the cryo-EM
sample grid preparation. As the vitriﬁcation process itself has been
shown to only minimally affect the sample, especially with regard to
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-63748-w
Nature Communications|        (2025) 16:8293 
3

processes on the time-scale of protein oligomerisation37, we hypo-
thesize that the blotting step might have induced the oligomerisation
process, possibly due to a rapid increase in local protein concentration
as observed for other proteins38.
Because in our negative staining SPA elongated assemblies of
GephE dimers were only observed when Geph was complexed with the
GlyR-loop, but not for apo-Geph, we also prepared cryo-EM samples in
the absence of the GlyR-loop. Resulting micrographs were of com-
parable quality, also showing densely packed particles (Supplementary
Fig. 5a). Interestingly, despite the absence of the GlyR-loop, data pro-
cessing revealed 2D class averages that were similar to those observed
in the presence of the GlyR-loop, showing GephE ﬁlaments alone or in
a
b
c
d
e
90°
90°
GephG
GephG
GephG
Box 512 px
Box 256 px
Box 512 px
Box 256 px
Z-interface
Z-interface
GephE
GephE
GephE ﬁlament
SDII
SDII
Fig. 2 | Cryo-EM SPA of gephyrin reveals formation of ﬁlaments facilitated by
GephE SDII interactions. a Representative micrograph (scale bar 100 nm) of Geph
trimer in complex with GlyR-loop with representative 2D class averages depicting
GephG and GephE incorporated into ﬁlaments through a Z-shaped interface
(arrow). Densities corresponding to GephE and GephG are highlighted in the 2D
class average pictures, respectively (arrow). b Representative 2D back-projections
of GephG (PDB:1JLJ) and GephE (PDB 2FU3).c Representative micrograph (scale bar
100 nm) with GephE in complex with GlyR-loop with representative 2D class
averages depicting GephE incorporated into ﬁlaments through a Z-shapedinterface
(arrow). d Surface representation of cryo-EM map of GephE dimer inserted into
ﬁlaments with highlighted SDI (red), SDII (dark green), SDIII (yellow), SDIV (blue)
from one GephE monomer and SDII from adjacent GephE dimer (SDII', light green).
The second GephE monomer is colored in gray. Regions of the structure not used
for model building are shown in white. Scale bar 50 Å. e Final structure of GephE,
shown on a cartoon representation incorporated into ﬁlaments, is built into the
map shown in (d), highlighting the SDs positions and the SDII-SDII' interface. Car-
toon bar diagrams illustrate the Geph constructs used in this experiment (green:
GephG, gray: GephC, light green: SDII, red: position of amino acid substitution,
orange: GlyR-loop).
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-63748-w
Nature Communications|        (2025) 16:8293 
4

close proximity to a smaller bilobed density (Supplementary Fig. 5b),
implicating that potentially the increased concentration might over-
come the necessety for GlyR-loop binding observed during negative
stain EM.
GephE ﬁlaments are connected via an interlocking interface of
neighboring SDIIs
In order to conﬁrm that neither GephG nor the C-linker is involved
in the formation of the ﬁlaments, and aiming to reduce the crowded-
ness of the sample on the grid, we prepared cryo-EM samples of iso-
lated
GephE
(residues
327-736)
using
identical
experimental
conditions as for full-length Geph before (Supplementary Fig. 6).
Again, 2D class averages revealed linear, but ﬂexible assemblies of
GephE dimers connected by a Z-shaped interface (Fig. 2c and Sup-
plementary Fig. 6c).
To mitigate the effects of preferred orientation, we acquired an
additional dataset at a 25° tilt of the sample stage (Supplementary
Fig. 6b). In this dataset, several micrographs showed highly reduced
particle crowdedness and clearly illustrated the distribution and pro-
portions of ﬁlaments on the micrographs (Supplementary Fig. 6b1).
Processing of combined datasets yielded extended particle orienta-
tions (Supplementary Fig. 6d), which allowed for an ab-initio 3D
reconstruction that revealed a complete GephE dimer with additional
density on one side, corresponding to the SDII of an adjacent GephE
dimer in the ﬁlament (hereafter referred to as SDII') (Supplementary
Fig. 6e). Further processing yielded a ﬁnal map at a global resolution of
3.5 Å, showing clear side-chain density in most areas (Supplementary
Fig. 6f). However, density for the SDII-SDII' interface remained frag-
mented, which we attributed to conformational ﬂexibility in agree-
ment with the various degrees of curvature observed for the 2D class
averages of the ﬁlament (Fig. 2c and Supplementary Fig. 6c, d). Using a
motion-based deep generative model for continuous heterogeneity39,
the ﬂexibility of SDII and the SDII-SDII' interface to the adjacent GephE
dimer was conﬁrmed (Supplementary Fig. 6g).
In order to improve the resolution in the SDII-SDII' interface
region, we used in silico-generated 3D structures based on the defor-
mation ﬂow ﬁeld from the ﬂexibility analysis to initiate a 3D classiﬁ-
cation. This yielded one class with a poorly resolved SDII-SDII' interface
(35% of particles) and two classes with improved resolution at the SDII-
SDII' interface (65% of particles, Supplementary Fig. 6h), of which the
latter subset of particles was further reﬁned. Global reﬁnement and
subsequent local reﬁnement focussing on the area encompassing the
core part of GephE dimer including the SDII-SDII' interface yielded a
map with continuous density at the SDII-SDII' interface and a resolu-
tion of approximately 3.0 Å in the core part of the GephE dimer and 3.5
to 4.0 Å in the SDII-SDII' interface (Fig. 2d; Supplementary Figs. 6i,
j and 7a), allowing us to build an almost complete atomic model into
the density map following additional deep-learning based40 map
sharpening (Fig. 2e and Supplementary Fig. 6j). In our atomic model
chain A comprises all four subdomains of GephE (Fig. 2e). Due to the
highly fragmented density of chain B in the SDII region, the respective
amino acid residues (Ala370-Pro459) were not build into our atomic
model (Fig. 2e). For SDII' (chain C) we utilized a predicted structure of
SDII as a starting template for building the atomic model41,42.
Overall, our structure of the GephE dimer highly agrees with
previous crystal structures, especially in the regions of SDI, SDIII and
SDIV4. The here identiﬁed SDII-SDII' interface features a prominent
groove on the SDII side that interlocked with a complementary bulge
on the SDII' side (Fig. 2e and Supplementary Fig. 7b, c).
Plasticity of the SDII-SDII' interface supports GephE ﬁlaments
ﬂexibility
While our 3D sorting strategy could alleviate the fragmentation of the
SDII-SDII' interface density, likely caused by hinge-like motions at the
two loops connecting SDI and SDII, the lower resolution of this area in
our ﬁnal reconstruction implied the presence of remaining structural
ﬂexibility. To further characterize potential heterogeneity of the SDII-
SDII' interface we re-processed the particles from the initial 3D sorting
(Supplementary Figs. 6h and 8). For this, particles that did not show a
well-resolved SDII-SDII' interface region ("fragmented"), and particles
that showed a well-resolved SDII-SDII' interface region ("deﬁned"),
were individually reﬁned and then subjected to a motion-based deep
generative model for continuous heterogeneity in order to visualize
the main modes of SDII-SDII' interface movement (Supplementary
Fig. 8a, b). Notably, the consensus position of the SDII' in the structure
from the "fragmented" subset was shifted by approximately. 9.8°
upward as compared to the previously identiﬁed, higher resolved, SDII'
position (Fig. 3a and Supplementary Fig. 8c). SDII and SDII' from the
"deﬁned" subset showed a movement of up to 3.9° and 9.5° for SDII
and SDII', respectively (Fig. 3b and Supplementary Fig. 9a). In contrast,
the movement of the interface with the uptilted SDII' showed an
increased movement of up to 9.9° for SDII and 20.9° for SDII' (Fig. 3c
and Supplementary Fig. 9b). Potentially, the later "fragmented" parti-
cle population (Supplementary Fig. 8a) might represent a less stable
state before SDII and SDII' fully interlock.
To follow up on the observed mobility of the SDII, we investigated
whether the incorporation of GephE into ﬁlaments changes the posi-
tion of the SDII in relation to the other domains of the protein. When
comparing SDII positions in the crystal structure of human GephE
either without or with bound GlyR-loop (PDB: 2FU3, 2FTS) we found
that SDII in our structure is positioned further away from the core part
of the protein compared to the GephE crystal structure without bound
GlyR-loop (Fig. 3d). This difference was smaller if comparing to the
GlyR-loop bound GephE crystal structure, implying a GlyR-loop
dependent shift in the SDII positioning might be related to ﬁlament
formation as it promotes a positioning of the SDII more similar to the
positioning observed in GephE ﬁlaments (Fig. 3e and Supplementary
Fig. 9d). A similar effect was observed in the crystal structures of the
GephE plant orthologue, Cnx1E, that shows a shift of SDII towards the
ﬁlament-promotion angle when the cofactor was bound (Fig. 3f, g and
Supplementary Fig. 9e, f)43,44.
A single GlyR-loop is able to occupy both binding sites within
one GephE dimer
Despite saturation of the sample with the GlyR-loop, the consensus
structure showed only fragmented density in the receptor binding
sites (Figs. 1b and 2d). We hypothesized that this might be caused by
the GlyR-loop adopting multiple conformations within the binding
pocket4,45. In order to better resolve the GlyR-loop density, we carried
out a 3D classiﬁcation of all particles of GephE irrespective their SDII
conformation using a mask focusing on the core part of the GephE
dimer, including both receptor-binding sites (Supplementary Fig. 6f;
Sub-Fig. 10). The subset of particles showing the most continuous
density for the GlyR-loop was further processed by local reﬁnement
excluding the SDII subdomains (Supplementary Fig. 10a). This yielded
a ﬁnal map that after low-pass ﬁltration to 6 Å showed a continuous
density spanning both binding pockets on the GephE dimer (Fig. 4a;
Supplementary Fig. 10a). 3D classiﬁcation resulted in classes that
either showed GlyR-loop density in both binding sites or a complete
absence of GlyR-loop density, suggesting that in the case of binding, a
single GlyR-loop is simultaneously occupying both binding sites within
one GephE dimer (Fig. 4a, b; Supplementary Fig. 10b). Importantly, this
ﬁnding rationalizes previous biochemical data reporting the binding of
one GlyR-loop to one GephE dimer4,23,31,45. Moreover, machine-learning-
based structure predictions46 of the most probable position of a single
GlyR-loop within the GephE dimer are in line with the observed density
for GlyR-loop in our reconstruction (Fig. 4c-e and Supplementary
Fig. 11), and predict an extension of the GlyR-loop core binding motive
(R394-Y412) towards the C-terminal end, enabling the occupation of
both binding sites simultaneously (D413-L426, Fig. 4d, e). This agrees
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-63748-w
Nature Communications|        (2025) 16:8293 
5

with previous in vitro studies showing that residues 413-426 are
required for high-afﬁnity binding of the GlyR-loop to GephE dimer23.
SDII is crucial for Geph ﬁlament formation, LLPS, and clustering
at synapses
To conﬁrm that the observed ﬁlament formation is solely dependent
on SDII interactions, we generated a full-length Geph variant lacking
the SDII domain (GephΔSDII, deleted residues 371-459) and puriﬁed the
protein in complex with GlyR-loop to homogeneity similarly to the
wild-type protein previously. Structural analysis revealed dimeric and
trimeric particles, but no signs of ﬁlament formation as seen with wild-
type protein, conﬁrming thatalso in the presence of GephC and GephG
ﬁlament formation requires SDII (Supplementary Fig. 12). Importantly,
binding studies with GlyR-loop showed that both full-length GephΔSDII
as well as GephEΔSDII maintained similar binding afﬁnities as compared
to the wild-type protein, indicating that the deletion of SDII does not
interfere with receptor binding and GephE dimerization (Supplemen-
tary Fig. 1c-f).
Next, we asked whether the deletion of SDII would abolish Geph
LLPS in vitro, which has been hypothesized to represent the molecular
basis of Geph clustering31,32,47. For this, we mixed the GlyR- and
GABAAR-mimetic
ICD
proteins
GlyR-LD,
GABAAR-α1LD,
and
GABAAR-α3LD as described previously31 with GephE variants and per-
formed sedimentation experiments. In the presence of GlyR-LD,
approx. 10 times more GephEWT was detected in the pellet fraction as
compared to the sample without GlyR-LD, thus demonstrating strong
a
b
c
d
e
f
g
90°
3.9°
9.9°
9.8°
20.9°
9.5°
SDII
SDII`
Distance: 4.0 Å
Distance: 6.2 Å
0.13°
1.24°
1.0°
3.77°
Distance: 4.7 Å
Distance: 3.9 Å
Fig. 3 | The SDII-SDII' interface allows for motion between GephE dimers.
a Overlay of the alternative SDII' binding position (orange) within the SDII-SDII'
interface with the main position observed for SDII' in the interface (green). For
orientation, SDI and SDII of one GephE subunit (light blue), and SDII and SDIV of the
second GephE monomer (dark blue) in the dimer are shown. The shift between the
SDII' positions is indicated. For further information, see Supplementary Fig. 8. Scale
bar is 25 Å. b, c Visualization of main trajectories depicting possible degrees of
freedom of SDII (blue) and SDII' (green or orange) in the main (b) and alternative (c)
binding positions based on motion-based deep generative modeling. Strongest
deviation from the consensus position is highlighted in color, the course of
movement shown in shades of gray, and the difference between the extreme
positions indicated in degrees. For further information see Supplementary
Figs. 8 and 9d-g) Structural comparison of the SDII position in the GephE dimer
incorporated into ﬁlaments in the presence of GlyR-loop (blue) with the crystal
structure without GlyR-loop (PDB: 2FU3, olive (d), the GephE crystal structure
bound to GlyR-loop (PDB: 2FTS, red (e), the Cnx1E crystal structure without Moco-
AMP (PDB: 5G2R, dark orange (f), and the Cnx1E crystal structure bound to Moco-
AMP (PDB: 6Q32, purple (g). Differences in SDIIs positions are indicated in dis-
tances and angular changes. For further information, see Supplementary Fig. 9.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-63748-w
Nature Communications|        (2025) 16:8293 
6

LLPS formation (Fig. 5a, b). In contrast, GephΔSDII did not sediment in
the presence of GlyR-LD, as the band in the pellet fraction was similar
to the control without GlyR-LD (Fig. 5a, b). Similar results were
obtained for GABAAR-α1LD and GABAAR-α3LD, with again the amount
of GephΔSDII within the pellet fraction being unaffected by the presence
or absence of the respective receptor ICD model proteins (Supple-
mentary Fig. 1g, h). This data collectively demonstrated that SDII is
required for Geph LLPS.
To conﬁrm the physiological relevance of SDII-mediated Geph
ﬁlament formation for postsynaptic Geph clustering, we expressed
mScarlet-tagged gephyrin constructs in dissociated murine hippo-
campal neurons lacking endogenous gephyrin. This was achieved by
infecting hippocampal cultures from ﬂoxed gephyrin mice48 with
recombinant adeno-associated viruses (rAAVs) encoding Cre recom-
binase and subsequently with rAAVs encoding Cre-dependent mScar-
let-Geph
or
mScarlet-GephΔSDII,
before
the
onset
of
synapse
formation49,50. After 14 days in vitro, mScarlet-Geph formed frequent
somatic and dendritic clusters, which co-localized with pre-synaptic
vesicular GABA transporter (vGAT) and post-synaptic GABAARs
(GABAAR-γ2), both markers of GABAergic synapses. In contrast,
mScarlet-GephΔSDII was diffusely distributed and did not form post-
synaptic clusters (Fig. 5c, d), despite the fact that GephΔSDII retained its
receptor-binding but lost its ﬁlament formation ability. Overall, these
experiments demonstrate that the SDII subdomain-mediated ﬁlaments
are a prerequisite for the formation of postsynaptic clusters at
GABAergic synapses.
Loss of Geph ﬁlaments provides the molecular basis of epileptic
encephalopathy in two patients
After showing that SDII is required for Geph ﬁlament formation, LLPS
and receptor clustering, we asked whether we can disclose the
mechanistic basis of epileptic encephalopathy in previously identiﬁed
pathogenic variants of Geph, GephG375D and GephD422N, which are both
located within SDII and in case of GephG375D shows a strong impairment
in LLPS formation14,31,33.
Similar to GephEWT, we puriﬁed GephEG375D to high homogeneity
and added the GlyR-loop in a ﬁve-fold molar excess before cryo-EM
sample preparation (Supplementary Fig. 1b). The resulting micro-
graphs were of high quality, showing numerous evenly distributed
particles (Supplementary Fig. 13a). Unsupervised 2D classiﬁcation
yielded high-quality class averages showing dimeric structures from
various angles, but no indications of ﬁlament formation. Moreover, the
observed structures were more compact than those observed for
GephEWT (Supplementary Fig. 13b). Further 3D processing yielded a
378
394
413
426
VGETRCKKVCTSKSDLRSNDFSIVGSLPRDFELSNYDCYGKPIEVNNGL
90°
90°
a
b
c
d
e
Fig. 4 | GlyR-loop occupies both binding sites within one GephE dimer simul-
taneously. a Surface representation of GephE dimer in complex with GlyR-loop
lowpass ﬁltered to 6 Å (light blue) with highlighted density depicting the position of
GlyR-loop (orange). b Surface representation of GephE dimer without GlyR-loop
lowpass ﬁltered to 6 Å. For further information, see Supplementary Fig. 10).
c GephE dimer in complex with GlyR-loop modeled after structure prediction.
GephE dimer is shown in surface presentation with highlighted GephE monomers
(light gray, dark gray). GlyR-loop is shown in stick presentation with color-coded
amino acid sequence. Amino acid sequence of modeled GlyR-loop with respective
positions is depicted beneath. d Magniﬁcation of GlyR-loop binding site one
occupied by the core binding motive of GlyR-loop (red). e Magniﬁcation of second
GlyR-loop binding site occupied by the C-terminally extended binding motive of
GlyR-loop (blue).
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-63748-w
Nature Communications|        (2025) 16:8293 
7

ﬁnal map of the GephE dimer with a global resolution of 3.2 Å, which,
while showing density for the GlyR-loop was lacked density for the SDII
region in both subunits (Fig. 5e and Supplementary Fig. 13c, d). Given
that neither 3D sorting nor local reﬁnement allowed us to recover
density in the SDII region, we hypothesize that the SDII in GephEG375D is
unable to fold properly. This ﬁnding is supported by GephEG375D aSEC
experiments showing a larger hydrodynamic radius than GephEWT
(Supplementary Fig. 1b). In conclusion, GephEG375D exhibits an
unstructured SDII, thus leading to a loss of Geph ﬁlament formation.
Next, we expressed and puriﬁed the second pathogenic Geph
variant, GephED422N, and prepared it for cryo-EM. The resulting micro-
graphs were of high quality, showing numerous evenly distributed
particles (Supplementary Fig. 14a). Unsupervised 2D classiﬁcation
yielded high-quality class averages showing dimeric structures from
SDII
SDII`
R379
D422
a
c
b
d
e
g
h
i
f
P
55
[kDa]
ctrl
WT
GephE
ctrl
D422N
ctrl
R379D
ctrl
WT
ΔSDII
ctrl
ΔSDII +
GephEΔSDII
WT +
GlyR-LD
D422N +
GlyR-LD
R379D +
GlyR-LD
GlyR-LD
GephE
GlyR-LD
WT +
GlyR-LD
GlyR-LD
35
25
15
S
P
S
P
S
P
S
S
P
P
S
P
S
P
S
P
S
P
S
<0.0001
<0.0001
<0.0001
<0.0001
<0.0001
<0.0001
<0.0001
0.6278
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-63748-w
Nature Communications|        (2025) 16:8293 
8

various angles, but no indications of ﬁlament formation. Different
from GephEG375D, the observed structures were similar to those
observed for GephEWT, including folded SDIIs (Supplementary Fig. 14b,
c). Further 3D processing yielded a ﬁnal map of the GephE dimer with a
global resolution of 3.1 Å, which showed density for the SDII region in
both subunits, allowing for C2 symmetric 3D reconstruction (Fig. 5f
and Supplementary Fig. 14d, e). Importantly, while GephED422N showed
a completely folded SDII, no ﬁlament formation was evident either
during 2D or 3D processing (Fig. 5f and Supplementary Fig. 14c).
Therefore, the substitution of Asp422 by Asn appears to fully abolish
SDII-based ﬁlament formation. Close inspection of the SDII-SDII'
interface in our GephEWT structure identiﬁed a possible ion bridge
between Asp422 and Arg379 of the neighboring GephE dimer (Fig. 5g).
To investigate the potential importance of this hypothesized ion
bridge, we created a variant in which Arg379 was substituted with Asp
(GephER379D) to reverse the charge and thus disrupt the hypothesized
ion bridge. Similar to GephED422N, GephER379D showed completely fol-
ded SDIIs but no ﬁlament formation, demonstrating that this ion
bridge is a crucial component of the ﬁlament interface (Supplemen-
tary Fig. 15).
Next, we corroborated that for both the known patient mutant
GephED422N and the mutant GephER379D the inability to form ﬁlaments
affects their ability to undergo LLPS in vitro. Indeed, both mutant
variants exhibited strongly reduced LLPS formation comparable to
GephΔSDII. (Fig. 5a, b).
Finally, to corroborate that the inability to form ﬁlaments also has
physiological
relevance,
we
expressed
either
mScarlet-tagged
GephG375D or GephD422N constructs in dissociated murine hippocampal
neurons lacking endogenous gephyrin. Similar to mScarlet-GephΔSDII,
mScarlet-GephG375D and mScarlet-GephD422N were diffusely localized
throughout hippocampal neurons and did not form any postsynaptic
clusters (Fig. 5h, i).
Combined, our structural and functional studies of Geph dis-
closed a hitherto unknown type of oligomerization of GephE dimers,
leading to Geph ﬁlament formation. This interaction is stabilized by a
single GlyR-loop bound to both receptor bindings sites of a GephE
dimer. Deleting the ﬁlament forming SDII or introducing either known
pathogenic mutations or targeted disruption of an ion-bridge, all
prohibited GephE ﬁlament formation, caused loss in LLPS and
impaired synapse formation in neurons.
Discussion
Our structural and functional data uncovered GephE dimer ﬁlament
formation as the underlying molecular mechanism for the formation
of Geph-containing postsynaptic densities. Negative stain EM data
revealed pronounced conformational heterogeneity of full-length
gephyrin, consistent with previous studies, which suggest structural
variability in puriﬁed Geph trimers ranging from so-called 'closed' to
'open' states20. The addition of the GlyR-loop not only reduced overall
heterogeneity, but also led to the formation of ﬁlamentous assemblies
of Geph. Cryo-EM data revealed that these ﬁlaments are mediated by a
hitherto unknown SDII-SDII' interface, which was corroborated by
structural data derived both from full-length gephyrin and various
GephE variants. Our observation that a single GlyR-loop could bridge
two GephE subunits by occupying both previously identiﬁed GlyR-loop
binding sites simultaneously highlights the important role of receptor
binding in GephE dimerization and ﬁlament formation: While previous
studies have shown that multiple receptor binding sites increase afﬁ-
nity towards gephyrin24, the here observed binding of a single peptide
bridging both receptor sites in GephE would support a receptor-
mediated stabilization of GephE dimers, thus probably lowering the
concentration threshold required for ﬁlament formation. Notably,
gephyrin variants with either a deleted SDII or with single residue
substitutions in SDII derived either from epileptic patients or designed
based on our atomic model were collectively unable to form GephE
ﬁlaments, to engage in LLPS or to form postsynaptic clusters. Neither
deletion of SDII nor the pathogenic amino acid substitutions affected
Geph's ability to bind the receptor drastically, with only minor loss in
afﬁnity observed14,33. This ﬁnding highlights that the underlying cause
of the pathological loss of gephyrin function is most likely the inability
to form Geph ﬁlaments. Given that ﬁlament formation requires a cri-
tical interplay of GephE dimers, the lack of ﬁlament formation by
GephG375D variant further explains its dominant nature in the patient
with the hemizygous GPHN mutation14.
Previous electron tomography (ET) has uncovered that the PSD of
inhibitory synapses forms a thin layer of 5-15 nm width underneath the
postsynaptic membrane51. Cryo-ET revealed a mesophasic organiza-
tion of inhibitory receptors in the postsynaptic membrane, with most
receptors having four or fewer neighbors assembling into short,
curved and presumably branched assemblies26. Our structural obser-
vation that Geph is able to form ﬂexible ﬁlaments, with trimeric GephG
forming the basis for GephE dimer-linked ﬁlaments and/or branching
points, aligns well with the Cryo-ET data. In addition, an underlying
ﬁlament network at inhibitory PSD was identiﬁed in previous ET stu-
dies of GABAergic synapses, revealing ﬁlaments with a length of
approx. 24 to 32 nm29, which would correlate to ﬁlaments consisting of
two to three GephE dimers, agreeing with what has been observed in
our study. In contrast to the previously proposed hexagonal lattice
model, relying on GephG trimer and GephE dimer interactions,
gephyrin ﬁlaments not only help to understand the observed regular
assemblies of inhibitory receptors in the postsynaptic membrane, but
also provide further understanding of the mode of action of patho-
genic gephyrin variants14,33. Our data lend themselves to the conclusion
that a hexagonal lattice is neither a requirement nor a precursor for
gephyrin ﬁlaments, given that gephyrin ﬁlaments were also observed
for isolated GephE dimers. However, based on studies from human
Fig. 5 | Proper SDII folding and build-up of Gephyrin ﬁlaments are essential for
synaptic cluster formation and LLPS. a Representative SDS-PAGE of sedimenta-
tion experiment showing the amount of protein present in pellet (P) and super-
natant (S) fractions of GephE variants (WT, ΔSDII, D422N, R379D) either without
GlyT-LD (ctrl) or with (+GlyR-LD). b Quantiﬁcation of band intensities in the pellet
fraction; n = 3 presented as means ± SD. Data were analyzed by one-way ANOVA
(F9,20 = 47.78, p = 1.42·10-11), Tukey's post hoc test; p-values are indicated.
c Representative images of gephyrinﬂoxed/ﬂoxed murine hippocampal neurons infec-
ted with moxBFP-Cre and either mScarlet-GephWT or mScarlet-GephΔSDII (pseudo-
colored ﬁre LUT, magenta) and immunostained against vesicular GABA transporter
(vGAT, green) and GABAAR γ2 subunit (yellow). d Quantiﬁcation of gephyrin clus-
ters from c per cell area; n = 20 images per condition from four independent cul-
tures. Each data point represents cluster density per acquired image, means ± SD
are indicated. Data were analyzed by unpaired, two-tailed Welch's two-sample t-test
(t(19.3) = 13.8, p = 1.92·10-11). e Surface representation of GephEG375D dimer high-
lighting the positions of SDI (red), SDIII (yellow) and SDIV (blue) of one monomer.
The second monomer is shown in gray. Scale bar 50 Å. f Surface representation of
GephED422N dimer highlighting the positions of SDI (red), SDII (green) SDIII (yellow)
and SDIV (blue) of one monomer. The second monomer is shown in gray. Scale
similar to (f).g Close up depiction of the SDII interfacehighlighting D422 situated in
SDII' and R379 in close proximity situated in SDII. h Representative images of
gephyrinﬂoxed/ﬂoxed murine hippocampal neurons infected with moxBFP-Cre and
either mScarlet-GephWT, mScarlet-GephG375D or mScarlet-GephD422N (pseudo-colored
ﬁre LUT, magenta) and immunostained against vesicular GABA transporter (vGAT,
green) and GABAAR γ2 subunit (yellow). i Quantiﬁcation of gephyrin clusters from h
per cell area; n = 20 images per condition from four independent cultures. Each
data point represents cluster density per acquired image; means ± SD are indicated.
Data were analyzed by one-way ANOVA (F2,57 = 34.94, p = 1.25·10-10), Tukey's post
hoc test; p-values are indicated. Cartoon bar diagrams illustrate the Geph con-
structs used in this experiment (green: GephG, gray: GephC, light green: SDII, red:
position of amino acid substitution).
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-63748-w
Nature Communications|        (2025) 16:8293 
9

patients with different forms of neuropsychiatric disorders harboring
gephyrin deletions in either GephG, GephC, or GephE, we conclude
that proper oligomerization of both GephG and GephE is required for
synapse formation52. Future studies are needed to structurally resolve
the GephG in gephyrin full-length ﬁlaments. One possible role is gen-
erating branching points that connect gephyrin ﬁlaments, thus incor-
porating elements of the hexagonal lattice model.
Multiple lines of studies have shown speciﬁc organization of
receptors and PSD protein throughout the synapse, indicating reg-
ulatory mechanisms controlling protein density26,29,30,53. Receptor ICD
binding stabilizes the GephE dimer, thereby fostering ﬁlament forma-
tion and PSD stabilization. Our data also suggests that in the absence of
receptors, Geph retains its ability to self-organize but only at elevated
protein concentration. While we did not observe ﬁlament formation
during SEC experiments, neither in the presence nor in the absence of
the GlyR-loop, we detected ﬁlaments also in the absence of the GlyR-
loop during cryo-EM. In negative stain EM, we only observed ﬁlaments
in the presence of GlyR-loop. Geph concentration is a main difference
between these three experimental approaches, with SEC having the
lowest, negative stain-EM an intermediate, and cryo-EM the highest
concentration, especially when accounting for a concentration increase
due to the blotting process during grid preparation38. Considering an
ice thickness of approximately 200 Å and a particle density ranging
from 300 to 1000 particles per micrograph, as estimated from our data,
a Geph concentration between 0.2 mM and 0.7 mM can be assumed54.
According to high-resolution light microscopy of postsynaptic
densities, it was estimated that an inhibitory PSD contains approxi-
mately 200-300 gephyrin molecules12,28. Based on an average synapse
area of 0.07 µm² and a thickness of 0.015 µm, this corresponds to an
estimated gephyrin concentration between 0.34 mM and 0.51 mM
within the inhibitory PSD, which agrees well with the gephyrin con-
centration estimated on our cryo-EM grids51. Additionally, it can be
assumed that the length of gephyrin ﬁlaments correlates with
increased or decreased local protein concentrations in the PSD26,53,55.
Local increase in receptor and gephyrin concentration likely inﬂuences
the formation of nanodomains within the synapse, which are char-
acterized by elevated receptor and PSD protein concentrations, which
is an underlying prerequisite for LLPS at the postsynapse30,53,55.
A structural comparison of apo- and ﬁlament-GephE revealed that
binding to GlyR-loop alters the position of SDII closer to the position
observed in GephE ﬁlaments. This observation suggests a GlyR-ICD-
induced conformational change rendering SDII more prone to engage
in GephE ﬁlament formation. This agrees with the previous X-ray
structure of GephE, which identiﬁed SDII as the most mobile part of
GephE4,8. As SDII harbors one half of the substrate binding site for
gephyrin's enzymatic function, the conversion of molybdopterin-
adenylate into molybdenum cofactor44, this activity may also impact
SDII position and thus ﬁlament formation. Additionally, a negatively
charged and partially disordered region in SDII, opposite to the here
identiﬁed ﬁlament-forming SDII-interface, has been found crucial for
LLPS formation, probably impacting the conformational position of
SDII within GephE dimers as well31.
The concept of LLPS as an underlying mechanistic principleinPSD
formation has been put forward in recent years31,32,56,57. LLPS often
requires increased local protein concentration, intrinsically unstruc-
tured protein motifs and a deﬁned window of ion strength31,58-61.
Although the unstructured GephC could not be resolved in our cryo-
EM study, we can exclude its direct participation in the protein-protein
interaction. It rather enabled the alignment of various GephE dimers
derived from different Geph trimers and may play a regulatory role in
the prohibition of phase separation at lower concentrations62,63. Given
that an SDII-deﬁcient Geph variant was unable to form ﬁlaments, to
engage in LLPS and to form synapses, we conclude that SDII-
dependent GephE ﬁlaments contribute strongly to the underlying
mechanistic principle of Geph LLPS31. Furthermore, in line with
previous studies that identiﬁed a lack in LLPS for the pathogenic
GephEG375D variant31, we could now resolve the underlying cause as a
loss in SDII folding, thus prohibiting GephE ﬁlament formation while
receptor binding remained largely uncompromised. Finally, in the
pathogenic variant GephD422N a critical salt bridge within the SDII
interaction site has been abolished underlying the functional impor-
tance of a precise alignment of both SDII domains during GephE ﬁla-
ment formation. In this regard, receptor binding was slightly reduced,
but gephyrin's enzymatic function remained unchanged33.
In summary, our data collectively support the concept of LLPS-
driven subcellular compartmentalization and identiﬁed GephE ﬁla-
ment formation as the underlying molecular principle that assembles
gephyrin into the PSD of inhibitory synapses58,64.
Methods
Ethics statement
We complied with all relevant ethical regulations for animaltesting and
research. Experiments were approved by the local research ethics
committees (Germany, Landesamt für Natur, Umwelt und Ver-
braucherschutz Nordrhein-Westfalen, reference 2021.A450).
Expression constructs
6His-tagged Geph, GephE WT and GlyR β-loop-intein expression vec-
tors have been described before14,23. 6His-tagged GephEG375D and
GephED422N expression vectors have been described before14,33. For the
6His-tagged GephΔSDII (residues: 1-383, GSGSG-linker, 473-751) var-
iant, the previously described 6His-tagged Geph construct was used as
template23. Deletion of SDII (residue: 383-473) and insertion of GSGSG-
linker was achieved by Gibson Assembly using DpnI restriction enzyme
and the following primers (fw-GGCTCAGGTTCCGGACCCATCGGC-
CACGACATTAA;
rv-CAACCTACCCCCATTCCCAGGCTCAGGTTCCGG
A). For the 6His-tagged GephER379D variant, the previously described
6His-tagged GephE WT construct was used as template23. Side-directed
mutagenesis for GephER379D was achieved by PCR with the following
primers (fw-CTATGCTGTTGATGCTGCTGATGGT; rv-ACCATCAGCAG-
CATCAACAGCATAG) followed by DpnI restriction enzyme digest.
GlyR-DL and GABAAR-ɑ1/3-DL were kindly provided by the Zhang lab31.
Protein expression and puriﬁcation
All gephyrin variants used in this study were recombinantly expressed
in E. coli BL21 (DE3) Rosetta cells in 1x LB medium containing 0.1 mg/ml
ampicillin. Prior to expression, cells were grown until an OD600 of
0.3-0.4 was reached. His-tagged gephyrin variants were expressed for
16 h at 18 °C. His-tagged GephE WT was expressed for 5 h at 25 °C,
whereas GephE variants were expressed for 16 h at 18 °C. Protein
expression
was
induced
by
the
addition
of
isopropyl-β-D-
thiogalactopyranosid (IPTG) to an end-concentration of 250 μM in
the cell culture. After protein expression, cells were harvested by
centrifugation at 4000 × g and resuspended in lysis buffer (50 mM
Tris/HCl, pH 7.5, 250 mM NaCl, 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol, 1x protease
inhibitor (cOmplete, Roche, Basel, Switzerland) and lysozyme from
chicken egg (Sigma-Aldrich) and stored at -20 °C for further use. For
puriﬁcation, the cells were lysed mechanically using EmulsiFlex
(Avestin, Ottawa, Canada) and ultrasound for 3 × 30 s at 45% ampli-
tude. Cytosolic extract was separated from cell debris by centrifuga-
tion at 50,000 × g for 45 min. Prior to Ni-NTA chromatography, the cell
extracts were supplemented with imidazole to 20 mM ﬁnal con-
centration. The cell extract was applied to 10 ml Ni-NTA resin, and
proteins were washed with 10 column volumes (CV) of lysis buffer and
10 CV of lysis buffer containing 40 mM imidazole. Proteins were eluted
with 3 CV lysis buffer containing 300 mM imidazole. All proteins were
further puriﬁed via size exclusion chromatography (SEC) (Superdex
16/600 prep grade, GE Healthcare) using protein buffer (25 mM Tris/
HCl, pH 7.5, 250 mM NaCl, 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol, 5% glycerol). All
puriﬁcation steps were performed at 4 °C. GlyR-βloop was expressed
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-63748-w
Nature Communications|        (2025) 16:8293 
10

and puriﬁed as stated previously23. GlyR-βLD, GABAAR-αLD and
GABAAR-α3LD were puriﬁed according to the protocol provided by Bai
and colleagues31
Isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC)
All experiments were performed with a MicroCal Auto-ITC200 (Mal-
vern, Malvern, United Kingdom) in ITC buffer (25 mM Tris pH 7.5,
250 mM NaCl, 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol, 5% glycerol. The sample cell
was ﬁlled with gephyrin or GephE variants at a concentration of
20-30 μM. GlyR-βloop was ﬁlled into the syringe at a concentration of
250-350 μM. Experiments were conducted at 37 °C with an injection
volume of 1.5-2 μl, a set reference power of 5 μcal/s, spacing time of
180-300 s and a stirring speed of 750 rpm. Data was analyzed using
Origin 7 (OriginLab Corporation), and binding parameters were
derived by applying a one-site or two-site binding model.
Sedimentation assay of in vitro phase separation
For sedimentation assays, proteins were mixed at designated combi-
nations and conditions in a 100 μl ﬁnal volume in assay buffer (25 mM
Tris, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl). After 10 min incubation at room tem-
perature, the mixtures were centrifuged at 16,000 × g for 10 min at
25 °C. Right after centrifugation, the supernatant and pellet were
separated. The pellet was brought to the same volume as the super-
natant. Proteins recovered in supernatant and pellet were analyzed by
the Bradford assays or SDS-PAGE with Coomassie Blue staining. The
band intensities in SDS-PAGE gels were quantiﬁed by ImageJ software.
Relative and absolute amounts of proteins in supernatant and pellet
were calculated based on the input amounts and relative band inten-
sities. Data from three repeats were presented as means ± SD.
Negative stain sample preparation and data collection
For negative stain EM, all samples were SEC puriﬁed prior to grid
preparation using either a Superdex 6 increase 10/300 GL or Superose
6 increase 10/300 GL column with grid buffer (25 mM Tris pH 7.5,
250 mM NaCl, 25 mM Arg/Glu, 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol, 1.5%sucrose).
For grid preparation, protein samples were diluted to a ﬁnal con-
centration of 0.005 mg/ml using grid buffer. Continuous carbon grids
(Quantifoil, Cu 200 mesh) were subjected to glow discharge using a
Zepto Plasma Cleaner (Diener) for 30 s to clean the surface and render
it hydrophilic. 3 µl protein solution was incubated on the grid for
approximately 1 min at room temperature, and then stained with
uranyl formate as described elsewhere65. The grids were stored in the
dark in a dry atmosphere until further use. EM data were acquired
using a Talos L120C (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) electron microscope
equipped with a LaB6 emitter operated at 120 kV. Images were col-
lected automatically using EPU (version 2.12.1.2782REL, Thermo Fisher
Scientiﬁc) on Ceta16M CMOS detector with a calibrated pixel size of
1.86 Å per pixel. Defocus values were set to range from −0.3 to −2.0 µm.
Cryo-EM sample preparation and data collection
Prior to grid preparation, all samples were isolated using a Superdex 6
increase 10/300 GL column with grid buffer. Afterwards, samples were
diluted to a concentration of 0.5 mg/ml using the grid buffer. Protein
samples were applied to a glow-discharged UltrAUfoil R1.2/1.3 Au300
(Quantifoil Micro Tools GmbH), incubated for 5 s, blotted for 3.5 s and
ﬂash-frozen in liquid ethane using a Vitrobot Mark IV device (Thermo
Fisher Scientiﬁc) set to 100% humidity at 21 °C. Grids were stored
under liquid nitrogen conditions until usage. Cryo-EM data were
acquired using a Titan Krios G3i (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) electron
microscope operated at 300 kV with either 0° or 25 ° stage tilt. Images
were collected automatically using EPU (version 2.12.1.2782REL,
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) on a Falcon III direct electron detector with a
calibrated pixel size of 0.862 Å px−1. Movies were collected in counting
mode with a total dose of approximately 30-40 e-/Å2 distributed
among 42 frames. Defocus values ranged from −0.5 to −2.6 μm.
EM image processing
Image processing was performed using cryoSPARC (version 4.4)66.
Movie stacks were ﬁrst corrected for drift and beam-induction motion,
and then used to determine defocus and other CTF-related values.
Only high-quality micrographs with low drift metrics, low astigmatism
and good agreement between experimental and calculated CTFs were
further processed. On these high-quality micrographs, putative parti-
cles were automatically picked based on expected protein diameter,
extracted, and subjected to reference-free 2D classiﬁcation. Repre-
sentative 2D classes were then used for a template-based picking
approach, particles extracted again, subjected to reference-free 2D
classiﬁcation to exclude artefacts, and subsequent 3D classiﬁcation
using C1 symmetry to identify high-quality particles. 3D classiﬁcation
was performed with a target resolution of 6 Å in order to ensure that
secondary-structure elements are also included as a feature in the
classiﬁcation algorithm. Particles showing protein-like density fea-
tures, especially features resembling secondary structure elements,
were further reﬁned using the non-uniform reﬁnement strategy. Sub-
sequent data processing workﬂows differ from this point onwards
between the different datasets (For more information, see supple-
mentary information).
Atomic model building
The atomic model was built starting from the gephyrin E domain
dimer crystal structure (PDB ID 2FTS) and the gephyrin amino
acid sequence (UniProt Q9NQX3). First, Coot (version 0.9.8.02)67 was
used to semi-manually ﬁt amino acids into a single subunit of the EM
density map. Next, Phenix (version 1.21)68 was used to generate a non-
crystallographic symmetry (NCS)-related second subunit and both
subunits were then simultaneously reﬁned against the 3D density map.
This process was iterated until the ﬁt to the density map and geometric
parameters converged. The ﬁnal atomic model accounts for residues
31 to 556. For further details and statistics, see Supplementary Table 1.
Molecular visualization and analysis were done using UCSF ChimeraX
(version 1.9)69
In the ﬁnal atomic model, the following amino acid sequences
were reduced to their respective C-alpha: ChainA/LEU 432-ILE 447,
ChainA/VAL 574-ASP 580, ChainB/VAL 574-ASP 580, ChainC/LEU 432-
ILE 447.
DNA constructs
mScarlet-Gphn
C4c
from
pAAV-hSyn-fDIO-mScarlet-Gphn_C4c
(Addgene plasmid # 194974; RRID:Addgene_194974) and pAAV-hSyn-
fDIO-mScarlet-Gphn_P1
(Addgene
plasmid
#
[194972];
RRID:
Addgene_194972) were initially subcloned into pGP-AAV-syn-FLEX-
jGCaMP7s, in which the WPRE was removed using HindIII and NotI
(pGP-AAV-syn-FLEX-jGCaMP7s-WPRE was a gift from Douglas Kim &
GENIE Project (Addgene plasmid # 104491; RRID:Addgene_104491))
using NEBuilder HiFi DNA Assembly (NEB). Since one of the AAV2 ITR
sites was destroyed in the process, the inserts mScarlet-Gphn C4c
and mScarlet-Gphn_P1, including loxP and lox2272 sites, were sub-
cloned
into
the
backbone
of
pAAV-hSyn-fDIO-mScarlet-Gphn_P1
(Addgene plasmid # 194972; RRID:Addgene_194972) using HindIII
and Eco47III. His-tagged Gphn C4c (P2) ΔSDII in pQE80 was
generated by site-directed mutagenesis using forward GGCTCA
GGTTCCGGACCCATCGGCCACGACATTAA
and
reverse
TCCGGAA
CCTGAGCCTGGGAATGGGGGTAGGTTG primers. His-tagged Gphn (P1)
D422N in pQE80 was generated by site-directed mutagenesis using
forward TGCGGTGCTAATGCAGTAGTG and reverse CACTACTGCAT-
TAGCACCGCA primers. His-tagged Gphn (P1) G375D in pQE80 was
generated by site-directed mutagenesis using forward CATCAG-
TAAAAGATGACTATGCTGTTCG
and
reverse
CGAACAGCATAGT
CATCTTTTACTGATG primers. Gphn C4c (P2) ΔSDII, Gphn (P1) D422N,
and Gphn (P1) G375D were subcloned into the backbone of pAAV-hSyn-
FLEX-mScarlet-Gphn C4c or pAAV-hSyn-FLEX-mScarlet-Gphn P1 using
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-63748-w
Nature Communications|        (2025) 16:8293 
11

XhoI and BshTI restriction sites. pAAV-CamKIIa-moxBFP-P2A-Cre was
generated in two steps. First, pAAV-CamKIIa-moxBFP-Cre was gener-
ated by subcloning Cre from pAAV.CMV.HI.eGFP-Cre.WPRE.SV40 (a
gift from James M. Wilson (Addgene plasmid # 105545; RRI-
D:Addgene_105545))
into
pAAV-CamKIIa-moxBFP-WPRE
(Addgene
plasmid # 194976; RRID:Addgene_194976). In the second step, the P2A
site was inserted in between moxBFP and Cre via site-directed muta-
genesis using forward GGCGACGTGGAGGAGAACCCCGGCCCCGCCGG
CAGCATGTCCGGAGAGCAAAAGCTG and reverse primers TCTCCTCC
ACGTCGCCGGCCTGCTTCAGCAGGCTGAAGTTGGTGGCGCCGCTGCC
CTTGTACAGCTCGTCCATGC. The plasmids pAdDeltaF6 (Addgene
plasmid # 112867; RRID:Addgene_112867) and pAAV2/1 (Addgene
plasmid # 112862; RRID:Addgene_112862) were gifts from James M.
Wilson. All DNA constructs were conﬁrmed by Sanger sequencing
(Euroﬁns), and the integrity of AAV2 ITR sites was conﬁrmed by ana-
lytical SmaI restriction digest.
Primary hippocampal cultures
Floxed gephyrin mice48 were a gift from Ralph A. Nawrotzki. Floxed
gephyrin mice were back-crossed to C57BL/6NRj. Mice were housed at
22 ± 2 °C, with a humidity of 55 ± 10%, on a 12 h light-dark cycle with
free access to food and water.
Dissociated primary hippocampal cultures were prepared from
homozygous gephyrin ﬂoxed embryos (E17.5) of either sex, which were
obtained from a total of four homozygous parental pairs. Per pre-
paration, all embryonal hippocampi obtained from one pregnant
mouse were pooled prior to cell dissociation. After dissociation,
65,000 cells were seeded on Poly-L-lysine-coated 13-mm cover slips.
Cultures were grown in 0.5 ml per well neurobasal medium supple-
mented with B-27, N-2, GlutaMAXTM (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc), and
Pen/Strep. Recombinant AAV1 particles were diluted in Neurobasal
medium with supplements before they were added to the cultures.
Cultures were infected after 4 days in vitro (DIV) with 1 × 108 viral
genome copies (GC) of moxBFP or moxBFP-P2A-Cre and after 8 DIV
with 5 × 108 GC of either AAV-hSyn-FLEX-mScarlet-Gphn C4c. On DIV
11, 50% media was exchanged for fresh neurobasal media with
supplements.
rAAV2/1 preparation
Recombinant AAV2/1 particles were prepared in HEK293T cells (DSMZ
no. ACC 635) according to the protocol by Kimura and colleagues70.
Viral particles were precipitated with PEG/NaCl and subsequently
cleared via chloroform extraction70. Purity of viral preparations was
assessed with SDS-PAGE, and AAV titers were determined using Gel
green®
(Biotium)
protocol71.
Fluorescence
was
measured
at
507 ± 5 nm excitation and 528 ± 5 nm emission using a plate reader
equipped with monochromators (Tecan Spark).
Immunocytochemistry
Cells were ﬁxed at DIV14 with 4% formaldehyde in PBS for 15 min and
quenched with NH4Cl in PBS at room temperature (RT). All subsequent
incubation and wash steps (PBS) were performed at RT. After blocking/
permeabilization for 1 h with 10% goat serum, 1% BSA, 0.2% Triton
X-100 in PBS, the following primary antibodies (Synaptic Systems)
were used: anti-vesicular GABA transporter (vGAT) (1:1000, #131003)
for inhibitory presynaptic terminals; anti-GABAAR γ2 (1:500, #224004)
for postsynaptic GABAARs. The following secondary antibodies were
used: goat anti-rabbit AlexaFluor 488 (1:500, #A-11034, Thermo Fisher
Scientiﬁc) and goat anti-guinea pig AlexaFluor 647 (1:500, #ab150187,
Abcam). Coverslips were mounted with Mowiol/Dabco.
Confocal microscopy and image analysis
Image stacks [0.3-μm z-step size, 3432 × 3432 (144.77 × 144.77 μm)]
were acquired on a Leica TCS SP8 LIGHTNING upright confocal
microscope with an HC PL APO CS2 63×/1.30 glycerol objective,
equipped with hybrid detectors (Leica HyD) and the following diode
lasers: 405, 488, 552, and 638 nm. LIGHTNING adaptive deconvolution
using "Mowiol" setting was applied. Images were segmented and
analyzed in an automated fashion using ImageJ/FIJI 1.53c (https://
imagej.net/software/ﬁji/), and the code is available online at GitHub
(https://github.com/FilLieb/quantitative_synapse_analysis).
Statistics and reproducibility
Micrographs shown for the cryo-EM experiments are representative
for the respective dataset. Statistical analyses were performed using R
version 4.2.2 (2022-10-31 ucrt), readxl v. 1.4.1, rstatix v. 0.7.1, tidyverse
v. 1.3.2 in Rstudio environment (https://www.rstudio.com/), Platform:
x86 64-w64-mingw32/x64 (64-bit). Exact p-values can be found in the
source data.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature
Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data availability
Unless otherwise stated, all data supporting the results of this study
can be found in the article, supplementary, and source data ﬁles.
Plasmids have been made available via Addgene [https://www.
addgene.org/]. The EM maps for GephEWT, GephEG375D, GephED422N,
and GephER379D have been deposited in the EMDB under accession
codes EMD-51644, EMD-54820, EMD-54821, EMD-54824. The raw
electron microscopy imaging data are available on request due to their
large size. Atomic coordinates for GephEWT have been deposited in the
Protein Data Bank under the accession code 9GW9. Source data are
provided with this paper.
Code availability
The code used for the image analysis is available at GitHub [https://
github.com/FilLieb/quantitative_synapse_analysis].
References
1.
Fritschy, J.-M., Harvey, R. J. & Schwarz, G. Gephyrin: where do we
stand, where do we go? Trends Neurosci. 31, 257-264 (2008).
2.
Tretter, V. et al. Gephyrin, the enigmatic organizer at GABAergic
synapses. Front. Cell. Neurosci. 6, 23 (2012).
3.
Tyagarajan, S. K. & Fritschy, J.-M. Gephyrin: a master regulator of
neuronal function? Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 15, 141-156 (2014).
4.
Kim, E. Y. et al. Deciphering the structural framework of glycine
receptor anchoring by gephyrin. EMBO J. 25, 1385-1395 (2006).
5.
Kowalczyk, S. et al. Direct binding of GABAA receptor β2 and
β3 subunits to gephyrin. Eur. J. Neurosci. 37, 544-554 (2013).
6.
Maric, H.-M., Mukherjee, J., Tretter, V., Moss, S. J. & Schindelin, H.
Gephyrin-mediated γ-aminobutyric acid type A and glycine recep-
tor clustering relies on a common binding site. J. Biol. Chem. 286,
42105-42114 (2011).
7.
Maric, H. M. et al. Molecular basis of the alternative recruitment of
GABAA versus glycine receptors through gephyrin. Nat. Commun.
5, 5767 (2014).
8.
Schrader, N. et al. Biochemical characterization of the high afﬁnity
binding between the glycine receptor and gephyrin. J. Biol. Chem.
279, 18733-18741 (2004).
9.
Calamai, M. et al. Gephyrin oligomerization controls GlyR mobility
and synaptic clustering. J. Neurosci. 29, 7639-7648 (2009).
10.
Hannan, S. et al. GABAAR isoform and subunit structural motifs
determine synaptic and extrasynaptic receptor localisation. Neu-
ropharmacology 169, 107540 (2020).
11.
Kirsch, J. & Betz, H. The postsynaptic localization of the glycine
receptor-associated protein gephyrin is regulated by the cytoske-
leton. J. Neurosci. 15, 4148 LP-4144156 (1995).
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-63748-w
Nature Communications|        (2025) 16:8293 
12

12.
Patrizio, A., Renner, M., Pizzarelli, R., Triller, A. & Specht, C. G. Alpha
subunit-dependent glycine receptor clustering and regulation of
synaptic receptor numbers. Sci. Rep. 7, 10899 (2017).
13.
Yu, W. et al. Gephyrin clustering is required for the stability of
GABAergic synapses. Mol. Cell. Neurosci. 36, 484-500 (2007).
14.
Dejanovic, B. et al. Simultaneous impairment of neuronal and
metabolic function of mutated gephyrin in a patient with epileptic
encephalopathy. EMBO Mol. Med 7, 1580-1594 (2015).
15.
Förstera, B. et al. Irregular RNA splicing curtails postsynaptic
gephyrin in the cornu ammonis of patients with epilepsy. Brain 133,
3778-3794 (2010).
16.
Herweg, J. & Schwarz, G. Splice-speciﬁc glycine receptor binding,
folding, and phosphorylation of the scaffolding protein gephyrin. J.
Biol. Chem. 287, 12645-12656 (2012).
17.
Pfeiffer, F., Graham, D. & Betz, H. Puriﬁcation by afﬁnity chromato-
graphy of the glycine receptor of rat spinal cord. J. Biol. Chem. 257,
9389-9393 (1982).
18.
Prior, P. et al. Primary structure and alternative splice variants of
gephyrin, a putative glycine receptor-tubulin linker protein. Neuron
8, 1161-1170 (1992).
19.
Schwarz, G., Schrader, N., Mendel, R. R., Hecht, H.-J. & Schindelin,
H. Crystal structures of human gephyrin and plant Cnx1 G domains:
comparative analysis and functional implications. J. Mol. Biol. 312,
405-418 (2001).
20. Sander, B. et al. Structural characterization of gephyrin by AFM and
SAXS reveals a mixture of compact and extended states. Acta
Crystallogr. D. Biol. Crystallogr. 69, 2050-2060 (2013).
21.
Sola, M., Kneussel, M., Heck, I. S., Betz, H. & Weissenhorn, W. X-ray
crystal structure of the trimeric N-terminal domain of gephyrin. J.
Biol. Chem. 276, 25294-25301 (2001).
22. Sola, M. et al. Structural basis of dynamic glycine receptor clus-
tering by gephyrin. EMBO J. 23, 2510-2519 (2004).
23. Grünewald, N. et al. Sequences ﬂanking the gephyrin-binding site
of GlyRβ tune receptor stabilization at synapses. eNeuro https://doi.
org/10.1523/ENEURO.0042-17.2018 (2018).
24. Maric, H. M., Kasaragod, V. B. & Schindelin, H. Modulation of
gephyrin-glycine receptor afﬁnity by multivalency. ACS Chem. Biol.
9, 2554-2562 (2014).
25. Saiyed, T. et al. Molecular basis of gephyrin clustering at inhibitory
synapses: role of G- and E-domain interactionS. J. Biol. Chem. 282,
5625-5632 (2007).
26. Liu, Y.-T. et al. Mesophasic organization of GABAA receptors in
hippocampal inhibitory synapses. Nat. Neurosci. 23,
1589-1596 (2020).
27.
Rubinski, A. & Ziv, N. E. Remodeling and tenacity of inhibitory
synapses: relationships with network activity and neighboring
excitatory synapses. PLoS Comput Biol. 11, e1004632 (2015).
28. Specht, C. G. et al. Quantitative nanoscopy of inhibitory synapses:
counting gephyrin molecules and receptor binding sites. Neuron
79, 308-321 (2013).
29. Linsalata, A. E., Chen, X., Winters, C. A. & Reese, T. S. Electron
tomography on γ-aminobutyric acid-ergic synapses reveals a dis-
continuous postsynaptic network of ﬁlaments. J. Comp. Neurol.
522, 921-936 (2014).
30. Pennacchietti, F. et al. Nanoscale molecular reorganization
of the inhibitory postsynaptic density is a determinant of
GABAergic synaptic potentiation. J. Neurosci. 37, 1747
LP-1741756 (2017).
31.
Bai, G., Wang, Y. & Zhang, M. Gephyrin-mediated formation of
inhibitory postsynaptic density sheet via phase separation. Cell Res
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41422-020-00433-1 (2020).
32. Lee, G. et al. Thermodynamic modulation of gephyrin condensation
by inhibitory synapse components. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 121,
e2313236121 (2024).
33. Macha, A. et al. Biallelic gephyrin variants lead to impaired
GABAergic inhibition in a patient with developmental and epileptic
encephalopathy. Hum. Mol. Genet 31, 901-913 (2022).
34. Mayr, S. J., Mendel, R.-R. & Schwarz, G. Molybdenum cofactor
biology, evolution and deﬁciency. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1868,
118883 (2021).
35. Smolinsky, B., Eichler, S. A., Buchmeier, S., Meier, J. C. & Schwarz,
G. Splice-speciﬁc functions of gephyrin in molybdenum cofactor
biosynthesis. J. Biol. Chem. 283, 17370-17379 (2008).
36. Johannes, L., Fu, C.-Y. & Schwarz, G. Molybdenum cofactor deﬁ-
ciency in humans. Molecules 27, 6896 (2022).
37. Grubmuller, H. & Bock, L. V. Effects of cryo-EM freezing on struc-
tural ensembles. Biophys. J. 120, 117a (2021).
38. Klebl, D. P. et al. Need for speed: examining protein behavior during
CryoEM grid preparation at different timescales. Structure 28,
1238-1248.e4 (2020).
39. Punjani, A. & Fleet, D. J. 3D ﬂexible reﬁnement: structure and
motion of ﬂexible proteins from cryo-EM. bioRxiv https://doi.org/10.
1101/2021.04.22.440893 (2021).
40. Cianfrocco, M. A., Wong-Barnum, M., Youn, C., Wagner, R. &
Leschziner, A. COSMIC2: A science gateway for cryo-electron
microscopy structure determination. in Practice and Experience in
Advanced Research Computing 2017: Sustainability, Success and
Impact (Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,
USA, 2017).
41.
Baek, M. et al. Accurate prediction of protein structures and inter-
actions using a three-track neural network. Science (1979) 373,
871-876 (2021).
42. Hiranuma, N. et al. Improved protein structure reﬁnement guided
by deep learning based accuracy estimation. Nat. Commun. https://
doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.17.209643 (2020).
43. Krausze, J. et al. Dimerization of the plant molybdenum insertase
Cnx1E is required for synthesis of the molybdenum cofactor. Bio-
chem. J. 474, 163-178 (2016).
44. Probst, C. et al. Mechanism of molybdate insertion into pterin-
based molybdenum cofactors. Nat. Chem. 13, 758-765 (2021).
45. Maric, H. M. et al. Gephyrin-binding peptides visualize postsynaptic
sites and modulate neurotransmission. Nat. Chem. Biol. 13,
153-160 (2017).
46. Abramson, J. et al. Accurate structure prediction of biomolecular
interactions with AlphaFold 3. Nature 630, 493-500 (2024).
47. Chen, X., Wu, X., Wu, H. & Zhang, M. Phase separation at the
synapse. Nat. Neurosci. 23, 301-310 (2020).
48. O'Sullivan, G. A. et al. Forebrain-speciﬁc loss of synaptic GABAA
receptors results in altered neuronal excitability and synaptic
plasticity in mice. Mol. Cell. Neurosci. 72, 101-113 (2016).
49. Deng, L. et al. Sequential postsynaptic maturation governs the
temporal order of GABAergic and glutamatergic synaptogenesis in
rat embryonic cultures. J. Neurosci. 27, 10860 (2007).
50. Grabrucker, A., Vaida, B., Bockmann, J. & Boeckers, T. M. Synapto-
genesis of hippocampal neurons in primary cell culture. Cell Tissue
Res. 338, 333-341 (2009).
51.
Tao, C.-L. et al. Differentiation and characterization of excitatory and
inhibitory synapses by cryo-electron tomography and correlative
microscopy. J. Neurosci. 38, 1493 LP-1491510 (2018).
52. Lionel, A. C. et al. Rare exonic deletions implicate the synaptic
organizer Gephyrin (GPHN) in risk for autism, schizophrenia and
seizures. Hum. Mol. Genet. 22, 2055-2066 (2013).
53. Crosby, K. C. et al. Nanoscale subsynaptic domains underlie the
organization of the inhibitory synapse. Cell Rep. 26,
3284-3297.e3 (2019).
54. Brown, H. G. & Hanssen, E. MeasureIce: accessible on-the-ﬂy
measurement of ice thickness in cryo-electron microscopy. Com-
mun. Biol. 5, 817 (2022).
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-63748-w
Nature Communications|        (2025) 16:8293 
13

55. Liu, P.-W., Hosokawa, T. & Hayashi, Y. Regulation of synaptic
nanodomain by liquid-liquid phase separation: A novel mechanism
of synaptic plasticity. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 69, 84-92 (2021).
56. Feng, Z., Zeng, M., Chen, X. & Zhang, M. Neuronal synapses:
microscale signal processing machineries formed by phase
separation? Biochemistry 57, 2530-2539 (2018).
57. Zhu, S. et al. Demixing is a default process for biological con-
densates formed via phase separation. Science 384,
920-928 (2024).
58. Kato, M. et al. Cell-free formation of RNA granules: low complexity
sequence domains form dynamic ﬁbers within hydrogels. Cell 149,
753-767 (2012).
59. Molliex, A. et al. Phase separation by low complexity domains
promotes stress granule assembly and drives Pathological ﬁbrilli-
zation. Cell 163, 123-133 (2015).
60. Nott, T. J. et al. Phase transition of a disordered nuage protein
generates environmentally responsive membraneless organelles.
Mol. Cell 57, 936-947 (2015).
61.
Lin, Y., Currie, S. L. & Rosen, M. K. Intrinsically disordered sequences
enable modulation of protein phase separation through distributed
tyrosine motifs. J. Biol. Chem. 292, 19110-19120 (2017).
62. Feng, Z., Chen, X., Wu, X. & Zhang, M. Formation of biological
condensates via phase separation: Characteristics, analytical
methods, and physiological implications. J. Biol. Chem. 294,
14823-14835 (2019).
63. Alberti, S., Gladfelter, A. & Mittag, T. Considerations and challenges
in studying liquid-liquid phase separation and biomolecular con-
densates. Cell 176, 419-434 (2019).
64. Krainer, G. et al. Reentrant liquid condensate phase of proteins is
stabilized by hydrophobic and non-ionic interactions. Nat. Com-
mun. 12, 1085 (2021).
65. Gunkel, M. M. A. B. E. Revisiting sodium phosphotungstate and
ammonium molybdate as nonradioactive negative-staining agents
for single-particle analysis. Struct. Biol. Commun. 80,
356-362 (2024).
66. Punjani, A., Rubinstein, J. L., Fleet, D. J. & Brubaker, M. A. cryoS-
PARC: algorithms for rapid unsupervised cryo-EM structure deter-
mination. Nat. Methods 14, 290-296 (2017).
67. Emsley, P., Lohkamp, B., Scott, W. G. & Cowtan, K. Features and
development of Coot. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr 66,
486-501 (2010).
68. Adams, P. D. et al. PHENIX: a comprehensive Python-based system
for macromolecular structure solution. Acta Crystallogr. D Biol.
Crystallogr. 66, 213-221 (2010).
69. Pettersen, E. F. et al. UCSF ChimeraX: structure visualization for
researchers, educators, and developers. Protein Sci. 30,
70-82 (2021).
70. Kimura, T. et al. Production of adeno-associated virus vectors for
in vitro and in vivo applications. Sci. Rep. 9, 13601 (2019).
71.
Xu, J., DeVries, S. H. & Zhu, Y. Quantiﬁcation of adeno-associated
virus with safe nucleic acid dyes. Hum. Gene Ther. 31,
1086-1099 (2020).
Acknowledgements
We thank the Biocenter Imaging Facility for their support with confocal
microscopy, Dr. Franziska Neuser and Julia Reich, for their support with
primary hippocampal cultures, as well as Monika Laurien, Simona
Jansen and Jennifer Lange for their technical support. We thank
PD Dr. med. Ralph A. Nawrotzki, Universität Heidelberg, for kindly
sharing ﬂoxed gephyrin mice with us. We thank the StruBiTEM facility for
access to the cryo-EM infrastructure (Cologne, funded by DFG Grant
INST 216/949-1 FUGG) and the RRZK for access to the computing infra-
structure of CHEOPS (Cologne, funded by DFG Grant INST 216/512/1
FUGG). Funding by the German Research Foundation is gratefully
acknowledged by GS (RTG2550/1736 project ID 411422114). Funding by
the Ministry of Culture and Science of the State of North Rhine-
Westphalia is gratefully acknowledged by EB (iHEAD MKW NRW, PB22-
025A). We also thank Prof. Mingjie Zhang, Hong Kong University of
Science and Technology, for kindly sharing their DNA constructs with us.
Author contributions
A.M., E.B., and G.S. designed the research study; A.M., F.L., E.H.W.B.,
I.v.S., and K.B. conducted experiments; A.M., F.L., E.H.W.B., N.B., K.B.,
and M.G. acquired data; A.M., F.L., E.H.W.B., N.B., M.G. analyzed data;
A.M. performed structural model building; A.M., F.L., E.B., and G.S. wrote
the manuscript with input from all coauthors.
Funding
Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains
supplementary material available at
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-63748-w.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to
Elmar Behrmann or Guenter Schwarz.
Peer review information Nature Communications thanks the anon-
ymous reviewers for their contribution to the peer review of this work. A
peer review ﬁle is available.
Reprints and permissions information is available at
http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher's note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jur-
isdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if
changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright
holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2025
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-63748-w
Nature Communications|        (2025) 16:8293 
14

