JULIAN JAYNES 


THE ORIGIN OF 
CONSCIOUSNESS 
IN THE BREAK 
DOWN OF THE 
BICAMERAL MIND 


A R I M F R BOOKS 

Julian Jaynes 

THE ORIGIN OF 
CONSCIOUSNESS IN 
THE BREAK¬ 
DOWN OF THE 
BICAMERAL 
MIND 


A Mariner Book 
HOUGHTON MIFFLIN COMPANY 

BOSTON 

NEW YORK 


First Mariner Books edition 2000 


Copyright © 1976,1990 by Julian Jaynes 
All rights reserved. 

For information about permission to reproduce selections from 
this book, write to Permissions, Houghton Mifflin Company, 
215 Park Avenue South, New York, New York 10003. 

Visit our Web site: www.hmco.com/trade. 

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Jaynes, Julian. 

The origin of consciousness in the breakdown of the 
bicameral mind. 

Includes no index. Scanned in May 2011 by LnZ. 

1. Consciousness. 2. Consciousness — History. I. Title. 
BF311.J36 I28 .2 76-28748 
ISBN 0-618-05707-2 (pbk.) 

Printed in the United States of America 

DOC 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 


See last page of book for credits. 



PREFACE 


T !he central ideas of this inquiry were first summarized 
publicly in an Invited Address to the American Psychologi¬ 
cal Association in Washington in September 1969. Since then, I 
have been something of an itinerant lecturer, various parts of this 
work having been given at colloquia and lectures at various places. 
The resulting attention and discussion have been very helpful. 


Book I presents these ideas as I arrived at them. 

Book II examines the historical evidence. 

Book III makes deductions to explain some modern phenomena. 

Originally, I had planned Books IV and V to complete the 
central positions of the theory. These will now become a separate 
volume, whose working title is The Consequences of Conscious¬ 
ness, not yet scheduled for publication. 


PRINCETON UNIVERSITY, I982 



CONTENTS 


PREFACE V 

INTRODUCTION: THE PROBLEM OF CONSCIOUSNESS I 

Book I 

The Mind of Man 

1. The Consciousness of Consciousness 21 

2. Consciousness 48 

3. The Mind of Iliad 67 

4. The Bicameral Mind 84 

5. The Double Brain 100 

6. The Origin of Civilization 126 

Book II 

The Witness of History 

1. Gods, Graves, and Idols 149 

2. Literate Bicameral Theocracies 176 

3. The Causes of Consciousness 204 

4. A Change of Mind in Mesopotamia 223 

5. The Intellectual Consciousness of Greece 255 

6. The Moral Consciousness of the Khabiru 293 

Book III 

Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 

1. The Quest for Authorization 317 

2. Of Prophets and Possession 339 

3. Of Poetry and Music 361 

4. Hypnosis 379 

5. Schizophrenia 404 

6. The Auguries of Science 433 

AFTERWORD 447 

INDEX 471 



The Origin of Consciousness 
in the Breakdown of the Bicameral Mind 



INTRODUCTION 


The Problem of Consciousness 


O , WHAT A WORLD of unseen visions and heard silences, this 
insubstantial country of the mind! What ineffable essences, 
these touchless rememberings and unshowable reveries! And the 
privacy of it all! A secret theater of speechless monologue and 
prevenient counsel, an invisible mansion of all moods, musings, 
and mysteries, an infinite resort of disappointments and discov¬ 
eries. A whole kingdom where each of us reigns reclusively alone, 
questioning what we will, commanding what we can. A hidden 
hermitage where we may study out the troubled book of what we 
have done and yet may do. An introcosm that is more myself 
than anything I can find in a mirror. This consciousness that is 
myself of selves, that is everything, and yet nothing at all —- 
what is it? 

And where did it come from? 

And why? 

Few questions have endured longer or traversed a more per¬ 
plexing history than this, the problem of consciousness and its 
place in nature. Despite centuries of pondering and experiment, 
of trying to get together two supposed entities called mind and 
matter in one age, subject and object in another, or soul and body 
in still others, despite endless discoursing on the streams, states, 
or contents of consciousness, of distinguishing terms like intui¬ 
tions, sense data, the given, raw feels, the sensa, presentations 
and representations, the sensations, images, and affections of 
structuralist introspections, the evidential data of the scientific 
positivist, phenomenological fields, the apparitions of Hobbes, the 
phenomena of Kant, the appearances of the idealist, the elements 
of Mach, the phanera of Peirce, or the category errors of Ryle, in 





Introduction 


spite of all of these, the problem of consciousness is still with us. 
Something about it keeps returning, not taking a solution. 

It is the difference that will not go away, the difference be¬ 
tween what others see of us and our sense of our inner selves and 
the deep feelings that sustain it. The difference between the you- 
and-me of the shared behavioral world and the unlocatable loca¬ 
tion of things thought about. Our reflections and dreams, and the 
imaginary conversations we have with others, in which never-to- 
be-known-by-anyone we excuse, defend, proclaim our hopes and 
regrets, our futures and our pasts, all this thick fabric of fancy is 
so absolutely different from handable, standable, kickable reality 
with its trees, grass, tables, oceans, hands, stars — even brains! 
How is this possible? How do these ephemeral existences of our 
lonely experience fit into the ordered array of nature that some¬ 
how surrounds and engulfs this core of knowing? 

Men have been conscious of the problem of consciousness 
almost since consciousness began. And each age has described 
