consciousness in terms of its own theme and concerns. In the 
golden age of Greece, when men traveled about in freedom while 
slaves did the work, consciousness was as free as that. Heracli¬ 
tus, in particular, called it an enormous space whose boundaries, 
even by traveling along every path, could never be found out. 1 A 
millennium later, Augustine among the caverned hills of Carth¬ 
age was astonished at the “mountains and hills of my high imagi¬ 
nations,” “the plains and caves and caverns of my memory” with 
its recesses of “manifold and spacious chambers, wonderfully 
furnished with unnumberable stores.” 2 Note how the metaphors 
of mind are the world it perceives. 

The first half of the nineteenth century was the age of the 
great geological discoveries in which the record of the past was 
written in layers of the earth’s crust. And this led to the populari¬ 
zation of the idea of consciousness as being in layers which 

1 Diels, Fragment, 45. 

2 Confessions, 9:7; 10:26, 65. 



THE 


PROBLEM 




recorded the past of the individual, there being deeper and deeper 
layers until the record could no longer be read. This emphasis on 
the unconscious grew until by 1875 most psychologists were 
insisting that consciousness was but a small part of mental life, 
and that unconscious sensations, unconscious ideas, and uncon¬ 
scious judgments made up the majority of mental processes .3 

In the middle of the nineteenth century chemistry succeeded 
geology as the fashionable science, and consciousness from 
James Mill to Wundt and his students, such as Titchener, was the 
compound structure that could be analyzed in the laboratory into 
precise elements of sensations and feelings. 

And as steam locomotives chugged their way into the pattern 
of everyday life toward the end of the nineteenth century, so they 
too worked their way into the consciousness of consciousness, the 
subconscious becoming a boiler of straining energy which de¬ 
manded manifest outlets and when repressed pushed up and out 
into neurotic behavior and the spinning camouflaged fulfillments 
of going-nowhere dreams. 

There is not much we can do about such metaphors except to 
state that that is precisely what they are. 

Now originally, this search into the nature of consciousness 
was known as the mind-body problem, heavy with its ponderous 
philosophical solutions. But since the theory of evolution, it has 
bared itself into a more scientific question. It has become the 
problem of the origin of mind, or, more specifically, the origin of 
consciousness in evolution. Where can this subjective experience 
which we introspect upon, this constant companion of hosts of 
associations, hopes, fears, affections, knowledges, colors, smells, 
toothaches, thrills, tickles, pleasures, distresses, and desires — 
where and how in evolution could all this wonderful tapestry of 
inner experience have evolved? How can we derive this inward¬ 
ness out of mere matter? And if so, when? 

3 For a statement of this effect, see G. H. Lewes, The Physical Basis of Mind (Lon¬ 
don: Triibner, 1877), p. 365. 





Introduction 


This problem has been at the very center of the thinking of the 
twentieth century. And it will be worthwhile here to briefly look 
at some of the solutions that have been proposed. I shall mention 
the eight that I think are most important. 

Consciousness as a Property of Matter 

The most extensive possible solution is attractive mostly to 
physicists. It states that the succession of subjective states that 
we feel in introspection has a continuity that stretches all the way 
back through phylogenetic evolution and beyond into a funda¬ 
mental property of interacting matter. The relationship of con¬ 
sciousness to what we are conscious of is not fundamentally 
different from the relationship of a tree to the ground in which it 
is rooted, or even of the gravitational relationship between two 
celestial bodies. This view was conspicuous in the first quarter of 
this century. What Alexander called compresence or Whitehead 
called prehension provided the groundwork of a monism that 
moved on into a flourishing school called Neo-Realism. If a piece 
of chalk is dropped on the lecture table, that interaction of chalk 
and table is different only in complexity from the perceptions and 
knowledges that fill our minds. The chalk knows the table just 
as the table knows the chalk. That is why the chalk stops at the 
table. 

This is something of a caricature of a very subtly worked out 
position, but it nevertheless reveals that this difficult theory is 
answering quite the wrong question. We are not trying to explain 
how we interact with our environment, but rather the particular 
experience that we have in introspecting. The attractiveness of 
this kind of neo-realism was really a part of an historical epoch 
when the astonishing successes of particle physics were being 
talked of everywhere. The solidity of matter was being dissolved 
into mere mathematical relationships in space, and this seemed 
like the same unphysical quality as the relationship of individuals 
conscious of each other. 



THE PROBLEM 




Consciousness as a Property of Protoplasm 

The next most extensive solution asserts that consciousness is 
not in matter per se; rather it is the fundamental property of all 
living things. It is the very irritability of the smallest one-celled 
animals that has had a continuous and glorious evolution up 
through coelenterates, the protochordates, fish, amphibians, rep¬ 
tiles, and mammals to man. 

A wide variety of nineteenth- and twentieth-century scientists, 
including Charles Darwin and E. B. Titchener, found this thesis 
unquestionable, initiating in the first part of this century a great 
deal of excellent observation of lower organisms. The search for 
rudimentary consciousnesses was on. Books with titles such as 
The Animal Mind or The Psychic Life of Micro-Organisms were 
eagerly written and eagerly read. 4 And anyone who observes 
amoebas hunting food or responding to various stimuli, or para- 
mecia avoiding obstacles or conjugating, will know the almost 
passionate temptation to apply human categories to such be¬ 
havior. 

And this brings us to a very important part of the problem — 
our sympathy and identification with other living things. What¬ 
ever conclusions we may hold on the matter, it is certainly a part 
of our consciousness to ‘see’ into the consciousness of others, to 
identify with our friends and families so as to imagine what they 
are thinking and feeling. And so if animals are behaving such as 
we would in similar situations, so well are we trained in our 
human sympathies that it requires a particular vigor of mind to 
suppress such identifications when they are not warranted. The 
explanation for our imputing consciousness to protozoa is simply 
that we make this common and misleading identification. Yet the 
explanation for their behavior resides entirely in physical chemis¬ 
try, not in introspective psychology. 

Even in animals with synaptic nervous systems, the tendency 

4 By Margaret Floy Washburn, a Titchenerian, and by Alfred Binet respectively. 
The real classic in the field of early evolved animals is H. S. Jennings, Behavior of 
the Lower Organisms (New York: Macmillan, 1906). 





Introduction 


to read consciousness into their behavior comes more from our¬ 
selves than from our observations. Most people will identify with 
a struggling worm. But as every boy who has baited a fish hook 
knows, if a worm is cut in two, the front half with its primitive 
brain seems not to mind as much as the back half, which writhes 
in ‘agony’.s But surely if the worm felt pain as we do, surely it 
would be the part with the brain that would do the agonizing. 
The agony of the tail end is our agony, not the worm’s; its 
writhing is a mechanical release phenomenon, the motor nerves 
in the tail end firing in volleys at being disconnected from their 
normal inhibition by the cephalic ganglion. 


Consciousness as Learning 

To make consciousness coextensive with protoplasm leads, of 
course, to a discussion of the criterion by which consciousness 
can be inferred. And hence a third solution, which states that 
consciousness began not with matter, nor at the beginning of 
animal life, but at some specific time after life had evolved. It 
seemed obvious to almost all the active investigators of the sub¬ 
ject that the criterion of when and where in evolution conscious¬ 
ness began was the appearance of associative memory or learn¬ 
ing. If an animal could modify its behavior on the basis of its 
experience, it must be having an experience; it must be con¬ 
scious. Thus, if one wished to study the evolution of conscious¬ 
ness, one simply studied the evolution of learning. 

This was indeed how I began my search for the origin of 
consciousness. My first experimental work was a youthful at¬ 
tempt to produce signal learning (or a conditional response) in 
an especially long suffering mimosa plant. The signal was an 
intense light; the response was the drooping of a leaf to a care- 

5 Since an earthworm 'writhes’ from the tactile stimulation of simply being handled, 
the experiment is best performed with a razor blade as the worm is crawling over 
some hard ground or a board. The unbelieving and squeamish may suppress their 
anguish with the consciousness that they are helping the worm population (and there¬ 
fore the robin population) since both ends regenerate. 



THE PROBLEM 




fully calibrated tactile stimulus where it joined the stem. After 
over a thousand pairings of the light and the tactile stimulus, my 
patient plant was as green as ever. It was not conscious. 
