
That expected failure behind me, I moved on to protozoa, deli¬ 
cately running individual paramecia in a T-maze engraved in wax 
on black Bakelite, using direct current shock to punish the animal 
and spin it around if it went to the incorrect side. If paramecia 
could learn, I felt they had to be conscious. Moreover I was 
extremely interested in what would happen to the learning 
(and the consciousness) when the animal divided. A first sug¬ 
gestion of positive results was not borne out in later replications. 
After other failures to find learning in the lower phyla, I moved 
on to species with synaptic nervous systems, flatworms, earth¬ 
worms, fish, and reptiles, which could indeed learn, all on the 
naive assumption that I was chronicling the grand evolution of 
consciousness. 6 

Ridiculous! It was, I fear, several years before I realized that 
this assumption makes no sense at all. When we introspect, it is 
not upon any bundle of learning processes, and particularly not 
the types of learning denoted by conditioning and T-mazes. Why 
then did so many worthies in the lists of science equate con¬ 
sciousness and learning? And why had I been so lame of mind as 
to follow them? 

The reason was the presence of a kind of huge historical 
neurosis. Psychology has many of them. And one of the reasons 
that the history of science is essential to the study of psychology 
is that it is the only way to get out of and above such intellectual 
disorders. The school of psychology known as Associationism in 
the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries had been so attractively 
presented and so peopled with prestigious champions that its 
basic error had become imbedded in common thought and lan- 

6 For the most recent discussion of this important but methodologically difficult 
problem of the evolution of learning, see M. E. Bitterman’s Thorndike Centenary 
Address, “The Comparative Analysis of Learning,” Science, 1975, 188:699-709. 
Other references may be found in R. A. Hinde’s Animal Behavior, 2nd ed. (New 
York: McGraw-Hill, 1970), particularly pp. 658-663. 





Introduction 


guage. That error was, and still is, that consciousness is an 
actual space inhabited by elements called sensations and ideas, 
and the association of these elements because they are like each 
other, or because they have been made by the external world to 
occur together, is indeed what learning is and what the mind is 
all about. So learning and consciousness are confused and mud¬ 
dled up with that vaguest of terms, experience. 

It is this confusion that lingered unseen behind my first strug¬ 
gles with the problem, as well as the huge emphasis on animal 
learning in the first half of the twentieth century. But it is now 
absolutely clear that in evolution the origin of learning and the 
origin of consciousness are two utterly separate problems. We 
shall be demonstrating this assertion with more evidence in the 
next chapter. 


Consciousness as a Metaphysical Imposition 

All the theories I have so far mentioned begin in the assump¬ 
tion that consciousness evolved biologically by simple natural 
selection. But another position denies that such an assumption is 
even possible. 

Is this consciousness, it asks, this enormous influence of ideas, 
principles, beliefs over our lives and actions, really derivable from 
animal behavior? Alone of species, all alone! we try to under¬ 
stand ourselves and the world. We become rebels or patriots or 
martyrs on the basis of ideas. We build Chartres and computers, 
write poems and tensor equations, play chess and quartets, sail 
ships to other planets and listen in to other galaxies — what have 
these to do with rats in mazes or the threat displays of baboons? 
The continuity hypothesis of Darwin for the evolution of mind is 
a very suspicious totem of evolutionary mythology.7 The yearn¬ 
ing for certainty which grails the scientist, the aching beauty 

7 To demonstrate such continuity was the purpose of Darwin’s second most impor¬ 
tant work, The Descent of Man. 



THE PROBLEM 




which harasses the artist, the sweet thorn of justice which fierces 
the rebel from the eases of life, or the thrill of exultation with 
which we hear of true acts of that now difficult virtue of courage, 
of cheerful endurance of hopeless suffering — are these really 
derivable from matter? Or even continuous with the idiot hier¬ 
archies of speechless apes? 

The chasm is awesome. The emotional lives of men and of 
other mammals are indeed marvelously similar. But to focus 
upon the similarity unduly is to forget that such a chasm exists at 
all. The intellectual life of man, his culture and history and 
religion and science, is different from anything else we know of 
in the universe. That is fact. It is as if all life evolved to a certain 
point, and then in ourselves turned at a right angle and simply 
exploded in a different direction. 

The appreciation of this discontinuity between the apes and 
speaking civilized ethical intellectual men has led many scientists 
back to a metaphysical view. The interiority of consciousness 
just could not in any sense be evolved by natural selection out of 
mere assemblages of molecules and cells. There has to be more 
to human evolution than mere matter, chance, and survival. 
Something must be added from outside of this closed system to 
account for something so different as consciousness. 

Such thinking began with the beginning of modern evolution¬ 
ary theory, particularly in the work of Alfred Russel Wallace, the 
codiscoverer of the theory of natural selection. Following their 
twin announcements of the theory in 1858, both Darwin and 
Wallace struggled like Laocoons with the serpentine problem of 
human evolution and its encoding difficulty of consciousness. 
But where Darwin clouded the problem with his own naivete, 
seeing only continuity in evolution, Wallace could not do so. The 
discontinuities were terrifying and absolute. Man’s conscious 
faculties, particularly, “could not possibly have been developed by 
means of the same laws which have determined the progressive 
development of the organic world in general, and also of man’s 





Introduction 


physical organism.” 8 He felt the evidence showed that some 
metaphysical force had directed evolution at three different 
points: the beginning of life, the beginning of consciousness, and 
the beginning of civilized culture. Indeed, it is partly because 
Wallace insisted on spending the latter part of his life searching 
in vain among the seances of spiritualists for evidence of such 
metaphysical imposition that his name is not as well known as is 
Darwin’s as the discoverer of evolution by natural selection. Such 
endeavors were not acceptable to the scientific Establishment. To 
explain consciousness by metaphysical imposition seemed to be 
stepping outside the rules of natural science. And that indeed 
was the problem, how to explain consciousness in terms of natu¬ 
ral science alone. 


The Helpless Spectator Theory 

In reaction to such metaphysical speculations, there grew up 
through this early period of evolutionary thinking an increasingly 
materialist view. It was a position more consistent with straight 
natural selection. It even had inherent in it that acrid pessimism 
that is sometimes curiously associated with really hard science. 
This doctrine assures us consciousness does nothing at all, and 
in fact can do nothing. Many tough-minded experimentalists still 
agree with Herbert Spencer that such a downgrading of con¬ 
sciousness is the only view that is consistent with straight evolu¬ 
tionary theory. Animals are evolved; nervous systems and their 
mechanical reflexes increase in complexity; when some unspeci¬ 
fied degree of nervous complexity is reached, consciousness 
appears, and so begins its futile course as a helpless spectator of 
cosmic events. 

What we do is completely controlled by the wiring diagram of 
the brain and its reflexes to external stimuli. Consciousness is not 

8 Darwinism, an Exposition of the Theory of Natural Selection (London: Mac¬ 
millan, 1889), p. 475; see also Wallace’s Contributions to the Theory of Natural 
Selection, Ch. 10. 



THE PROBLEM 




more than the Heat given off by the wires, a mere epiphenome- 
non. Conscious feelings, as Hodgson put it, are mere colors laid 
on the surface of a mosaic which is held together by its stones, 
not by the colors .9 Or as Huxley insisted in a famous essay, “we 
are conscious automata." 10 Consciousness can no more modify 
the working mechanism of the body or its behavior than can the 
whistle of a train modify its machinery or where it goes. Moan as 
it will, the tracks have long ago decided where the train will go. 
Consciousness is the melody that floats from the harp and can¬ 
not pluck its strings, the foam struck raging from the river that 
cannot change its course, the shadow that loyally walks step for 
step beside the pedestrian, but is quite unable to influence his 
journey. 

It is William James who has given the best discussion of the 
conscious automaton theory. 11 His argument here is a little like 
Samuel Johnson’s downing philosophical idealism by kicking a 
stone and crying, “I refute it thus!” It is just plain inconceivable 
that consciousness should have nothing to do with a business 
which it so faithfully attends. If consciousness is the mere impo¬ 
tent shadow of action, why is it more intense when action is most 
hesitant? And why are we least conscious when doing something 
most habitual? Certainly this seesawing relationship between 
consciousness and actions is something that any theory of con¬ 
sciousness must explain. 

Emergent Evolution 

The doctrine of emergent evolution was very specifically wel¬ 
comed into court to rescue consciousness from this undignified 

9 Shadworth Hodgson, The Theory of Practice (London: Longmans Green, 1870), 

1:416. 

10 And volitions merely symbols of brain-states. T. H. Huxley, Collected Essays 
(New York: Appleton, 1896), Vol. 1, p. 244. 

