11 William James, Principles of Psychology (New York: Holt, 1890), Vol. 1, Ch. 
5), but also see William McDougall, Body and Mind (London: Methuen, 1911), 
Chs. 11, 12. 





Introduction 


position as a mere helpless spectator. It was also designed to 
explain scientifically the observed evolutionary discontinuities 
that had been the heart of the metaphysical imposition argument. 
And when I first began to study it some time ago, I, too, felt with 
a shimmering flash how everything, the problem of conscious¬ 
ness and all, seemed to shiveringly fall into accurate and wonder¬ 
ful place. 

Its main idea is a metaphor: Just as the property of wetness 
cannot be derived from the properties of hydrogen and oxygen 
alone, so consciousness emerged at some point in evolution in a 
way underivable from its constituent parts. 

While this simple idea goes back to John Stuart Mill and G. H. 
Lewes, it was Lloyd Morgan’s version in his Emergent Evolution 
of 1923 that really captured the cheering. This book is a thor¬ 
oughgoing scheme of emergent evolution vigorously carried all 
the way back into the physical realm. All the properties of matter 
have emerged from some unspecified forerunner. Those of com¬ 
plex chemical compounds have emerged from the conjunction of 
simpler chemical components. Properties distinctive of living 
things have emerged from the conjunctions of these complex 
molecules. And consciousness emerged from living things. New 
conjunctions bring about new kinds of relatedness which bring 
about new emergents. So the new emergent properties are in 
each case effectively related to the systems from which they 
emerge. In fact, the new relations emergent at each higher level 
guide and sustain the course of events distinctive of that level. 
Consciousness, then, emerges as something genuinely new at a 
critical stage of evolutionary advance. When it has emerged, it 
guides the course of events in the brain and has causal efficacy in 
bodily behavior. 

The whoop with which this antireductionist doctrine was 
greeted by the majority of prominent biological and comparative 
psychologists, frustrated dualists all, was quite undignified. Biol¬ 
ogists called it a new Declaration of Independence from physics 
and chemistry. “No longer can the biologist be bullied into sup- 



THE PROBLEM 




pressing observed results because they are not discovered nor 
expected from work on the non-living. Biology becomes a science 
in its own right. Prominent neurologists agreed that now we no 
longer had to think of consciousness as merely dancing an as¬ 
siduous but futile attendance upon our brain processes. 12 The 
origin of consciousness seemed to have been pointed at in such a 
way as to restore consciousness to its usurped throne as the 
governor of behavior and even to promise new and unpredictable 
emergents in the future. 

But had it? If consciousness emerged in evolution, when? In 
what species? What kind of a nervous system is necessary? And 
as the first flush of a theoretical breakthrough waned, it was seen 
that nothing about the problem had really changed. It is these 
specifics that need to be answered. What is wrong about emer¬ 
gent evolution is not the doctrine, but the release back into old 
comfortable ways of thinking about consciousness and behavior, 
the license that it gives to broad and vacuous generalities. 

Historically, it is of interest here to note that all this dancing in 
the aisles of biology over emergent evolution was going on at the 
same time that a stronger, less-educated doctrine with a rigorous 
experimental campaign was beginning its robust conquest of psy¬ 
chology. Certainly one way of solving the problem of conscious¬ 
ness and its place in nature is to deny that consciousness exists at 
all. 


Behaviorism 

It is an interesting exercise to sit down and try to be conscious 
of what it means to say that consciousness does not exist. History 
has not recorded whether or not this feat was attempted by the 
early behaviorists. But it has recorded everywhere and in large 

12 The quote here is from H. S. Jennings and the paraphrase from C. Judson 
Herrick. For these and other reactions to emergent evolution, see F. Mason, Creation 
by Evolution (London: Duckworth, 1928) and W. McDougall, Modern Materialism 
and Emergent Evolution (New York: Van Nostrand, 1929). 



Introduction 



the enormous influence which the doctrine that consciousness does 
not exist has had on psychology in this century. 

And this is behaviorism. Its roots rummage far back into the 
musty history of thought, to the so-called Epicureans of the 
eighteenth century and before, to attempts to generalize tropisms 
from plants to animals to man, to movements called Objectivism, 
or more particularly, Actionism. For it was Knight Dunlap’s at¬ 
tempt to teach the latter to an excellent but aweless animal 
psychologist, John B. Watson, that resulted in a new word, Be¬ 
haviorism. « At first, it was very similar to the helpless spectator 
theory we have already examined. Consciousness just was not 
important in animals. But after a World War and a little invigo¬ 
rating opposition, behaviorism charged out into the intellectual 
arena with the snorting assertion that consciousness is nothing at 
all. 

What a startling doctrine! But the really surprising thing is 
that, starting off almost as a flying whim, it grew into a move¬ 
ment that occupied center stage in psychology from about 1920 
to i960. The external reasons for the sustained triumph of such 
a peculiar position are both fascinating and complex. Psychology 
at the time was trying to wriggle out of philosophy into a separate 
academic discipline and used behaviorism to do so. The immedi¬ 
ate adversary of behaviorism, Titchenerian introspectionism, was 
a pale and effete opponent, based as it was on a false analogy 
between consciousness and chemistry. The toppled idealism 
after World War I created a revolutionary age demanding new 
philosophies. The intriguing successes of physics and general 
technology presented both a model and a means that seemed 
more compatible with behaviorism. The world was weary and 

'3 For a less ad hominem picture of the beginnings of behaviorism, see John C. 
Burnham, “On the origins of behaviorism.” Journal of the History of the Behavioral 
Sciences, 1968, 4: 143-151. And for a good discussion, Richard Hermstein’s “Intro¬ 
duction to John B. Watson’s Comparative Psychology” in Historical Conceptions of 
Psychology, M. Henle, J. Jaynes, and J. J. Sullivan, eds. (New York: Springer, 1974), 
98 -115. 



THE PROBLEM 




wary of subjective thought and longed for objective fact. And in 
America objective fact was pragmatic fact. Behaviorism provided 
this in psychology. It allowed a new generation to sweep aside 
with one impatient gesture all the worn-out complexities of the 
problem of consciousness and its origin. We would turn over a 
new leaf. We would make a fresh start. 

And the fresh start was a success in one laboratory after 
another. But the single inherent reason for its success was not its 
truth, but its program. And what a truly vigorous and exciting 
program of research it was! with its gleaming stainless-steel 
promise of reducing all conduct to a handful of reflexes and 
conditional responses developed from them, of generalizing the 
spinal reflex terminology of stimulus and response and reinforce¬ 
ment to the puzzles of headed behavior and so seeming to solve 
them, of running rats through miles and miles of mazes into more 
fascinating mazes of objective theorems, and its pledge, its sol¬ 
emn pledge to reduce thought to muscle twitches and personality 
to the woes of Little Albert .h In all this there was a heady 
excitement that is difficult to relate at this remove. Complexity 
would be made simple, darkness would be made light, and philos¬ 
ophy would be a thing of the past. 

From the outside, this revolt against consciousness seemed to 
storm the ancient citadels of human thought and set its arrogant 
banners up in one university after another. But having once been 
a part of its major school, I confess it was not really what it 
seemed. Off the printed page, behaviorism was only a refusal to 
talk about consciousness. Nobody really believed he was not 
conscious. And there was a very real hypocrisy abroad, as those 
interested in its problems were forcibly excluded from academic 
psychology, as text after text tried to smother the unwanted 
problem from student view. In essence, behaviorism was a 
method, not the theory that it tried to be. And as a method, it 

’“t The unfortunate subject of Watson's experiments on conditioned fear. 



16 Introduction 

exorcised old ghosts. It gave psychology a thorough house clean¬ 
ing. And now the closets have been swept out and the cupboards 
washed and aired, and we are ready to examine the problem 
again. 


Consciousness as the Reticular Activating System 

But before doing so, one final approach, a wholly different 
approach, and one that has occupied me most recently, the 
nervous system. How often in our frustrations with trying to 
solve the mysteries of mind do we comfort our questions with 
anatomy, real or fancied, and think of a thought as a particular 
neuron or a mood as a particular neurotransmitter! It is a temp¬ 
tation born of exasperation with the untestableness and vague¬ 
ness of all the above solutions. Away with these verbal subtleties! 
These esoteric poses of philosophy and even the paper theories 
of behaviorists are mere subterfuges to avoid the very material 
we are talking about! Here we have an animal — make him a 
man if you will — here he is on the table of our analysis. If he is 
conscious, it has to be here, right here in him, in the brain in 
front of us, not in the presumptuous inklings of philosophy back 
in the incapable past! And today we at last have the techniques 
to explore the nervous system directly, brain to brain. Some¬ 
where here in a mere three-and-a-half pound lump of pinkish- 
gray matter, the answer has to be. 

All we have to do is to find those parts of the brain that are 
responsible for consciousness, then trace out their anatomical 
evolution, and we will solve the problem of the origin of con¬ 
