sciousness. Moreover, if we study the behavior of present-day 
species corresponding to various stages in the development of 
these neurological structures, we will be able at last to reveal with 
experimental exactness just what consciousness basically is. 

Now this sounds like an excellent scientific program. Ever 
since Descartes chose the brain’s pineal body as the seat of con¬ 
sciousness and was roundly refuted by the physiologists of his 



THE PROBLEM 



day, there has been a fervent if often superficial search for where 
in the brain consciousness exists.And the search is still on. 

At the present, a plausible nominee for the neural substrate of 
consciousness is one of the most important neurological dis¬ 
coveries of our time. This is that tangle of tiny internuncial 
neurons called the reticular formation, which has long lain hid¬ 
den and unsuspected in the brainstem. It extends from the top of 
the spinal cord through the brainstem on up into the thalamus 
and hypothalamus, attracting collaterals from sensory and motor 
nerves, almost like a system of wire-tabs on the communication 
lines that pass near it. But this is not all. It also has direct lines 
of command to half a dozen major areas of the cortex and 
probably all the nuclei of the brainstem, as well as sending fibers 
down the spinal cord where it influences the peripheral sensory 
and motor systems. Its function is to sensitize or “awaken” 
selected nervous circuits and desensitize others, such that those 
who pioneered in this work christened it “the waking brain” 16 

The reticular formation is also often called by its functional 
name, the reticular activating system. It is the place where gen¬ 
eral anesthesia produces its effect by deactivating its neurons. 
Cutting it produces permanent sleep and coma. Stimulating it 
through an implanted electrode in most of its regions wakes up a 
sleeping animal. Moreover, it is capable of grading the activity of 
most other parts of the brain, doing this as a reflection of its own 
internal excitability and the titer of its neurochemistry. There 
are exceptions, too complicated for discussion here. But they are 
not such as to diminish the exciting idea that this disordered 
network of short neurons that connect up with the entire brain, 
this central transactional core between the strictly sensory and 
motor systems of classical neurology, is the long-sought answer to 
the whole problem. 

'5 I have discussed this at greater length in my paper, “The Problem of Animate 
Motion in the Seventeenth Century,” Journal of the History of Ideas, 1970, 31: 219- 
234 - 

16 See H. W. Magoun, The Waking Brain (Springfield, Illinois: Thomas, 1958). 





Introduction 


If we now look at the evolution of the reticular formation, 
asking if it could be correlated with the evolution of conscious¬ 
ness, we find no encouragement whatever. It turns out to be one 
of the oldest parts of the nervous system. Indeed, a good case 
could be made that this is the very oldest part of the nervous 
system, around which the more orderly, more specific, and more 
highly evolved tracts and nuclei developed. The little that we at 
present know about the evolution of the reticular formation does 
not seem to indicate that the problem of consciousness and its 
origin will be solved by such a study. 

Moreover, there is a delusion in such reasoning. It is one that 
is all too common and unspoken in our tendency to translate 
psychological phenomena into neuro-anatomy and chemistry. 
We can only know in the nervous system what we have known 
in behavior first. Even if we had a complete wiring diagram of the 
nervous system, we still would not be able to answer our basic 
question. Though we knew the connections of every tickling 
thread of every single axon and dendrite in every species that 
ever existed, together with all its neurotransmitters and how they 
varied in its billions of synapses of every brain that ever existed, 
we could still never — not ever — from a knowledge of the brain 
alone know if that brain contained a consciousness like our own. 
We first have to start from the top, from some conception of 
what consciousness is, from what our own introspection is. We 
have to be sure of that, before we can enter the nervous system 
and talk about its neurology. 

We must therefore try to make a new beginning by stating 
what consciousness is. We have already seen that this is no easy 
matter, and that the history of the subject is an enormous confu¬ 
sion of metaphor with designation. In any such situation, where 
something is so resistant to even the beginnings of clarity, it is 
wisdom to begin by determining what that something is not. And 
that is the task of the next chapter. 




BOOK ONE 
The Mind of Man 



CHAPTER l 


The Consciousness 
of Consciousness 


W hen asked the question, what is consciousness? we become 
conscious of consciousness. And most of us take this con¬ 
sciousness of consciousness to be what consciousness is. This is 
not true. 

In being conscious of consciousness, we feel it is the most self- 
evident thing imaginable. We feel it is the defining attribute of 
all our waking states, our moods and affections, our memories, 
our thoughts, attentions, and volitions. We feel comfortably cer¬ 
tain that consciousness is the basis of concepts, of learning and 
reasoning, of thought and judgment, and that it is so because it 
records and stores our experiences as they happen, allowing us to 
introspect on them and learn from them at will. We are also 
quite conscious that all this wonderful set of operations and 
contents that we call consciousness is located somewhere in the 
head. 

On critical examination, all of these statements are false. 
They are the costume that consciousness has been masquerading 
in for centuries. They are the misconceptions that have pre¬ 
vented a solution to the problem of the origin of consciousness. 
To demonstrate these errors and show what consciousness is not, 
is the long but I hope adventurous task of this chapter. 

The Extensiveness of Consciousness 


To begin with, there are several uses of the word consciousness 
which we may immediately discard as incorrect. We have for 





The Mind of Man 


example the phrase "to lose consciousness” after receiving a blow 
on the head. But if this were correct, we would then have no 
word for those somnambulistic states known in the clinical litera¬ 
ture where an individual is clearly not conscious and yet is re¬ 
sponsive to things in a way in which a knocked-out person is not. 
Therefore, in the first instance we should say that the person 
suffering a severe blow on the head loses both consciousness and 
what I am calling reactivity, and they are therefore different 
things. 

This distinction is also important in normal everyday life. We 
are constantly reacting to things without being conscious of them 
at the time. Sitting against a tree, I am always reacting to the 
tree and to the ground and to my own posture, since if I wish to 
walk, I will quite unconsciously stand up from the ground to do so. 

Immersed in the ideas of this first chapter, I am rarely con¬ 
scious even of where I am. In writing, I am reacting to a pencil 
in my hand since I hold on to it, and am reacting to my writing 
pad since I hold it on my knees, and to its lines since I write upon 
them, but I am only conscious of what I am trying to say and 
whether or not I am being clear to you. 

If a bird bursts up from the copse nearby and flies crying to the 
horizon, I may turn and watch it and hear it, and then turn back 
to this page without being conscious that I have done so. 

In other words, reactivity covers all stimuli my behavior takes 
account of in any way, while consciousness is something quite 
distinct and a far less ubiquitous phenomenon. We are conscious 
of what we are reacting to only from time to time. And whereas 
reactivity can be defined behaviorally and neurologically, con¬ 
sciousness at the present state of knowledge cannot. 

But this distinction is much more far-reaching. We are con¬ 
tinually reacting to things in ways that have no phenomenal 
component in consciousness whatever. Not at any time. In see¬ 
ing any object, our eyes and therefore our retinal images are 
reacting to the object by shifting twenty times a second, and yet 



THE CONSCIOUSNESS OF CONSCIOUSNESS 




we see an unshifting stable object with no consciousness what¬ 
ever of the succession of different inputs or of putting them 
together into the object. An abnormally small retinal image of 
something in the proper context is automatically seen as some¬ 
thing at a distance; we are not conscious of making the correc¬ 
tion. Color and light contrast effects, and other perceptual 
constancies all go on every minute of our waking and even 
dreaming experience without our being in the least conscious of 
them. And these instances are barely touching the multitude of 
processes which by the older definitions of consciousness one 
might expect to be conscious of, but which we definitely are not. 
I am here thinking of Titchener’s designation of consciousness as 
“the sum total of mental processes occurring now.” We are now 
very far from such a position. 

But let us go further. Consciousness is a much smaller part of 
our mental life than we are conscious of, because we cannot be 
conscious of what we are not conscious of. How simple that is to 
say; how difficult to appreciate! It is like asking a flashlight in a 
dark room to search around for something that does not have any 
light shining upon it. The flashlight, since there is light in what¬ 
ever direction it turns, would have to conclude that there is light 
everywhere. And so consciousness can seem to pervade all men¬ 
