tality when actually it does not. 

The timing of consciousness is also an interesting question. 
When we are awake, are we conscious all the time? We think 
so. In fact, we are sure so! I shut my eyes and even if I try not to 
think, consciousness still streams on, a great river of contents in 
a succession of different conditions which I have been taught to 
call thoughts, images, memories, interior dialogues, regrets, 
wishes, resolves, all interweaving with the constantly changing 
pageant of exterior sensations of which I am selectively aware. 
Always the continuity. Certainly this is the feeling. And what¬ 
ever we’re doing, we feel that our very self, our deepest of deep 





The Mind of Man 


identity, is indeed this continuing flow that only ceases in sleep 
between remembered dreams. This is our experience. And many 
thinkers have taken this spirit of continuity to be the place to 
start from in philosophy, the very ground of certainty which no 
one can doubt. Cogito, ergo sum. 

But what could this continuity mean? If we think of a minute 
as being sixty thousand milliseconds, are we conscious for every 
one of those milliseconds? If you still think so, go on dividing the 
time units, remembering that the firing of neurons is of a finite 
order — although we have no idea what that has to do with our 
sense of the continuity of consciousness. Few persons would 
wish to maintain that consciousness somehow floats like a mist 
above and about the nervous system completely ununited to any 
earthly necessities of neural refractory periods. 

It is much more probable that the seeming continuity of con¬ 
sciousness is really an illusion, just as most of the other meta¬ 
phors about consciousness are. In our flashlight analogy, the 
flashlight would be conscious of being on only when it is on. 
Though huge gaps of time occurred, providing things were gen¬ 
erally the same, it would seem to the flashlight itself that the 
light had been continuously on. We are thus conscious less of the 
time than we think, because we cannot be conscious of when we 
are not conscious. And the feeling of a great uninterrupted 
stream of rich inner experiences, now slowly gliding through 
dreamy moods, now tumbling in excited torrents down gorges of 
precipitous insight, or surging evenly through our nobler days, is 
what it is on this page, a metaphor for how subjective conscious¬ 
ness seems to subjective consciousness. 

But there is a better way to point this out. If you close your left 
eye and stare at the left margin of this page, you are not at all 
conscious of a large gap in your vision about four inches to the 
right. But, still staring with your right eye only, take your finger 
and move it along a line of print from the left margin to the right, 
and you will see the top of it disappear into this gap and then 



THE CONSCIOUSNESS OF CONSCIOUSNESS 




reappear 011 the other side. This is due to a two-millimeter gap on 
the nasal side of the retina where the optic nerve fibers are 
gathered together and leave the eye for the brain . 1 The interest¬ 
ing thing about this gap is that it is not so much a blind spot as it 
is usually called; it is a non-spot. A blind man sees his darkness . 2 3 
But you cannot see any gap in your vision at all, let alone be 
conscious of it in any way. Just as the space around the blind 
spots is joined without any gap at all, so consciousness knits 
itself over its time gaps and gives the illusion of continuity. 


Examples of how little we are conscious of our everyday behav¬ 
ior can be multiplied almost anywhere we look. Playing the 
piano is a really extraordinary example.3 Here a complex array 
of various tasks is accomplished all at once with scarcely any 
consciousness of them whatever: two different lines of near 
hieroglyphics to be read at once, the right hand guided to one and 
the left to the other; ten fingers assigned to various tasks, the 
fingering solving various motor problems without any awareness, 
and the mind interpreting sharps and flats and naturals into 
black and white keys, obeying the timing of whole or quarter or 
sixteenth notes and rests and trills, one hand perhaps in three 
beats to a measure while the other plays four, while the feet are 
softening or slurring or holding various other notes. And all this 

1 A better technique of noticing- the blind spot is to take two pieces of paper about 
a half-inch square, and while holding- them about a foot and a half in front of you, 
fixate on one with one eye, and move the other piece of paper out on the same side 
until it disappears. 

2 Except when the cause of blindness is in the brain. For example, soldiers wounded 
in one or the other occipital areas of the cortex, with large parts of the visual field 
destroyed, are not conscious of any alteration in their vision. Looking straight ahead, 
they have the illusion of seeing a complete visual world, as you or I do. 

3 This example with similar phrasing was used by W. B. Carpenter to illustrate 
his "unconscious cerebration," probably the first important statement of the idea in 
the nineteenth century. It was first described in the fourth edition of Carpenter's 
Human Physiology in 1852, but more extensively in his later works, as in his in¬ 
fluential Principles of Mental Physiology (London: Kegan Paul, 1874), Book 2, 
Ch. 13. 





The Mind of Man 


time the performer, the conscious performer, is in a seventh 
heaven of artistic rapture at the results of all this tremendous 
business, or perchance lost in contemplation of the individual 
who turns the leaves of the music book, justly persuaded he is 
showing her his very soul! Of course consciousness usually has a 
role in the learning of such complex activities, but not necessarily 
in their performance, and that is the only point I am trying to 
make here. 

Consciousness is often not only unnecessary; it can be quite 
undesirable. Our pianist suddenly conscious of his fingers during 
a furious set of arpeggios would have to stop playing. Nijinsky 
somewhere says that when he danced, it was as if he were in the 
orchestra pit looking back at himself; he was not conscious of 
every movement, but of how he was looking to others. A sprinter 
may be conscious of where he is relative to the others in the race, 
but he is certainly not conscious of putting one leg in front of the 
other; such consciousness might indeed cause him to trip. And 
anyone who plays tennis at my indifferent level knows the exas¬ 
peration of having his service suddenly ‘go to pieces’ and of 
serving consecutive double faults! The more doubles, the more 
conscious one becomes of one’s motions (and of one’s disposi¬ 
tion!) and the worse things get .4 

Such phenomena of exertion are not to be explained away on 
the basis of physical excitement, for the same phenomena in 
regard to consciousness occur in less strenuous occupations. 
Right at this moment, you are not conscious of how you are 
sitting, of where your hands are placed, of how fast you are 
reading, though even as I mentioned these items, you were. And 
as you read, you are not conscious of the letters or even of the 
words or even of the syntax or the sentences and punctuation, 

4 The present writer improvises on the piano, and his best playing is when he is 
not conscious of the performance side as he invents new themes or developments, but 
only when he is somnambulistic about it and is conscious of his playing only as if he 
were another person. 



THE CONSCIOUSNESS OF CONSCIOUSNESS 


2 7 


but only of their meaning. As you listen to an address, phonemes 
disappear into words and words into sentences and sentences 
disappear into what they are trying to say, into meaning. To be 
conscious of the elements of speech is to destroy the intention of 
the speech. 

And also on the production side. Try speaking with a full 
consciousness of your articulation as you do it. You will simply 
stop speaking. 

And so in writing, it is as if the pencil or pen or typewriter 
itself spells the words, spaces them, punctuates properly, goes to 
the next line, does not begin consecutive sentences in the same 
way, determines that we place a question here, an exclamation 
there, even as we ourselves are engrossed in what we are trying 
to express and the person we are addressing. 

For in speaking or writing we are not really conscious of what 
we are actually doing at the time. Consciousness functions in the 
decision as to what to say, how we are to say it, and when we say 
it, but then the orderly and accomplished succession of phonemes 
or of written letters is somehow done for us. 

Consciousness Not a Copy of Experience 

Although the metaphor of the blank mind had been used in the 
writings ascribed to Aristotle, it is really only since John Locke 
thought of the mind as a tabula rasa in the seventeenth century 
that we have emphasized this recording aspect of consciousness, 
and thus see it crowded with memories that can be read over 
again in introspection. If Locke had lived in our time, he would 
have used the metaphor of a camera rather than a slate. But the 
idea is the same. And most people would protest emphatically 
that the chief function of consciousness is to store up experience, 
to copy it as a camera does, so that it can be reflected upon at 
some future time. 

So it seems. But consider the following problems: Does the 





The Mind of Man 


door of your room open from the right or the left? Which is your 
second longest finger? At a stoplight, is it the red or the green 
that is on top? How many teeth do you see when brushing your 
teeth? What letters are associated with what numbers on a 
telephone dial? If you are in a familiar room, without turning 
around, write down all the items on the wall just behind you, and 
then look. 

I think you will be surprised how little you can retrospect in 
consciousness on the supposed images you have stored from so 
much previous attentive experience. If the familiar door sud¬ 
denly opened the other way, if another finger suddenly grew 
longer, if the red light were differently placed, or you had an 
extra tooth, or the telephone were made differently, or a new 
