window latch had been put on the window behind you, you would 
know it immediately, showing that you all along ‘knew’, but not 
consciously so. Familiar to psychologists, this is the distinction 
between recognition and recall. What you can consciously recall 
is a thimbleful to the huge oceans of your actual knowledge. 

Experiments of this sort demonstrate that conscious memory is 
not a storing up of sensory images, as is sometimes thought. 
Only if you have at some time consciously noticed your finger 
lengths or your door, have at some time counted your teeth, 
though you have observed these things countless times, can you 
remember. Unless you have particularly noted what is on the 
wall or recently cleaned or painted it, you will be surprised at 
what you have left out. And introspect upon the matter. Did you 
not in each of these instances ask what must be there? Starting 
with ideas and reasoning, rather than with any image? Conscious 
retrospection is not the retrieval of images, but the retrieval of 
what you have been conscious of before,s and the reworking of 
these elements into rational or plausible patterns. 


5 See in this connection the discussion of Robert S. Woodworth in his Psychologi¬ 
cal Issues (New York: Columbia University Press, 1939), Ch. 7. 



THE CONSCIOUSNESS OF CONSCIOUSNESS 




Let us demonstrate this in another way. Think, if you will, of 
when you entered the room you are now in and when you picked 
up this book. Introspect upon it and then ask the question: are 
the images of which you have copies the actual sensory fields as 
you came in and sat down and began reading? Don’t you have an 
image of yourself coming through one of the doors, perhaps even 
a bird’s-eye view of one of the entrances, and then perhaps 
vaguely see yourself sitting down and picking up the book? 
Things which you have never experienced except in this intro¬ 
spection! And can you retrieve the sound fields around the 
event? Or the cutaneous sensations as you sat, took the pressure 
off your feet, and opened this book? Of course, if you go on with 
your thinking you can also rearrange your imaginal retrospection 
such that you do indeed ‘see’ entering the room just as it might 
have been; and ‘hear’ the sound of the chair and the book open¬ 
ing, and ‘feel’ the skin sensations. But I suggest that this has a 
large element of created imagery — what we shall call narratiz- 
ing a little later — of what the experience should be like, rather 
than what it actually was like. 

Or introspect on when you last went swimming: I suspect you 
have an image of a seashore, lake, or pool which is largely a 
retrospection, but when it comes to yourself swimming, lo! like 
Nijinsky in his dance, you are seeing yourself swim, something 
that you have never observed at all! There is precious little of the 
actual sensations of swimming, the particular waterline across 
your face, the feel of the water against your skin, or to what 
extent your eyes were underwater as you turned your head to 
breathe . 6 Similarly, if you think of the last time you slept out of 
doors, went skating, or — if all else fails — did something that 
you regretted in public, you tend not to see, hear, or feel things as 
you actually experienced them, but rather to re-create them in 
objective terms, seeing yourself in the setting as if you were 

6 An example taken from Donald Hebb’s provocative discussion, “The mind’s eye,” 
Psychology Today, 1961, 2. 





The Mind of Man 


somebody else. Looking back into memory, then, is a great deal 
invention, seeing yourself as others see you. Memory is the 
medium of the must-have-been. Though I have no doubt that in 
any of these instances you could by inference invent a subjective 
view of the experience, even with the conviction that it was the 
actual memory. 

Consciousness Not Necessary for Concepts 

A further major confusion about consciousness is the belief 
that it is specifically and uniquely the place where concepts are 
formed. This is a very ancient idea: that we have various con¬ 
crete conscious experiences and then put the similar ones to¬ 
gether into a concept. This idea has even been the paradigm of a 
slew of experiments by psychologists who thought they were thus 
studying concept formation. 

Max Muller, in one of his fascinating discussions in the last 
century, brought the problem to a point by asking, whoever saw a 
tree? “No one ever saw a tree, but only this or that fir tree, or oak 
tree, or apple tree . . . Tree, therefore, is a concept, and as such 
can never be seen or perceived by the senses .”7 Particular trees 
alone were outside in the environment, and only in consciousness 
did the general concept of tree exist. 

Now the relation between concepts and consciousness could 
have an extensive discussion. But let it suffice here simply to 
show that there is no necessary connection between them. When 
Miiller says no one has ever seen a tree, he is mistaking what he 
knows about an object for the object itself. Every weary wayfarer 
after miles under the hot sun has seen a tree. So has every cat, 
squirrel, and chipmunk when chased by a dog. The bee has a 
concept of a flower, the eagle a concept of a sheer-faced rocky 

7 Max Muller, The Science of Thought (London: Longmans Green, 1887), 78-79. 
Eugenio Rignano in his The Psychology of Reasoning (New York: Harcourt, Brace, 
1923), p. 108L, makes a similar criticism to mine. 



THE CONSCIOUSNESS OF CONSCIOUSNESS 31 

ledge, as a nesting thrush has a concept of a crotch of upper 
branch awninged with green leaves. Concepts are simply classes 
of behaviorally equivalent things. Root concepts are prior to 
experience. They are fundamental to the aptic structures that 
allow behavior to occur at all . 8 Indeed what Muller should have 
said was, no one has ever been conscious of a tree. For con¬ 
sciousness, indeed, not only is not the repository of concepts; it 
does not usually work with them at all! When we consciously 
think of a tree, we are indeed conscious of a particular tree, of 
the fir or the oak or the elm that grew beside our house, and let it 
stand for the concept, just as we can let a concept word stand for 
it as well. In fact, one of the great functions of language is to let 
the word stand for a concept, which is exactly what we do in 
writing or speaking about conceptual material. And we must do 
this because concepts are usually not in consciousness at all. 


Consciousness Not Necessary for Learning 

A third important misconception of consciousness is that it is 
the basis for learning. Particularly for the long and illustrious 
series of Associationist psychologists through the eighteenth and 
nineteenth centuries, learning was a matter of ideas in conscious¬ 
ness being grouped by similarity, contiguity, or occasionally some 
other relationship. Nor did it matter whether we were speaking 
of a man or an animal; all learning was “profiting from experi¬ 
ence” or ideas coming together in consciousness — as I said in 
the Introduction. And so contemporary common knowledge, 
without realizing quite why, has culturally inherited the notion 
that consciousness is necessary for learning. 

The matter is somewhat complex. It is also unfortunately 

8 Aptic structures are the neurological basis of aptitudes that are composed of an 
innate evolved aptic paradigm plus the results of experience in development. The 
term is the heart of an unpublished essay of mine and is meant to replace such prob¬ 
lematic words as instincts. They are organizations of the brain, always partially in¬ 
nate, that make the organism apt to behave in a certain way under certain conditions. 





The Mind of Man 


disfigured in psychology by a sometimes forbidding jargon, which 
is really an overgeneralization of the spinal-reflex terminology of 
the nineteenth century. But, for our purposes, we may consider 
the laboratory study of learning to have been of three central 
kinds, the learning of signals, skills, and solutions. Let us take 
up each in turn, asking the question, is consciousness necessary? 

Signal learning (or classical or Pavlovian conditioning) is the 
simplest example. If a light signal immediately followed by a 
puff of air through a rubber tube is directed at a person’s eye 
about ten times, the eyelid, which previously blinked only to the 
puff of air, will begin to blink to the light signal alone, and this 
becomes more and more frequent as trials proceeds Subjects 
who have undergone this well-known procedure of signal learn¬ 
ing report that it has no conscious component whatever. Indeed, 
consciousness, in this example the intrusion of voluntary eye 
blinks to try to assist the signal learning, blocks it from occurring. 

In more everyday situations, the same simple associative learn¬ 
ing can be shown to go on without any consciousness that it has 
occurred. If a distinct kind of music is played while you are 
eating a particularly delicious lunch, the next time you hear the 
music you will like its sounds slightly more and even have a little 
more saliva in your mouth. The music has become a signal for 
pleasure which mixes with your judgment. And the same is true 
for paintings . 10 Subjects who have gone through this kind of 
test in the laboratory, when asked why they liked the music or 
paintings better after lunch, could not say. They were not con¬ 
scious they had learned anything. But the really interesting thing 
here is that if you know about the phenomenon beforehand and 

s G. A. Kimble, “Conditioning as a function of the time between conditioned and 
unconditioned stimuli," Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1947, 37: 1-15. 

10 These studies are those of Gregory Razran and are discussed on page 232 of his 
Mind in Evolution (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1971). They are discussed critically 
in relation to the whole problem of unintentional learning by T. A. Ryan, Intentional 
Behavior (New York: Ronald Press, 1970), pp. 235-236. 



THE CONSCIOUSNESS OF CONSCIOUSNESS 




are conscious of the contingency between food and the music or 
painting, the learning does not occur. Again, consciousness actu¬ 
ally reduces our learning abilities of this type, let alone not being 
necessary for them. 

As we saw earlier in the performance of skills, so in the 
learning of skills, consciousness is indeed like a helpless spectator, 
having little to do. A simple experiment will demonstrate this fact. 
Take a coin in each hand and toss them both, crossing them in the 
air in such a way that each coin is caught by the opposite hand. This 
you can learn in a dozen trials. As you do, ask, are you conscious 
