of everything you, or Is consciousness necessary at all? I think 
you will find that learning is much better described as being 
Organics rather than conscious. Consciousness takes you into the 
task, giving you the goal to be reached. But from then on, 
apart perhaps from fleeting neurotic concerns about your abilities 
at such tasks, it is as if the learning is done for you. Yet the 
nineteenth century, taking consciousness to be the whole archi¬ 
tect of behavior, would have tried to explain such a task as 
consciously recognizing the good and bad motions, and by free 
choice repeating the former and dropping out the latter! 

The learning of complex skills is no different in this respect. 
Typewriting has been extensively studied, it generally being 
agreed in the words of one experimenter “that all adaptations and 
short cuts in methods were unconsciously made, that is, fallen 
into by the learners quite unintentionally. The learners suddenly 
noticed that they were doing certain parts of the work in a new 
and better way .” 11 

In the coin-tossing experiment, you may have even discovered 
that consciousness if present impeded your learning. This is a 
very common finding in the learning of skills, just as we saw it 
was in their performance. Let the learning go on without your 
being too conscious of it, and it is all done more smoothly and 

11 W. F. Book, The Psychology of Skill (New York: Gregg, 1925). 





The Mind of Man 


efficiently. Sometimes too much so, for, in complex skills like 
typing, one may learn to consistently type ‘hte’ or ‘the’. The 
remedy is to reverse the process by consciously practicing the 
mistake ‘hte’, whereupon contrary to the usual idea of ‘practice 
makes perfect’, the mistake drops away — a phenomenon called 
negative practice. 

In the common motor skills studied in the laboratory as well, 
such as complex pursuit-rotor systems or mirror-tracing, the sub¬ 
jects who are asked to be very conscious of their movements do 
worse . 12 And athletic trainers whom I have interviewed are 
unwittingly following such laboratory-proven principles when 
they urge their trainees not to think so much about what they are 
doing. The Zen exercise of learning archery is extremely explicit 
on this, advising the archer not to think of himself as drawing the 
bow and releasing the arrow, but releasing himself from the 
consciousness of what he is doing by letting the bow stretch itself 
and the arrow release itself from the fingers at the proper time. 

Solution learning (or instrumental learning or operant condi¬ 
tioning) is a more complex case. Usually when one is acquiring 
some solution to a problem or some path to a goal, consciousness 
plays a very considerable role in setting up the problem in a 
certain way. But consciousness is not necessary. Instances can 
be shown in which a person has no consciousness whatever of 
either the goal he is seeking or the solution he is finding to 
achieve that goal. 

Another simple experiment can demonstrate this. Ask some¬ 
one to sit opposite you and to say words, as many words as he can 
think of, pausing two or three seconds after each of them for you 
to write them down. If after every plural noun (or adjective, or 
abstract word, or whatever you choose) you say “good” or “right” 
as you write it down, or simply “mmm-hmm” or smile, or repeat 
the plural word pleasantly, the frequency of plural nouns (or 

12 H. L. Waskom, “An experimental analysis of incentive and forced application 
and their effect upon learning,” Journal of Psychology, 1936, 2: 393-408. 



THE CONSCIOUSNESS OF CONSCIOUSNESS 




whatever) will increase significantly as he goes on saying words. 
The important thing here is that the subject is not aware that 
he is learning anything at all. *3 He is not conscious that he is 
trying to find a way to make you increase your encouraging 
remarks, or even of his solution to that problem. Every day, in all 
our conversations, we are constantly training and being trained 
by each other in this manner, and yet we are never conscious of it. 

Such unconscious learning is not confined to verbal behavior. 
Members of a psychology class were asked to compliment any 
girl at the college wearing red. Within a week the cafeteria was a 
blaze of red (and friendliness), and none of the girls was aware 
of being influenced. Another class, a week after being told about 
unconscious learning and training, tried it on the professor. 
Every time he moved toward the right side of the lecture hall, 
they paid rapt attention and roared at his jokes. It is reported 
that they were almost able to train him right out the door, he 
remaining unaware of anything unusual. 1 * 

The critical problem with most of these studies is that if the 
subject decided beforehand to look for such contingencies, he 
would of course be conscious of what he was learning to do. One 
way to get around this is to use a behavioral response which is 
imperceptible to the subject. And this has been done, using a 
very small muscle in the thumb whose movements are impercep¬ 
tible to us and can only be detected by an electrical recording 
apparatus. The subjects were told that the experiments were 
concerned with the effect of intermittent unpleasant noise corn¬ 
's J. Greenspoon, “The reinforcing effect of two spoken sounds on the frequency 
of two responses," American Journal of Psychology 1955, 68: 409-416. But there 
is considerable controversy here, particularly in the order and wording of postexperi- 
mental questions. There may even be a kind of tacit contract between subject and 
experimenter. See Robert Rosenthal, Experimenter Effects in Behavioral Research 
(New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1966). In this controversy, I presently agree 
with Postman that the learning occurs before the subject becomes conscious of the 
reinforcement contingency, and indeed that consciousness would not occur unless this 
had been so. L. Postman and L. Sassenrath, “The automatic action of verbal rewards 
and punishment,” Journal of General Psychology, 1961, 65: 109—136. 

'4 W. Lambert Gardiner, Psychology: A Story of a Search (Belmont, California: 
Brooks/Cole, 1970), p. 76. 





The Mind of Man 


bined with music upon muscle tension. Four electrodes were 
placed on their bodies, the only real one being the one over the 
small thumb muscle, the other three being dummy electrodes. 
The apparatus was so arranged that whenever the imperceptible 
thumb-muscle twitch was electrically detected, the unpleasant 
noise was stopped for 15 seconds if it was already sounding, or 
delayed for 15 seconds if was not turned on at the time of the 
twitch. In all subjects, the imperceptible thumb twitch that 
turned off the distressing noise increased in rate without the 
subjects’ being the slightest bit conscious that they were learning 
to turn off the unpleasant noise. 15 

Thus, consciousness is not a necessary part of the learning 
process, and this is true whether it be the learning of signals, 
skills, or solutions. There is, of course, much more to say on this 
fascinating subject, for the whole thrust of contemporary re¬ 
search in behavior modification is along these lines. But, for the 
present, we have simply established that the older doctrine that 
conscious experience is the substrate of all learning is clearly and 
absolutely false. At this point, we can at least conclude that it is 
possible — possible I say — to conceive of human beings who are 
not conscious and yet can learn and solve problems. 

Consciousness Not Necessary for Thinking 

As we go from simple to more complicated aspects of mental¬ 
ity, we enter vaguer and vaguer territory, where the terms we use 
become more difficult to travel with. Thinking is certainly one of 
these. And to say that consciousness is not necessary for think¬ 
ing makes us immediately bristle with protest. Surely thinking is 
the very heart and bone of consciousness! But let us go slowly 

’5 R. F. Hefferline, B. Keenan, R. A. Harford, “Escape and avoidance condition¬ 
ing in human subjects without their observation of the response,” Science, 1959, 130: 
t 338 -i 339 . Another study which shows unconscious solution learning" very clearly 
is that of J. D. Keehn: “Experimental Studies of the Unconscious: operant condition¬ 
ing of unconscious eye blinking,” Behavior Research and Therapy, 1967, 5: 95-102. 



THE CONSCIOUSNESS OF CONSCIOUSNESS 




here. What we would be referring to would be that type of free 
associating which might be called thinking-about or thinking-of, 
which, indeed, always seems to be fully surrounded and im¬ 
mersed in the image-peopled province of consciousness. But the 
matter is really not that clear at all. 

Let us begin with the type of thinking that ends in a result to 
which may be predicated the terms right or wrong. This is what 
is commonly referred to as making judgments, and is very similar 
to one extreme of solution learning that we have just discussed. 

A simple experiment, so simple as to seem trivial, will bring us 
directly to the heart of the matter. Take any two unequal objects > 
such as a pen and pencil or two unequally filled glasses of water, 
and place them on the desk in front of you. Then, partly closing 
your eyes to increase your attention to the task, pick up each one 
with the thumb and forefinger and judge which is heavier. Now 
introspect on everything you are doing. You will find yourself 
conscious of the feel of the objects against the skin of your 
fingers, conscious of the slight downward pressure as you feel the 
weight of each, conscious of any protuberances on the sides of 
the objects, and so forth. And now the actual judging of which is 
heavier. Where is that? Lo! the very act of judgment that one 
object is heavier than the other is not conscious. It is somehow 
just given to you by your nervous system. If we call that process 
of judgment thinking, we are finding that such thinking is not 
conscious at all. A simple experiment, yes, but extremely impor¬ 
tant. It demolishes at once the entire tradition that such thought 
processes are the structure of the conscious mind. 

This type of experiment came to be studied extensively back at 
the beginning of this century in what came to be known as the 
Wurzburg School. It all began with a study by Karl Marbe in 
1901, which was very similar to the above, except that small 
weights were used. 16 The subject was asked to lift two weights 


16 K. Marbe, Experimentell-Psychologische Untersuchungen iiber das Urteil, eine 
Einleitung in die Logik (Leipzig: Engelmann, 1901). 





The Mind of Man 

