
in front of him, and place the one that was heavier in front of the 
experimenter, who was facing him. And it came as a startling 
discovery both to the experimenter himself and to his highly 
trained subjects, all of them introspective psychologists, that the 
process of judgment itself was never conscious. Physics and 
psychology always show interesting contrasts, and it is one of the 
ironies of science that the Marbe experiment, so simple as to 
seem silly, was to psychology what the so-difficult-to-set-up Mi- 
chaelson-Morley experiment was to physics. Just as the latter 
proved that the ether, that substance supposed to exist through¬ 
out space, did not exist, so the weight-judgment experiment 
showed that judging, that supposed hallmark of consciousness, 
did not exist in consciousness at all. 

But a complaint can be lodged here. Maybe in lifting the 
objects the judging was all happening so fast that we forgot it. 
After all, in introspecting we always have hundreds of words to 
describe what happens in a few seconds. (What an astonishing 
fact that is!) And our memory fades as to what just happened 
even as we are trying to express it. Perhaps this was what was 
occurring in Marbe’s experiment, and that type of thinking called 
judging could be found in consciousness, after all, if we could 
only remember. 

This was the problem as Watt faced it a few years after 
Marbe.To solve it, he used a different method, word associa¬ 
tions. Nouns printed on cards were shown to the subject, who 
was to reply by uttering an associate word as quickly as he could. 
It was not free association, but what is technically called par¬ 
tially constrained: in different series the subject was required to 
associate to the visual word a superordinate (e.g. oak-tree), co¬ 
ordinate (oak-elm), or subordinate (oak-beam); or a whole (oak- 
forest), a part (oak-acorn), or another part of a common whole 

v H. J. Watt, “Experimentelle Beitrage zur einer Theorie des Denkens,” Archiv 
fur geshihte der Psychologie, 1905, 4.: 289-436. 



THE CONSCIOUSNESS OF CONSCIOUSNESS 




(oak-path). The nature of this task of constrained associations 
made it possible to divide the consciousness of it into four pe¬ 
riods: the instructions as to which of the constraints it was to be 
(e.g., superordinate), the presentation of the stimulus noun 
(e.g., oak), the search for an appropriate association, and the 
spoken reply (e.g., tree). The introspecting observers were asked 
to confine themselves first to one period and then to another, and 
thus get a more accurate account of consciousness in each. 

It was expected that the precision of this fractionation method 
would prove Marbe’s conclusions wrong, and that the conscious¬ 
ness of thinking would be found in Watt's third period, the period 
of the search for the word that would suit the particular con¬ 
strained association. But nothing of the sort happened. It was 
the third period that was introspectively blank. What seemed to 
be happening was that thinking was automatic and not really 
conscious once a stimulus word had been given, and, previous to 
that, the particular type of association demanded had been ade¬ 
quately understood by the observer. This was a remarkable re¬ 
sult. Another way of saying it is that one does one’s thinking 
before one knows what one is to think about. The important part 
of the matter is the instruction, which allows the whole business 
to go off automatically. This I shall shorten to the term struction, 
by which I mean it to have the connotation of both instruction 
and construction. 18 

Thinking, then, is not conscious. Rather, it is an automatic 
process following a struction and the materials on which the 
struction is to operate. 

But we do not have to stay with verbal associations; any type of 
problem will do, even those closer to voluntary actions. If I say to 

18 The terms set, determining tendency, and struction need to be distinguished. A 
set is the more inclusive term, being an engaged aptic structure which in mammals 
can be ordered from a general limbic component of readiness to a specific cortical 
component of a determining tendency, the final part of which in humans is often a 
struction. 





The Mind of Man 


myself, I shall think about an oak in summer, that is a struction, 
and what I call thinking about is really a file of associated images 
cast up on the shores of my consciousness out of an unknown 
sea, just like the constrained associations in Watt's experiment. 

If we have the figures 6 and 2, divided by a vertical line, 
61 2, the ideas produced by such a stimulus will be eight, four, or 
three, according to whether the struction prescribed is addition, 
subtraction, or division. The important thing is that the struction 
itself, the process of addition, subtraction, or division, disappears 
into the nervous system once it is given. But it is obviously there 
‘in the mind’ since the same stimulus can result in any of three 
different responses. And that is something we are not in the least 
aware of, once it is put in motion. 

Suppose we have a series of figures such as the following: 

OAOAO? 

What is the next figure in this series? How did you arrive at your 
answer? Once I have given you the struction, you automatically 
‘see’ that it is to be another triangle. I submit that if you try to 
introspect on the process by which you came up with the answer 
you are not truly retrieving the processes involved, but inventing 
what you think they must have been by giving yourself another 
struction to that effect. In the task itself, all you were really 
conscious of was the struction, the figures before you on the page, 
and then the solution. 

Nor is this different from the case of speech which I mentioned 
earlier. When we speak, we are not really conscious either of the 
search for words, or of putting the words together into phrases, 
or of putting the phrases into sentences. We are only conscious 
of the ongoing series of structions that we give ourselves, which 
then, automatically, without any consciousness whatever, result 
in speech. The speech itself we can be conscious of as it is 



THE CONSCIOUSNESS OF CONSCIOUSNESS 




produced if we wish, thus giving some feedback to result in 
further structions. 

So we arrive at the position that the actual process of thinking, 
so usually thought to be the very life of consciousness, is not 
conscious at all and that only its preparation, its materials, and 
its end result are consciously perceived. 

Consciousness Not Necessary for Reason 

The long tradition of man as the rational animal, the tradition 
that enthroned him as Homo sapiens, rests in all its pontifical 
generality on the gracile assumption that consciousness is the 
seat of reason. Any discussion of such an assumption is embar¬ 
rassed by the vagueness of the term reason itself. This vagueness 
is the legacy we have from an older ‘faculty’ psychology that 
spoke of a ‘faculty’ of reason, which was of course situated ‘in’ 
consciousness. And this forced deposition of reason and con¬ 
sciousness was further confused with ideas of truth, of how we 
ought to reason, or logic — all quite different things. And hence 
logic was supposed to be the structure of conscious reason con¬ 
founding generations of poor scholars who knew perfectly well 
that syllogisms were not what was on their side of introspection. 

Reasoning and logic are to each other as health is to medicine, 
or — better — as conduct is to morality. Reasoning refers to a 
gamut of natural thought processes in the everyday world. Logic 
is how we ought to think if objective truth is our goal — and the 
everyday world is very little concerned with objective truth. 
Logic is the science of the justification of conclusions we have 
reached by natural reasoning. My point here is that, for such 
natural reasoning to occur, consciousness is not necessary. The 
very reason we need logic at all is because most reasoning is not 
conscious at all. 

Consider to begin with the many phenomena we have already 
established as going on without consciousness which can be 





The Mind of Man 


called elementary kinds of reasoning. Choosing paths, words, 
notes, motions, the perceptual corrections in size and color con¬ 
stancies — all are primitive kinds of reasoning that go on without 
any prod, nudge, or even glance of consciousness. 

Even the more standard types of reasoning can occur without 
consciousness. A boy, having observed on one or more past occa¬ 
sions that a particular piece of wood floats on a particular pond, 
will conclude directly in a new instance that another piece of 
wood will float on another pond. There is no collecting together 
of past instances in consciousness, and no necessary conscious 
process whatever when the new piece of wood is seen directly as 
floating on the new pond. This is sometimes called reasoning 
from particulars, and is simply expectation based on generaliza¬ 
tion. Nothing particularly extraordinary. It is an ability common 
to all the higher vertebrates. Such reasoning is the structure of 
the nervous system, not the structure of consciousness. 

But more complex reasoning without consciousness is con¬ 
tinually going on. Our minds work much faster than conscious¬ 
ness can keep up with. We commonly make general assertions 
based on our past experiences in an automatic way, and only as 
an afterthought are we sometimes able to retrieve any of the past 
experiences on which an assertion is based. How often we reach 
sound conclusions and are quite unable to justify them! Because 
reasoning is not conscious. And consider the kind of reasoning 
that we do about others’ feelings and character, or in reasoning 
out the motives of others from their actions. These are clearly 
the result of automatic inferences by our nervous systems in 
which consciousness is not only unnecessary, but, as we have 
seen in the performance of motor skills, would probably hinder 
the process. 1 ? 

Surely, we exclaim, this cannot be true of the highest processes 
of intellectual thought! Surely there at last we will come to 

'9 Such instances were early recognized as not conscious and were called “auto¬ 
matic inference” or “common sense.” Discussions can be found in Sully, Mill, and 
other nineteenth-century psychologists. 

