

THE CONSCIOUSNESS OF CONSCIOUSNESS 




the very empire of consciousness, where all is spread out in a 
golden clarity and all the orderly processes of reason go on in 
a full publicity of awareness. But the truth has no such gran¬ 
deur. The picture of a scientist sitting down with his problems 
and using conscious induction and deduction is as mythical as a 
unicorn. The greatest insights of mankind have come more mys¬ 
teriously. Helmholtz had his happy thoughts which “often 
enough crept quietly into my thinking without my suspecting their 
importance ... in other cases they arrived suddenly, without any 
effort on my part . . . they liked especially to make their appear¬ 
ance while I was taking an easy walk over wooded hills in sunny 
weather !" 20 

And Gauss, referring to an arithmetical theorem which he had 
unsuccessfully tried to prove for years, wrote how “like a sudden 
flash of lightning, the riddle happened to be solved. I myself 
cannot say what was the conducting thread which connected 
what I previously knew with what made my success possible.” 21 

And the brilliant mathematician Poincare was particularly in¬ 
terested in the manner in which he came upon his own discov¬ 
eries. In a celebrated lecture at the Societe de Psychologie in 
Paris, he described how he set out on a geologic excursion: “The 
incidents of the journey made me forget my mathematical work. 
Having reached Coutances, we entered an omnibus to go some 
place or other. At the moment when I put my foot on the step, 
the idea came to me, without anything in my former thoughts 
seeming to have paved the way for it, the transformation I had 
used to define the Fuchsian functions were identical with those of 
non-Euclidian geometry!” 22 

It does seem that it is in the more abstract sciences, where the 
materials of scrutiny are less and less interfered with by everyday 

20 As quoted by Robert S. Woodworth, Experimental Psychology (New York: 
Holt, 1938), p. 818. 

21 As quoted by Jacques Hadamard, The Psychology of Invention in the Mathe¬ 
matical Field (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1945), p. 15. 

22 Henri Poincare, “Mathematical creation,” in his The Foundations of Science, 
G. Bruce Halsted, trans. (New York: The Science Press, 1913), p. 387. 





The Mind of Man 


experience, that this business of sudden flooding insights is most 
obvious. A close friend of Einstein’s has told me that many of the 
physicist’s greatest ideas came to him so suddenly while he was 
shaving that he had to move the blade of the straight razor very 
carefully each morning, lest he cut himself with surprise. And a 
well-known physicist in Britain once told Wolfgang Kohler, “We 
often talk about the three B’s, the Bus, the Bath, and the Bed. 
That is where the great discoveries are made in our science.” 

The essential point here is that there are several stages of 
creative thought: first, a stage of preparation in which the prob¬ 
lem is consciously worked over then a period of incubation with¬ 
out any conscious concentration upon the problem; and then the 
illumination which is later justified by logic. The parallel be¬ 
tween these important and complex problems and the simple 
problems of judging weights or the circle-triangle series is obvi¬ 
ous. The period of preparation is essentially the setting up of a 
complex struction together with conscious attention to the mate¬ 
rials on which the struction is to work. But then the actual 
process of reasoning, the dark leap into huge discovery, just as in 
the simple trivial judgment of weights, has no representation in 
consciousness. Indeed, it is sometimes almost as if the problem 
had to be forgotten to be solved. 

The Location of Consciousness 

The final fallacy which I wish to discuss is both important and 
interesting, and I have left it for the last Because I think it deals 
the coup de grace to the everyman theory of consciousness. Where 
does consciousness take place? 

Everyone, or almost everyone, immediately replies, in my 
head. This is because when we introspect, we seem to look 
inward on an inner space somewhere behind our eyes. But what 
on earth do we mean by ‘look’? We even close our eyes some¬ 
times to introspect even more clearly. Upon what? Its spatial 



THE CONSCIOUSNESS OF CONSCIOUSNESS 45 

character seems unquestionable. Moreover we seem to move or 
at least ‘look’ in different directions. And if we press ourselves 
too strongly to further characterize this space (apart from its 
imagined contents), we feel a vague irritation, as if there were 
something that did not want to be known, some quality which to 
question was somehow ungrateful, like rudeness in a friendly 
place. 

We not only locate this space of consciousness inside our own 
heads. We also assume it is there in others’. In talking with a 
friend, maintaining periodic eye-to-eye contact (that remnant of 
our primate past when eye-to-eye contact was concerned in estab¬ 
lishing tribal hierarchies), we are always assuming a space be¬ 
hind our companion’s eyes into which we are talking, similar to 
the space we imagine inside our own heads where we are talking 
from. 

And this is the very heartbeat of the matter. For we know 
perfectly well that there is no such space in anyone’s head at all! 
There is nothing inside my head or yours except physiological 
tissue of one sort or another. And the fact that it is predomi¬ 
nantly neurological tissue is irrelevant. 

Now this thought takes a little thinking to get used to. It 
means that we are continually inventing these spaces in our own 
and other people’s heads, knowing perfectly well that they don't 
exist anatomically; and the location of these ‘spaces’ is indeed 
quite arbitrary. The Aristotelian writings, 2 3 for example, located 
consciousness or the abode of thought in and just above the 
heart, believing the brain to be a mere cooling organ since it was 
insensitive to touch or injury. And some readers will not have 
found this discussion valid since they locate their thinking selves 
somewhere in the upper chest. For most of us, however, the 
habit of locating consciousness in the head is so ingrained that it 

2 3 It is so obvious that the writings ascribed to Aristotle were not written by the 
same hand that I prefer this designation. 





The Mind of Man 


is difficult to think otherwise. But, actually, you could, as you 
remain where you are, just as well locate your consciousness 
around the corner in the next room against the wall near the 
floor, and do your thinking there as well as in your head. Not 
really just as well. For there are very good reasons why it is 
better to imagine your mind-space inside of you, reasons to do 
with volition and internal sensations, with the relationship of 
your body and your ‘I’ which will become apparent as we go on. 

That there is no phenomenal necessity in locating conscious¬ 
ness in the brain is further reinforced by various abnormal in¬ 
stances in which consciousness seems to be outside the body. A 
friend who received a left frontal brain injury in the war regained 
consciousness in the corner of the ceiling of a hospital ward 
looking down euphorically at himself on the cot swathed in 
bandages. Those who have taken lysergic acid diethylamide com¬ 
monly report similar out-of-the-body or exosomatic experiences, 
as they are called. Such occurrences do not demonstrate anything 
metaphysical whatever; simply that locating consciousness can be 
an arbitrary matter. 

Let us not make a mistake. When I am conscious, I am always 
and definitely using certain parts of my brain inside my head. 
But so am I when riding a bicycle, and the bicycle riding does not 
go on inside my head. The cases are different of course, since 
bicycle riding has a definite geographical location, while con¬ 
sciousness does not. In reality, consciousness has no location 
whatever except as we imagine it has. 

Is Consciousness Necessary? 

Let us review where we are, for we have just found our way 
through an enormous amount of ramous material which may 
have seemed more perplexing than clarifying. We have been 
brought to the conclusion that consciousness is not what we 
generally think it is. It is not to be confused with reactivity. It is 



THE CONSCIOUSNESS OF CONSCIOUSNESS 47 

not involved in hosts of perceptual phenomena. It is not involved 
in the performance of skills and often hinders their execution. 
It need not be involved in speaking, writing, listening, or reading. 
It does not copy down experience, as most people think. Con¬ 
sciousness is not at all involved in signal learning, and need not 
be involved in the learning of skills or solutions, which can go on 
without any consciousness whatever. It is not necessary for mak¬ 
ing judgments or in simple thinking. It is not the seat of reason, 
and indeed some of the most difficult instances of creative reason¬ 
ing go on without any attending consciousness. And it has no 
location except an imaginary one! The immediate question 
therefore is, does consciousness exist at all? But that is the 
problem of the next chapter. Here it is only necessary to con¬ 
clude that consciousness does not make all that much difference 
to a lot of our activities. If our reasonings have been correct, it is 
perfectly possible that there could have existed a race of men 
who spoke, judged, reasoned, solved problems, indeed did most of 
the things that we do, but who were not conscious at all. This is 
the important and in some ways upsetting notion that we are 
forced to conclude at this point. Indeed I have begun in this 
fashion, and place great importance on this opening chapter, for 
unless you are here convinced that a civilization without con¬ 
sciousness is possible, you will find the discussion that follows 
unconvincing and paradoxical. 



CHAPTER 2 


Consciousness 


T ius having chiseled away some of the major misconcep¬ 
tions about consciousness, what then have we left? If con¬ 
sciousness is not all these things, if it is not so extensive as we 
