think, not a copy of experience, or the necessary locus of learning, 
judgment, or even thought, what is it? And as we stare into the 
dust and rubble of the last chapter, hoping Pygmalion-like to see 
consciousness newly step forth pure and pristine out of the detritus, 
let us ramble out and around the subject a little way as the dust 
settles, talking of different things. 

Metaphor and Language 

Let us speak of metaphor. The most fascinating property of 
language is its capacity to make metaphors. But what an under¬ 
statement! For metaphor is not a mere extra trick of language, 
as it is so often slighted in the old schoolbooks on composition; it 
is the very constitutive ground of language. I am using metaphor 
here in its most general sense: the use of a term for one thing to 
describe another because of some kind of similarity between 
them or between their relations to other things. There are thus 
always two terms in a metaphor, the thing to be described, which 
I shall call the metaphrand, and the thing or relation used to 
elucidate it, which I shall call the metaphier. A metaphor is 
always a known metaphier operating on a less known meta- 



CONSCIOUSNESS 




phrand. 1 I have coined these hybrid terms simply to echo multi¬ 
plication where a multiplier operates on a multiplicand. 

It is by metaphor that language grows. The common reply to 
the question “what is it?” is, when the reply is difficult or. the 
experience unique, “well, it is like —In laboratory studies, 
both children and adults describing nonsense objects (or meta- 
phrands) to others who cannot see them use extended meta- 
phiers that with repetition become contracted into labels. 2 This 
is the major way in which the vocabulary of language is formed. 
The grand and vigorous function of metaphor is the generation 
of new language as it is needed, as human culture becomes more 
and more complex. 

A random glance at the etymologies of common words in a 
dictionary will demonstrate this assertion. Or take the naming of 
various fauna and flora in their Latin indicants, or even in their 
wonderful common English names, such as stag beetle, lady’s- 
slipper, darning needle, Queen Anne’s lace, or buttercup. The 
human body is a particularly generative metaphier, creating pre¬ 
viously unspeakable distinctions in a throng of areas. The head 
of an army, table, page, bed, ship, household, or nail, or of steam 
or water; the face of a clock, cliff, card, or crystal; the eyes of 
needles, winds, storms, targets, flowers, or potatoes; the brow of 
a hill; the cheeks of a vise; the teeth of cogs or combs; the lips of 
pitchers, craters, augers; the tongues of shoes, boardjoints, or 
railway switches; the arm of a chair or the sea; the leg of a table, 
compass, sailor’s voyage, or cricket field; and so on and on. Or 

1 This distinction is not connotatively the same as I. A. Richards’ ‘tenor’ and 

‘vehicle’. See his Philosophy of Rhetoric (New York: Oxford University Press, 1936), 

pp. 96, 120-121. Nor as Christine Brooke-Rose’s ‘proper’ and ‘metaphor’ terms, both 
of which make the matter too literary. See her A Grammar of Metaphor (London: 
Seeker and Warburg, 1958), the first chapter of which is a good historical intro¬ 
duction to the subject. 

2 See S. Glucksberg, R. M. Krauss, and R. Weisberg, “Referential communica¬ 
tion in nursery school children: Method and some preliminary findings,” Journal of 
Experimental Child Psychology, 1966, 3: 333-342. 





The Mind of Man 


the foot of this page. Or the leaf you will soon turn. All of these 
concrete metaphors increase enormously our powers of percep¬ 
tion of the world about us and our understanding of it, and 
literally create new objects. Indeed, language is an organ of per¬ 
ception, not simply a means of communication. 

This is language moving out synchronically (or without refer¬ 
ence to time) into the space of the world to describe it and 
perceive it more and more definitively. But language also moves 
in another and more important way, diachronically, or through 
time, and behind our experiences on the basis of aptic structures 
in our nervous systems to create abstract concepts whose refer¬ 
ents are not observables except in a metaphorical sense. And 
these too are generated by metaphor. This is indeed the nub 
(knob), heart, pith, kernel, core, marrow, etc. of my argument, 
which itself is a metaphor and ‘seen’ only with the mind’s ‘eye’. 

In the abstractions of human relations, the skin becomes a 
particularly important metaphier. We get or stay ‘in touch’ with 
others who may be ‘thick-’ or ‘thin-skinned’ or perhaps ‘touchy’ 
in which case they have to be ‘handled’ carefully lest we ‘rub’ 
them the wrong way; we may have a ‘feeling’ for another person 
with whom we may have a ‘touching’ experience.' 5 

The concepts of science are all of this kind, abstract concepts 
generated by concrete metaphors. In physics, we have force, 
acceleration (to increase one’s steps), inertia (originally an in¬ 
dolent person), impedance, resistance, fields, and now charm. In 
physiology, the metaphier of a machine has been at the very 
center of discovery. We understand the brain by metaphors to 
everything from batteries and telegraphy to computers and holo¬ 
grams. Medical practice is sometimes dictated by metaphor. In 
the eighteenth century, the heart in fever was like a boiling pot, 
and so bloodletting was prescribed to reduce its fuel. And even 
today, a great deal of medicine is based upon the military meta- 

3 See Ashley Montagu, Touching (New York: Columbia University Press, 1971). 



CONSCIOUSNESS 




phor of defense of the body against attacks of this or that. The 
very concept of law in Greek derives from nomos, the word for 
the foundations of a building. To be liable, or bound in law, comes 
from the Latin ligare, meaning to bind with cord. 

In early times, language and its referents climbed up from the 
concrete to the abstract on the steps of metaphors, even, we may 
say, created the abstract on the bases of metaphors. 

It is not always obvious that metaphor has played this all- 
important function. But this is because the concrete metaphiers 
become hidden in phonemic change, leaving the words to exist on 
their own. Even such an unmetaphorical-sounding word as the 
verb 'to be' was generated from a metaphor. It comes from the 
Sanskrit bhu, “to grow, or make grow,” while the English forms 
‘am’ and ‘is’ have evolved from the same root as the Sanskrit 
asmiy “to breathe.” It is something of a lovely surprise that the 
irregular conjugation of our most nondescript verb is thus a 
record of a time when man had no independent word for ‘exis¬ 
tence’ and could only say that something ‘grows’ or that it 
“breathes.”4 Of course we are not conscious that the concept of 
being is thus generated from a metaphor about growing and 
breathing. Abstract words are ancient coins whose concrete 
images in the busy give-and-take of talk have worn away with 
use. 

Because in our brief lives we catch so little of the vastnesses of 
history, we tend too much to think of language as being solid as a 
dictionary, with a granite-like permanence, rather than as the 
rampant restless sea of metaphor which it is. Indeed, if we con¬ 
sider the changes in vocabulary that have occurred over the last 
few millennia, and project them several millennia hence, an 
interesting paradox arises. For if we ever achieve a language 
that has the power of expressing everything, then metaphor will 

4 A paraphrase of Phillip Wheelwright in his The Burning Fountain (Blooming¬ 
ton: Indiana University Press, 1954). 





The Mind of Man 


no longer be possible. I would not say, in that case, my love is 
like a red, red rose, for love would have exploded into terms for 
its thousands of nuances, and applying the correct term would 
leave the rose metaphorically dead. 

The lexicon of language, then, is a finite set of terms that by 
metaphor is able to stretch out over an infinite set of circum¬ 
stances, even to creating new circumstances thereby. 

(Could consciousness be such a new creation?) 


Understanding as Metaphor 

We are trying to understand consciousness, but what are we 
really trying to do when we try to understand anything? Like 
children trying to describe nonsense objects, so in trying to 
understand a thing we are trying to find a metaphor for that 
thing. Not just any metaphor, but one with something more 
familiar and easy to our attention. Understanding a thing is to 
arrive at a metaphor for that thing by substituting something 
more familiar to us. And the feeling of familiarity is the feeling 
of understanding. 

Generations ago we would understand thunderstorms perhaps 
as the roaring and rumbling about in battle of superhuman gods. 
We would have reduced the racket that follows the streak of 
lightning to familiar battle sounds, for example. Similarly today, 
we reduce the storm to various supposed experiences with fric¬ 
tion, sparks, vacuums, and the imagination of bulgeous banks of 
burly air smashing together to make the noise. None of these 
really exist as we picture them. Our images of these events of 
physics are as far from the actuality as fighting gods. Yet they 
act as the metaphor and they feel familiar and so we say we 
understand the thunderstorm. 

So, in other areas of science, we say we understand an aspect 
of nature when we can say it is similar to some familiar theoreti¬ 
cal model. The terms theory and model, incidentally, are some- 



CONSCIOUSNESS 




times used interchangeably. But really they should not be. A 
theory is a relationship of the model to the things the model is 
supposed to represent. The Bohr model of the atom is that of a 
proton surrounded by orbiting electrons. It is something like the 
pattern of the solar system, and that is indeed one of its meta¬ 
