phoric sources. Bohr’s theory was that all atoms were similar to 
his model. The theory, with the more recent discovery of new 
particles and complicated interatomic relationships, has turned 
out not to be true. But the model remains. A model is neither 
true nor false; only the theory of its similarity to what it rep¬ 
resents. 

A theory is thus a metaphor between a model and data. And 
understanding in science is the feeling of similarity between 
complicated data and a familiar model. 

If understanding a thing is arriving at a familiarizing meta¬ 
phor for it, then we can see that there always will be a difficulty 
in understanding consciousness. For it should be immediately 
apparent that there is not and cannot be anything in our immedi¬ 
ate experience that is like immediate experience itself. There is 
therefore a sense in which we shall never be able to understand 
consciousness in the same way that we can understand things 
that we are conscious of. 

Most of the errors about consciousness that we have been 
studying have been errors of attempted metaphors. We spoke of 
the notion of consciousness being a copy of experience coming 
out of the explicit metaphor of a schoolboy’s slate. But of course 
no one really meant consciousness copies experience; it was as if 
it did. And we found on analysis, of course, that it did no such 
thing. 

And even the idea behind that last phrase, that consciousness 
does anything at all, even that is a metaphor. It is saying that 
consciousness is a person behaving in physical space who does 
things, and this is true only if ‘does’ is a metaphor as well. For to 





The Mind of Man 


do things is some kind of behavior in a physical world by a living 
body. And also in what Space' is the metaphorical 'doing' being 
done? (Some of the dust is beginning to settle.) This 'space* too 
must be a metaphor of real space. All of which is reminiscent of 
our discussion of the location of consciousness, also a metaphor. 
Consciousness is being thought of as a thing, and so like other 
things must have a location, which, as we saw earlier, it does not 
actually have in the physical sense. 

I realize that my argument here is becoming fairly dense. But 
before coming out into the clearing, I wish to describe what I 
shall mean by the term analog. An analog is a model, but a 
model of a special kind. It is not like a scientific model, whose 
source may be anything at all and whose purpose is to act as an 
hypothesis of explanation or understanding. Instead, an analog 
is at every point generated by the thing it is an analog of. A map 
is a good example. It is not a model in the scientific sense, not a 
hypothetical model like the Bohr atom to explain something un¬ 
known. Instead, it is constructed from something well known, if 
not completely known. Each region of a district of land is allot¬ 
ted a corresponding region on the map, though the materials of 
land and map are absolutely different and a large proportion of 
the features of the land have to be left out. And the relation 
between an analog map and its land is a metaphor. If I point to a 
location on a map and say, "There is Mont Blanc and from Cha¬ 
monix we can reach the east face this way," that is really a 
shorthand way of saying, "The relations between the point labeled 
'Mont Blanc' and other points is similar to the actual Mont Blanc 
and its neighboring regions.” 


The Metaphor Language of Mind 

I think it is apparent now, at least dimly, what is emerging 
from the debris of the previous chapter. I do not now feel myself 
proving my thesis to you step by step, so much as arranging in 



CONSCIOUSNESS 




your mind certain notions so that, at the very least, you will not 
be immediately estranged from the point I am about to make. My 
procedure here in what I realize is a difficult and overtly diffuse 
part of this book is to simply state in general terms my conclusion 
and then clarify what it implies. 

Subjective conscious mind is an analog of what is called the 
real world. It is built up with a vocabulary or lexical field whose 
terms are all metaphors or analogs of behavior in the physical 
world. Its reality is of the same order as mathematics. It allows 
us to shortcut behavioral processes and arrive at more adequate 
decisions. Like mathematics, it is an operator rather than a thing 
or repository. And it is intimately bound up with volition and 
decision. 

Consider the language we use to describe conscious processes. 
The most prominent group of words used to describe mental 
events are visual. We ‘see’ solutions to problems, the best of 
which may be ‘brilliant’, and the person ‘brighter’ and ’clear¬ 
headed’ as opposed to 'dull', 'fuzzy-minded', or 'obscure' solu¬ 
tions. These words are all metaphors and the mind-space to which 
they apply is a metaphor of actual space. In it we can 'approach' a 
problem, perhaps from some 'viewpoint', and 'grapple' with its 
difficulties, or seize together or 'com-prehend' parts of a problem, 
and so on, using metaphors of behavior to invent things to do in 
this metaphored mind-space. 

And the adjectives to describe physical behavior in real space 
are analogically taken over to describe mental behavior in mind- 
space when we speak of our minds as being 'quick,' 'slow', 'agi¬ 
tated' (as when we cogitate or co-agitate), 'nimble-witted', 
'strong-' or 'weak-minded.' The mind-space in which these meta¬ 
phorical activities go on has its own group of adjectives; we can 
be 'broad-minded', 'deep', 'open', or 'narrow-minded'; we can be 
'occupied'; we can 'get something off our minds', 'put something 
out of mind', or we can 'get it', let something 'penetrate', or 'bear', 
'have', 'keep', or 'hold' it in mind. 

As with a real space, something can be at the 'back' of our 





The Mind of Man 


mind, in its ’inner recesses', or 'beyond' our mind, or 'out' of our 
mind. In argument we try to 'get things through' to someone, to 
'reach' their 'understanding' or find a 'common ground', or 'point 
out', etc., all actions in real space taken over analogically into the 
space of the mind. 

But what is it we are making a metaphor of? We have seen 
that the usual function of metaphor is a wish to designate a 
particular aspect of a thing or to describe something for which 
words are not available. That thing to be designated, described, 
expressed, or lexically widened is what we have called the meta- 
phrand. We operate upon this by some similar, more familiar 
thing, called a metaphier. Originally, of course, the purpose was 
intensely practical, to designate an arm of the sea as a better 
place for shellfish, or to put a head on a nail that it might better 
hold a board to a stanchion. The metaphiers here were arm and 
head, and the metaphrands a particular part of the sea and 
particular end of the nail that already existed. Now when we say 
mind-space is a metaphor of real space, it is the real 'external' 
world that is the metaphier. But if metaphor generates con¬ 
sciousness rather than simply describes it, what is the meta- 
phrand? 


Paraphiers and Paraphrands 

If we look more carefully at the nature of metaphor (noticing 
all the while the metaphorical nature of almost everything we are 
saying), we find (even the verb “find”!) that it is composed of 
more than a metaphier and a metaphrand. There are also at the 
bottom of most complex metaphors various associations or attri¬ 
butes of the metaphier which I am going to call paraphiers. And 
these paraphiers project back into the metaphrand as what I 
shall call the paraphrands of the metaphrand. Jargon, yes, but 
absolutely necessary if we are to be crystal clear about our re¬ 
ferents. 



CONSCIOUSNESS 




Some examples will show that the unraveling of metaphor into 
these four parts is really quite simple, as well as clarifying what 
otherwise we could not speak about. 

Consider the metaphor that the snow blankets the ground. 
The metaphrand is something about the completeness and even 
thickness with which the ground is covered by snow. The meta- 
phier is a blanket on a bed. But the pleasing nuances of this 
metaphor are in the paraphiers of the metaphier, blanket. These 
are something about warmth, protection, and slumber until some 
period of awakening. These associations of blanket then auto¬ 
matically become the associations or paraphrands of the original 
metaphrand, the way the snow covers the ground. And we thus 
have created by this metaphor the idea of the earth sleeping and 
protected by the snow cover until its awakening in spring. All 
this is packed into the simple use of the word ‘blanket’ to pertain 
to the way snow covers the ground. 

Not all metaphors, of course, have such generative potential. 
In that often-cited one that a ship plows the sea, the metaphrand 
is the particular action of the bow of the ship through the water, 
and the metaphier is plowing action. The correspondence is 
exact. And that is the end of it. 

But if I say the brook sings through the woods, the similarity of 
the metaphrand of the brook's bubbling and gurgling and the 
metaphier of (presumably) a child singing is not at all exact. It 
is the paraphiers of joy and dancingness becoming the para¬ 
phrands of the brook that are of interest. 

Or in the many-poemed comparison of love to a rose, it is not 
the tenuous correspondence of metaphrand and metaphier but 
the paraphrands that engage us, that love lives in the sun, smells 
sweet, has thorns when grasped, and blooms for a season only. 
Or suppose I say less visually and so more profoundly something 
quite opposite, that my love is like a tinsmith's scoop, sunk past 
its gleam in the meal-bin.s The immediate correspondence here 

5 From “Mossbawn (for Mary Heaney)” by Seumas Heaney, North (London: 
Faber, 1974). 





