The Mind of Man 


of metaphrand and metaphier, of being out of casual sight, is 
trivial. Instead, it is the paraphrands of this metaphor which 
create what could not possibly be there, the enduring careful 
shape and hidden shiningness and holdingness of a lasting love 
deep in the heavy manipulable softnesses of mounding time, the 
whole simulating (and so paraphranding) sexual intercourse 
from a male point of view. Love has not such properties except 
as we generate them by metaphor. 

Of such poetry is consciousness made. This can be seen if we 
return to some of the metaphors of mind we have earlier looked 
at. Suppose we are trying to solve some simple problem such as 
the circle-triangle series in the previous chapter. And suppose we 
express the fact that we have obtained the solution by exclaiming 
that at last we 'see' what the answer is, namely, a triangle. 

This metaphor may be analyzed just as the blanket of snow or 
the singing brook. The metaphrand is obtaining the solution, the 
metaphier is sight with the eyes, and the paraphiers are all those 
things associated with vision that then create paraphrands, such 
as the mind's 'eye', 'seeing the solution clearly’ etc., and, most 
important, the paraphrand of a 'space' in which the 'seeing' is 
going on, or what I am calling mind-space, and 'objects' to 'see.' 

I do not mean this brief sketch to stand in for a real theory of 
how consciousness was generated in the first place. That prob¬ 
lem we shall come to in Book II. Rather I intend only to suggest 
the possibility that I hope to make plausible later, that conscious¬ 
ness is the work of lexical metaphor. It is spun out of the 
concrete metaphiers of expression and their paraphiers, project¬ 
ing paraphrands that exist only in the functional sense. More¬ 
over, it goes on generating itself, each new paraphrand capable 
of being a metaphrand on its own, resulting in new metaphiers 
with their paraphiers, and so on. 

Of course this process is not and cannot be as haphazard as I 
am making it sound. The world is organized, highly organized, 



CONSCIOUSNESS 




and the concrete metaphiers that are generating consciousness 
thus generate consciousness in an organized way. Hence the 
similarity of consciousness and the physical-behavioral world we 
are conscious of. And hence the structure of that world is echoed 
— though with certain differences — in the structure of con¬ 
sciousness. 

One last complication before going on. A cardinal property of 
an analog is that the way it is generated is not the way it is 
used — obviously. The map-maker and map-user are doing two 
different things. For the map-maker, the metaphrand is the 
blank piece of paper on which he operates with the metaphier of 
the land he knows and has surveyed. But for the map-user, it is 
just the other way around. The land is unknown; it is the land 
that is the metaphrand, while the metaphier is the map which he 
is using, by which he understands the land. 

And so with consciousness. Consciousness is the metaphrand 
when it is being generated by the paraphrands of our verbal 
expressions. But the functioning of consciousness is, as it were, 
the return journey. Consciousness becomes the metaphier full of 
our past experience, constantly and selectively operating on such 
unknowns as future actions, decisions, and partly remembered 
pasts, on what we are and yet may be. And it is by the generated 
structure of consciousness that we then understand the world. 

What kinds of things can we say about that structure? Here I 
shall briefly allude to only the most important. 

The Features of Consciousness 

I. Spatialization. The first and most primitive aspect of con¬ 
sciousness is what we already have had occasion to refer to, the 
paraphrand of almost every mental metaphor we can make, the 
mental space which we take over as the very habitat of it all. If I 
ask you to think of your head, then your feet, then the breakfast 



6o 


The Mind of Man 


you had this morning, and then the Tower of London, and then 
the constellation of Orion, these things have the quality of being 
spatially separated; and it is this quality I am here referring to. 
When we introspect (a metaphor of seeing into something), it is 
upon this metaphorical mind-space which we are constantly re¬ 
newing and 'enlarging' with each new thing or relation conscious- 
ized. 

In Chapter 1 , we spoke of how we invent mind-space inside our 
own heads as well as the heads of others. The word invent is 
perhaps too strong except in the ontological sense. We rather 
assume these ’spaces’ without question. They are a part of what 
it is to be conscious and what it is to assume consciousness in 
others. 

Moreover, things that in the physical-behavioral world do not 
have a spatial quality are made to have such in consciousness. 
Otherwise we cannot be conscious of them. This we shall call 
spatialization. 

Time is an obvious example. If I ask you to think of the last 
hundred years, you may have a tendency to excerpt the matter in 
such a way that the succession of years is spread out, probably 
from left to right. But of course there is no left or right in time. 
There is only before and after, and these do not have any spatial 
properties whatever — except by analog. You cannot, absolutely 
cannot think of time except by spatializing it. Consciousness is 
always a spatialization in which the diachronic is turned into the 
synchronic, in which what has happened in time is excerpted and 
seen in side-by-sideness. 

This spatialization is characteristic of all conscious thought. If 
you are now thinking of where in all the theories of mind my 
particular theory fits, you are first habitually ’turning’ to your 
mind-space where abstract things can be ’separated out’ and 
’put beside’ each other to be ’looked at’ — as could never happen 
physically or in actuality. You then make the metaphor of the¬ 
ories as concrete objects, then the metaphor of a temporal sue- 



CONSCIOUSNESS 




cession of such objects as a synchronic array, and thirdly, the 
metaphor of the characteristics of theories as physical character¬ 
istics, all of some degree so they can be 'arranged' in a kind of 
order. And you then make the further expressive metaphor of 
'fit'. The actual behavior of fitting, of which 'fit' here is the analog 
in consciousness, may vary from person to person or from culture 
to culture, depending on personal experience of arranging things 
in some kind of order, or of fitting objects into their receptacles, 
etc. The metaphorical substrate of thought is thus sometimes 
very complicated, and difficult to unravel. But every conscious 
thought that you are having in reading this book can by such an 
analysis be traced back to concrete actions in a concrete world. 

2 . Excerption. In consciousness, we are never 'seeing' any¬ 
thing in its entirety. This is because such 'seeing' is an analog of 
actual behavior j and in actual behavior we can only see or pay 
attention to a part of a thing at any one moment. And so in 
consciousness. We excerpt from the collection of possible atten¬ 
tions to a thing which comprises our knowledge of it. And this is 
all that it is possible to do since consciousness is a metaphor of 
our actual behavior. 

Thus, if I ask you to think of a circus, for example, you will 
first have a fleeting moment of slight fuzziness, followed perhaps 
by a picturing of trapeze artists or possibly a clown in the center 
ring. Or, if you think of the city which you are now in, you will 
excerpt some feature, such as a particular building or tower or 
crossroads. Or if I ask you to think of yourself, you will make 
some kind of excerpts from your recent past, believing you are 
then thinking of yourself. In all these instances, we find no 
difficulty or particular paradox in the fact that these excerpts are 
not the things themselves, although we talk as if they were. 
Actually we are never conscious of things in their true nature, 
only of the excerpts we make of them. 

The variables controlling excerption are deserving of much 





The Mind of Man 


more thought and study. For on them the person's whole con¬ 
sciousness of the world and the persons with whom he is interact¬ 
ing depend. Your excerptions of someone you know well are 
heavily associated with your affect toward him. If you like him, 
the excerpts will be the pleasant things; if not, the unpleasant. 
The causation may be in either direction. 

How we excerpt other people largely determines the kind of 
world we feel we are living in. Take for example one's relatives 
when one was a child. If we excerpt them as their failures, their 
hidden conflicts, their delusions, well, that is one thing. But if we 
excerpt them at their happiest, in their idiosyncratic delights, it is 
quite another world. Writers and artists are doing in a controlled 
way what happens 'in' consciousness more haphazardly. 

Excerption is distinct from memory. An excerpt of a thing is 
in consciousness the representative of the thing or event to which 
memories adhere, and by which we can retrieve memories. If I 
wish to remember what I was doing last summer, I first have an 
excerption of the time concerned, which may be a fleeting image 
of a couple of months on the calendar, until I rest in an excerp¬ 
tion of a particular event, such as walking along a particular 
riverside. And from there I associate around it and retrieve mem¬ 
ories about last summer. This is what we mean by reminiscence, 
and it is a particular conscious process which no animal is capa¬ 
ble of. Reminiscence is a succession of excerptions. Each so- 
called association in consciousness is an excerption, an aspect or 
image, if you will, something frozen in time, excerpted from the 
experience on the basis of personality and changing situational 
factors. 6 

3. The Analog T. A most important 'feature' of this meta¬ 
phor 'world' is the metaphor we have of ourselves, the analog 'I', 
which can 'move about' vicarially in our 'imagination', 'doing' 

6 Individual differences and changes in the excerptions with age or health are an 
exceedingly interesting study. For example, if we are depressed or suffering, the ex¬ 
