cerptions of the world in consciousness change dramatically. 



CONSCIOUSNESS 




things that we are not actually doing. There are of course many 
uses for such an analog T. We imagine 'ourselves' 'doing' this or 
that, and thus 'make' decisions on the basis of imagined 'out¬ 
comes' that would be impossible if we did not have an imagined 
'self behaving in an imagined 'world'. In the example in the 
section on spatialization, it was not your physical behavioral self 
that was trying to 'see' where my theory 'fits' into the array of 
alternative theories. It was your analog 'I'. 

If we are out walking, and two roads diverge in a wood, and we 
know that one of them comes back to our destination after a 
much more circuitous route, we can 'traverse' that longer route 
with our analog 'I' to see if its vistas and ponds are worth the 
longer time it will take. Without consciousness with its vicarial 
analog 'I', we could not do this. 

4. The Metaphor 'Me'. The analog 'I' is, however, not simply 
that. It is also a metaphor 'me'. As we imagine ourselves strolling 
down the longer path we indeed catch 'glimpses' of 'ourselves', as 
we did in the exercises of Chapter 1, where we called them auto- 
scopic images. We can both look out from within the imagined self 
at the imagined vistas, or we can step back a bit and see ourselves 
perhaps kneeling down for a drink of water at a particular brook. 
There are of course quite profound problems here, particularly in 
the relationship of the 'I' to the 'me'. But that is another treatise. 
And I am only indicating the nature of the problem. 

5. Narratization. In consciousness, we are always seeing our 
vicarial selves as the main figures in the stories of our lives. In 
the above illustration, the narratization is obvious, namely, walk¬ 
ing along a wooded path. But it is not so obvious that we are 
constantly doing this whenever we are being conscious, and this I 
call narratization. Seated where I am, I am writing a book and 
this fact is imbedded more or less in the center of the story of my 
life, time being spatialized into a journey of my days and years. 





The Mind of Man 


New situations are selectively perceived as part of this ongoing 
story, perceptions that do not fit into it being unnoticed or at least 
unremembered. More important, situations are chosen which are 
congruent to this ongoing story, until the picture I have of myself 
in my life story determines how I am to act and choose in novel 
situations as they arise. 

The assigning of causes to our behavior or saying why we did a 
particular thing is all a part of narratization. Such causes as 
reasons may be true or false, neutral or ideal. Consciousness is 
ever ready to explain anything we happen to find ourselves doing. 
The thief narratizes his act as due to poverty, the poet his as due 
to beauty, and the scientist his as due to truth, purpose and cause 
inextricably woven into the spatialization of behavior in con¬ 
sciousness. 

But it is not just our own analog 'I' that we are narratizing; it is 
everything else in consciousness. A stray fact is narratized to fit 
with some other stray fact. A child cries in the street and we 
narratize the event into a mental picture of a lost child and a 
parent searching for it. A cat is up in a tree and we narratize the 
event into a picture of a dog chasing it there. Or the facts of 
mind as we can understand them into a theory of consciousness. 

6 . Conciliation. A final aspect of consciousness I wish to men¬ 
tion here is modeled upon a behavioral process common to most 
mammals. It really springs from simple recognition, where a 
slightly ambiguous perceived object is made to conform to some 
previously learned schema, an automatic process sometimes called 
assimilation. We assimilate a new stimulus into our conception, or 
schema about it, even though it is slightly different. Since we 
never from moment to moment see or hear or touch things in 
exactly the same way, this process of assimilation into previous 
experience is going on all the time as we perceive our world. We 
are putting things together into recognizable objects on the basis 
of the previously learned schemes we have of them. 



CONSCIOUSNESS 65 

Now assimilation consciousized is conciliation. A better term 
for it might be compatibilization, but that seems something too 
rococo. What I am designating by conciliation is essentially doing 
in mind-space what narratization does in mind-time or spatialized 
time. It brings things together as conscious objects just as narra¬ 
tization brings things together as a story. And this fitting together 
into a consistency or probability is done according to rules built up 
in experience. 

In conciliation we are making excerpts or narratizations com¬ 
patible with each other, just as in external perception the new 
stimulus and the internal conception are made to agree. If we are 
narratizing ourselves as walking along a wooded path, the suc¬ 
cession of excerpts is automatically made compatible with such a 
journey. Or if in daydreaming two excerpts or narratizations hap¬ 
pen to begin occurring at the same time, they are fused or con¬ 
ciliated. 

If I ask you to think of a mountain meadow and a tower at the 
same time, you automatically conciliate them by having the tower 
rising from the meadow. But if I ask you to think of the mountain 
meadow and an ocean at the same time, conciliation tends not 
to occur and you are likely to think of one and then the other. 
You can only bring them together by a narratization. Thus there 
are principles of compatibility that govern this process, and such 
principles are learned and are based on the structure of the 
world. 

Let me summarize as a way of 'seeing' where we are and the 
direction in which our discussion is going. We have said that 
consciousness is an operation rather than a thing, a repository, or 
a function. It operates by way of analogy, by way of constructing 
an analog space with an analog 'I' that can observe that space, 
and move metaphorically in it. It operates on any reactivity, 
excerpts relevant aspects, narratizes and conciliates them to¬ 
gether in a metaphorical space where such meanings can be 





The Mind of Man 


manipulated like things in space. Conscious mind is a spatial 
analog of the world and mental acts are analogs of bodily acts. 
Consciousness operates only on objectively observable things. 
Or, to say it another way with echoes of John Locke, there is 
nothing in consciousness that is not an analog of something that 
was in behavior first. 

This has been a difficult chapter. But I hope I have sketched 
out with some plausibility that the notion of consciousness as a 
metaphor-generated model of the world leads to some quite 
definite deductions, and that these deductions are testable in our 
own everyday conscious experience. It is only, of course, a begin¬ 
ning, a somewhat rough-hewn beginning, which I hope to develop 
in a future work. But it is enough to return now to our major 
inquiry of the origin of it all, saving further amplification of the 
nature of consciousness itself for later chapters. 

If consciousness is this invention of an analog world on the 
basis of language, paralleling the behavioral world even as the 
world of mathematics parallels the world of quantities of things, 
what then can we say about its origin? 

We have arrived at a very interesting point in our discussion, 
and one that is completely contradictory to all of the alternative 
solutions to the problem of the origin of consciousness which we 
discussed in the introductory chapter. For if consciousness is 
based on language, then it follows that it is of a much more 
recent origin than has heretofore been supposed. Consciousness 
come after language! The implications of such a position are 
extremely serious. 



CHAPTER 3 


The Mind of Iliad 


T here is an awkward moment at the top of a Ferris wheel 
when, having come up the inside curvature, where we are 
facing into a firm structure of confident girders, suddenly that 
structure disappears, and we are thrust out into the sky for the 
outward curve down. 

Such perhaps is the present moment. For all the scientific 
alternatives that we faced into in the Introduction, including my 
own prejudgments about the matter, all assured us that con¬ 
sciousness was evolved by natural selection back somewhere in 
mammalian evolution or before. We felt assured that at least 
some animals were conscious, assured that consciousness was 
related in some important way to the evolution of the brain and 
probably its cortex, assured certainly that early man was con¬ 
scious as he was learning language. 

These assurances have now disappeared, and we seem thrust 
out into the sky of a very new problem. If our impressionistic 
development of a theory of consciousness in the last chapter is 
even pointing in the right direction, then consciousness can only 
have arisen in the human species, and that development must 
have come after the development of language. 

Now if human evolution were a simple continuity, our proce¬ 
dure at this point would normally be to study the evolution of lan¬ 
guage, dating it as best we could. We would then try to trace out 
human mentality thereafter until we reached the goal of our 





The Mind of Man 


inquiry, where we could claim by some criterion or other that 
here at last is the place and the date of the origin and beginning 
of consciousness. 

But human evolution is not a simple continuity. Into human 
history around 3000 B.C. comes a curious and very remarkable 
practice. It is a transmutation of speech into little marks on 
stone or clay or papyrus (or pages) so that speech can be seen 
rather than just heard, and seen by anybody, not just those 
