within earshot at the time. So before pursuing the program of 
the preceding paragraph, we should first try to date the origin of 
consciousness either before or after the invention of such seen 
speech by examining its earliest examples. Our present question 
then is: what is the mentality of the earliest writings of man¬ 
kind? 

As soon as we go back to the first written records of man to 
seek evidence for the presence or absence of a subjective con¬ 
scious mind, we are immediately beset with innumerable techni¬ 
cal problems. The most profound is that of translating writings 
that may have issued from a mentality utterly different from our 
own. And this is particularly problematic in the very first human 
writings. These are in hieroglyphics, hieratic, and cuneiform, 
all — interestingly enough — beginning about 3000 B.C. None 
of these is entirely understood. When the subjects are concrete, 
there is little difficulty. But when the symbols are peculiar and 
undetermined by context, the amount of necessary guesswork 
turns this fascinating evidence of the past into a Rorschach test 
in which modern scholars project their own subjectivity with 
little awareness of the importance of their distortion. The indica¬ 
tions here as to whether consciousness was present in the early 
Egyptian dynasties and in the Mesopotamian cultures are thus 
too ambiguous for the kind of concerned analysis which is re¬ 
quired. We shall return to these questions in Book II. 

The first writing in human history in a language of which we 
have enough certainty of translation to consider it in connection 



THE MIND OF ILIAD 




with my hypothesis is the Iliad. Modern scholarship regards this 
revenge story of blood, sweat, and tears to have been developed 
by a tradition of bards or aoidoi between about 1230 B.C. when, 
according to inferences from some recently found Hittite 
tablets, 1 the events of the epic occurred and about 900 or 850 
B.C., when it came to be written down. I propose here to regard 
the poem as a psychological document of immense importance. 
And the question we are to put to it is: What is mind in the 
Iliad? 

The Language of the Iliad 

The answer is disturbingly interesting. There is in general no 
consciousness in the Iliad. I am saying 'in general' because I shall 
mention some exceptions later. And in general therefore, no words 
for consciousness or mental acts. The words in the Iliad that in a 
later age come to mean mental things have different meanings, all 
of them more concrete. The word psyche, which later means soul 
or conscious mind, is in most instances life-substances, such as 
blood or breath: a dying warrior bleeds out his psyche onto the 
ground or breathes it out in his last gasp. The thumos, which 
later comes to mean something like emotional soul, is simply 
motion or agitation. When a man stops moving, the thumos 
leaves his limbs. But it is also somehow like an organ itself, for 
when Glaucus prays to Apollo to alleviate his pain and to give 
him strength to help his friend Sarpedon, Apollo hears his prayer 
and "casts strength in his thumos " (Iliad, 16:529). The thumos 
can tell a man to eat, drink, or fight. Diomedes says in one place 
that Achilles will fight "when the thumos in his chest tells him to 
and a god rouses him" (9:702^). But it is not really an organ and 
not always localized; a raging ocean has thumos. A word of some¬ 
what similar use is phren, which is always localized anatomi- 

1 V. R. d'A. Desborough, The Last Mycenaeans and Their Successors: An Archeo¬ 
logical Survey, c. 1200-c. 1000 B.C. (Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1964). 





The Mind of Man 


cally as the midriff, or sensations in the midriff, and is usually 
used in the plural. It is the phrenes of Hector that recognize 
that his brother is not near him (22:296); this means what we 
mean by "catching one's breath in surprise". It is only centuries 
later that it comes to mean mind or 'heart' in its figurative sense. 

Perhaps most important is the word noos which, spelled as 
nous in later Greek, comes to mean conscious mind. It comes 
from the word noeein, to see. Its proper translation in the Iliad 
would be something like perception or recognition or field of 
vision. Zeus "holds Odysseus in his noos." He keeps watch over 
him. 

Another important word, which perhaps comes from the 
doubling of the word meros (part), is mermera, meaning in two 
parts. This was made into a verb by adding the ending -izo, the 
common suffix which can turn a noun into a verb, the resulting 
word being mermerizein, to be put into two parts about something. 
Modern translators, for the sake of a supposed literary quality in 
their work, often use modern terms and subjective categories 
which are not true to the original. Mermerizein is thus wrongly 
translated as to ponder, to think, to be of divided mind, to be 
troubled about, to try to decide. But essentially it means to be in 
conflict about two actions, not two thoughts. It is always behav¬ 
ioristic. It is said several times of Zeus (20:17, 16:647), as well 
as of others. The conflict is often said to go on in the thumos y or 
sometimes in the phrenes, but never in the noos. The eye cannot 
doubt or be in conflict, as the soon-to-be-invented conscious mind 
will be able to. 

These words are in general, and with certain exceptions, the 
closest that anyone, authors or characters or gods, usually get to 
having conscious minds or thoughts. We shall be entering the 
meaning of these words more carefully in a later chapter. 

There is also no concept of will or word for it, the concept 
developing curiously late in Greek thought. Thus, Iliadic men 
have no will of their own and certainly no notion of free will. 



THE MIND OF ILIAD 




Indeed, the whole problem of volition, so troubling, I think, to 
modern psychological theory, may have had its difficulties be¬ 
cause the words for such phenomena were invented so late. 

A similar absence from Iliadic language is a word for body in 
our sense. The word soma, which in the fifth century B.C. comes 
to mean body, is always in the plural in Homer and means dead 
limbs or a corpse. It is the opposite of psyche. There are several 
words which are used for various parts of the body, and, in 
Homer, it is always these parts that are referred to, and never the 
body as a whole. 2 3 4 So, not surprisingly, the early Greek art of 
Mycenae and its period shows man as an assembly of strangely 
articulated limbs, the joints underdrawn, and the torso almost 
separated from the hips. It is graphically what we find again and 
again in Homer, who speaks of hands, lower arms, upper arms, 
feet, calves, and thighs as being fleet, sinewy, in speedy motion, 
etc., with no mention of the body as a whole. 

Now this is all very peculiar. If there is no subjective con¬ 
sciousness, no mind, soul, or will, in Iliadic men, what then 
initiates behavior? 


The Religion of the Early Greeks 

There is an old and general idea that there was no true religion 
in Greece before the fourth century B.C.s and that the gods in the 
Homeric poems are merely a "gay invention of poets," as it has 
been put by noted scholars^ The reason for this erroneous view 
is that religion is being thought of as a system of ethics, as a kind 


2 Bruno Snell, The Discovery of Mind, T. G. Rosenmeyer, trans. (Cambridge: 
Harvard University Press, 1953). I was well along into the ideas and material of 
this chapter before knowing of Snell's parallel work on Homeric language. Our 
conclusions, however, are quite different. 

3 Except E. R. Dodds in his superb book The Greeks and the Irrational (Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 1951). 

4 For example, Maurice Bowra, Tradition and Design in the Iliad (Oxford: Claren¬ 
don Press, 1930), p. 222. 





The Mind of Man 


of bowing down to external gods in an effort to behave virtuously. 
And indeed in this sense the scholars are right. But to say that 
the gods in the Iliad are merely the inventions of the authors of 
the epic is to completely misread what is going on. 

The characters of the Iliad do not sit down and think out what 
to do. They have no conscious minds such as we say we have, 
and certainly no introspections. It is impossible for us with our 
subjectivity to appreciate what it was like. When Agamemnon, 
king of men, robs Achilles of his mistress, it is a god that grasps 
Achilles by his yellow hair and warns him not to strike Agamem¬ 
non (I :i97ff.). It is a god who then rises out of the gray sea and 
consoles him in his tears of wrath on the beach by his black 
ships, a god who whispers low to Helen to sweep her heart with 
homesick longing, a god who hides Paris in a mist in front of the 
attacking Menelaus, a god who tells Glaucus to take bronze for 
gold (6:234ff.), a god who leads the armies into battle, who speaks 
to each soldier at the turning points, who debates and teaches 
Hector what he must do, who urges the soldiers on or defeats 
them by casting them in spells or drawing mists over their visual 
fields. It is the gods who start quarrels among men (4:437ff.) 
that really cause the war (3:i64ff.), and then plan its strategy 
(2:56ff.). It is one god who makes Achilles promise not to go into 
battle, another who urges him to go, and another who then clothes 
him in a golden fire reaching up to heaven and screams through 
his throat across the bloodied trench at the Trojans, rousing in 
them ungovernable panic. In fact, the gods take the place of 
consciousness. 

The beginnings of action are not in conscious plans, reasons, 
and motives; they are in the actions and speeches of gods. To 
another, a man seems to be the cause of his own behavior. But 
not to the man himself. When, toward the end of the war, 
Achilles reminds Agamemnon of how he robbed him of his mis¬ 
tress, the king of men declares, "Not I was the cause of this act, 
but Zeus, and my portion, and the Erinyes who walk in darkness: 



THE MIND OF ILIAD 




they it was in the assembly put wild ate upon me on that day 
