when I arbitrarily took Achilles' prize from him, so what could I 
do? Gods always have their way.” (19:86-90). And that this 
was no particular fiction of Agamemnon's to evade responsibility 
is clear in that this explanation is fully accepted by Achilles, for 
Achilles also is obedient to his gods. Scholars who in comment¬ 
ing on this passage say that Agamemnon's behavior has become 
"alien to his ego,"s do not go nearly far enough. For the question 
is indeed, what is the psychology of the Iliadic hero? And I 
am saying that he did not have any ego whatever. 

Even the poem itself is not wrought by men in our sense. Its 
first three words are Menin aedie Thea, Of wrath sing, O God¬ 
dess! And the entire epic which follows is the song of the goddess 
which the entranced bard 'heard' and chanted to his iron-age lis¬ 
teners among the ruins of Agamemnon's world. 

If we erase all our preconceptions about poetry and act toward 
the poem as if we had never heard of poetry before, the abnormal 
quality of the speech would immediately arrest us. We call it 
meter nowadays. But what a different thing, these steady hex¬ 
ameters of pitch stresses, from the looser jumble of accents in 
ordinary dialogue! The function of meter in poetry is to drive the 
electrical activity of the brain, and most certainly to relax the 
normal emotional inhibitions of both chanter and listener. A 
similar thing occurs when the voices of schizophrenics speak in 
scanning rhythms or rhyme. Except for its later accretions, then, 
the epic itself was neither consciously composed nor consciously 
remembered, but was successively and creatively changed with 
no more awareness than a pianist has of his improvisation. 

Who then were these gods that pushed men about like robots 
and sang epics through their lips? They were voices whose 
speech and directions could be as distinctly heard by the Iliadic 
heroes as voices are heard by certain epileptic and schizophrenic 

5 Among- others, Martin P. Nilsson, A History of Greek Religion (New York: 
Norton, 1964). 





The Mind of Man 


patients, or just as Joan of Arc heard her voices. The gods were 
organizations of the central nervous system and can be regarded 
as personae in the sense of poignant consistencies through time, 
amalgams of parental or admonitory images. The god is a part of 
the man, and quite consistent with this conception is the fact that 
the gods never step outside of natural laws. Greek gods cannot 
create anything out of nothing, unlike the Hebrew god of Genesis. 
In the relationship between the god and the hero in their dialec¬ 
tic, there are the same courtesies, emotions, persuasions as might 
occur between two people. The Greek god never steps forth in 
thunder, never begets awe or fear in the hero, and is as far from 
the outrageously pompous god of Job as it is possible to be. He 
simply leads, advises, and orders. Nor does the god occasion 
humility or even love, and little gratitude. Indeed, I suggest 
that the god-hero relationship was — by being its progenitor 
— similar to the referent of the ego-superego relationship of 
Freud or the self-generalized other relationship of Mead. The 
strongest emotion which the hero feels toward a god is amaze¬ 
ment or wonder, the kind of emotion that we feel when the 
solution of a particularly difficult problem suddenly pops into our 
heads, or in the cry of eureka! from Archimedes in his bath. 

The gods are what we now call hallucinations. Usually they 
are only seen and heard by the particular heroes they are speak¬ 
ing to. Sometimes they come in mists or out of the gray sea or a 
river, or from the sky, suggesting visual auras preceding them. 
But at other times, they simply occur. Usually they come as 
themselves, commonly as mere voices, but sometimes as other 
people closely related to the hero. 

Apollo's relation to Hector is particularly interesting in this 
regard. In Book 16, Apollo comes to Hector as his maternal 
uncle; then in Book 17 as one of his allied leaders; and then later 
in the same book as his dearest friend from abroad. The denoue¬ 
ment of the whole epic comes when it is Athene who, after telling 
Achilles to kill Hector, then comes to Hector as his dearest 



THE MIND OF ILIAD 




brother, Deiphobus. Trusting in him as his second, Hector chal¬ 
lenges Achilles, demands of Deiphobus another spear, and turns 
to find nothing is there. We would say he has had an hallucina¬ 
tion. So has Achilles. The Trojan War was directed by halluci¬ 
nations. And the soldiers who were so directed were not at all 
like us. They were noble automatons who knew not what they 
did. 

The Bicameral Mind 

The picture then is one of strangeness and heartlessness and 
emptiness. We cannot approach these heroes by inventing mind- 
spaces behind their fierce eyes as we do with each other. Iliadic 
man did not have subjectivity as do we; he had no awareness of 
his awareness of the world, no internal mind-space to introspect 
upon. In distinction to our own subjective conscious minds, we 
can call the mentality of the Myceneans a bicameral mind. Voli¬ 
tion, planning, initiative is organized with no consciousness 
whatever and then 'told' to the individual in his familiar lan¬ 
guage, sometimes with the visual aura of a familiar friend or 
authority figure or 'god', or sometimes as a voice alone. The 
individual obeyed these hallucinated voices because he could not 
'see' what to do by himself. 

The evidence for the existence of such a mentality as I have 
just proposed is not meant to rest solely on the Iliad. It is rather 
that the Iliad suggests the hypothesis that in later chapters I shall 
attempt to prove or refute by examining the remains of other 
civilizations of antiquity. Nevertheless, it would be persuasive at 
this time to bring up certain objections to the preceding which 
will help clarify some of the issues before going on. 

Objection: Is it not true that some scholars have considered the 
poem to be entirely the invention of one man, Homer, with no 
historical basis whatever, even doubting whether Troy evei: ex- 



76 The Mind of Man 

isted at all, in spite of Schliemann's famous discoveries in the 
nineteenth century? 

Reply: This doubt has recently been put to rest by the discovery 
of Hittite tablets, dating from 1300 B.C., which clearly refer to 
the land of the Achaeans and their king, Agamemnon. The 
catalogue of Greek places that send ships to Troy in Book 2 
corresponds remarkably closely to the pattern of settlement 
which archaeology has discovered. The treasures of Mycenae, 
once thought to be fairy tales in the imagination of a poet, have 
been dug out of the silted ruins of the city. Other details men¬ 
tioned in the Iliad, the manners of burial, the kinds of armor, 
such as the precisely described boars’-tusk helmet, have been 
unearthed in sites relevant to the poem. There is thus no ques¬ 
tion of its historical substrate. The Iliad is not imaginative cre¬ 
ative literature and hence not a matter for literary discussion. It is 
history, webbed into the Mycenaean Aegean, to be examined by 
psychohistorical scientists. 

The problem of single or multiple authorship of the poem has 
been endlessly debated by classical scholars for at least a century. 
But this establishment of an historical basis, even of artifacts 
mentioned in the poem, must indicate that there were many 
intermediaries who verbally transmitted whatever happened in 
the thirteenth century to succeeding ages. It is thus more plaus¬ 
ible to think of the creation of the poem as part of this verbal 
transmission than as the work of a single man named Homer in 
the ninth century B.C. Homer, if he existed, may simply have 
been the first aoidos to be transcribed. 

Objection: Even if this is so, what basis is there to suppose that 
an epic poem, whose earliest manuscript that we know of is a 
recension from Alexandrian scholars of the fourth or third cen¬ 
tury B.C., which obviously must have existed in many forms, and 
as we read it today was put together out of them, how can a poem 
of this sort be regarded as indicative of what the actual Myce- 
naeans of the thirteenth century B.C. were like? 



THE MIND OF ILIAD 




Reply: This very serious objection is made even stronger by 
certain discrepancies between the descriptions in the poem and 
plausibility. The disappointing mounds of grassy rubble identi¬ 
fied today by archaeologists as the city of Priam cover but a few 
acres, while the Iliad counts its defenders at 50,000 men. Even 
the trivial is sometimes moved up by hyperbole into impossibility: 
the shield of Ajax, if it were made of seven oxhides and a layer of 
metal, would have weighed almost 300 pounds. History has defi¬ 
nitely been altered. The siege lasts ten years, an absolutely im¬ 
possible duration given the problems of supply on both sides. 

There are two general periods during which such alterations of 
the original history could have occurred: the verbal transmission 
period from the Trojan War to the ninth century B.C., when the 
Greek alphabet comes into existence and the epic is written down, 
and the literate period thereafter up to the time of the scholars 
of Alexandria in the third and second centuries B.C. whose put- 
together recension is the version we have today. As to the sec¬ 
ond period, there can be no doubt that there would be differences 
among various copies, and that extra parts and variations, even 
events belonging to different times and places, could have been 
drawn into the vortex of this one furious story. But all these 
additions were probably kept in check both by the transcribers' 
reverence for the poem at this time, as is indicated in all other 
Greek literature, and by the requirements of public perfor¬ 
mances. These were held at various sites, but particularly at the 
Panathenaea every four years at Athens, where the Iliad was 
devoutly chanted along with the Odyssey to vast audiences by the 
so-called rhapsodes. It is probable therefore that with the excep¬ 
tion of some episodes which contemporary scholars believe are 
late additions (such as the ambushing of Dolon and the references 
to Hades), the Iliad as we have it is very similar to what was 
first written down in the ninth century B.C. 

But further back in the dim obscurities of earlier time stand 
the shadowy aoidoi. And it is they certainly who successively 





The Mind of Man 


altered the original history. Oral poetry is a very different species 
from written poetry. 6 The way we read it and judge it must be 
