completely different. Composition and performance are not 
separate; they are simultaneous. And each new composing of the 
Iliad down the swift generations was on the basis of auditory 
memory and traditional bardic formulae, each aoidos with set 
phrases of varying lengths filling out the unremembered hexam¬ 
eters and with set turns of plot filling out unremembered action. 
And this was over the three or four centuries following the 
actual war. The Iliad, then, is not so much a reflection of the 
social life of Troy as it is of several stages of social development 
from that time up to the literate period. Treated as a socio¬ 
logical document, the objection is sustained. 

But as a psychological document, the case is quite different. 
Whence these gods? And why their particular relationship to 
the individuals? My argument has stressed two things, the lack 
of mental language and the initiation of action by the gods. 
These are not archaeological matters. Nor are they matters 
likely to have been invented by the aoidoi. And any theory about 
them has to be a psychological theory about man himself. The 
only other alternative is the following. 

Objection: Are we not making a great deal out of what might 
be merely literary style? That the gods are mere poetic devices of 
the aoidoi to make the action vivid, devices which may indeed go 
back to the earliest bards of Mycenae? 

Reply: This is the well-known problem of the gods and their 
overdetermination of the action. The gods seem to us quite un¬ 
necessary. Why are they there? And the common solution is as 
above, that they are a poetic device. The divine machinery dupli¬ 
cates natural conscious causations simply to present them in 
concrete pictorial form, because the aoidoi were without the refine¬ 
ments of language to express psychological matters. 


6 See Milman Parry, Collected Papers (New York, Oxford University Press, 
1971). I wish to thank both Randall Warner and Judith Griessman for discussion on 
some of these points. 



THE MIND OF ILIAD 




Not only is there no reason to believe that the aoidoi had any 
conscious psychology they were trying to express, such a notion is 
quite foreign to the whole texture of the poem. The Iliad is about 
action and it is full of action — constant action. It really is about 
Achilles' acts and their consequences, not about his mind. And as 
for the gods, the Iliadic authors and the Iliadic characters all 
agree in the acceptance of this divinely managed world. To say 
the gods are an artistic apparatus is the same kind of thing as to 
say that Joan of Arc told the Inquisition about her voices merely 
to make it all vivid to those who were about to condemn her. 

It is not that the vague general ideas of psychological causation 
appear first and then the poet gives them concrete pictorial form 
by inventing gods. It is, as I shall show later in this essay, just 
the other way around. And when it is suggested that the inward 
feelings of power or inward monitions or losses of judgment are 
the germs out of which the divine machinery developed, I return 
that the truth is just the reverse, that the presence of voices 
which had to be obeyed were the absolute prerequisite to the 
conscious stage of mind in which it is the self that is responsible 
and can debate within itself, can order and direct, and that the 
creation of such a self is the product of culture. In a sense, we 
have become our own gods. 

Objection: If the bicameral mind existed, one might expect 
utter chaos, with everybody following his own private hallucina¬ 
tions. The only possible way in which there could be a bicameral 
civilization would be that of a rigid hierarchy, with lesser men 
hallucinating the voices of authorities over them, and those au¬ 
thorities hallucinating yet higher ones, and so on to the kings and 
their peers hallucinating gods. Yet the Iliad does not present any 
such picture with its concentration on the heroic individual. 

Reply: This is a very telling objection that puzzled me for a 
long time, particularly as I studied the history of other bicameral 
civilizations in which there was not the freedom for individual 
action that there was in the social world of the Iliad. 

The missing pieces in the puzzle turn out to be the well-known 



8 o 


The Mind of Man 


Linear B Tablets from Knossos, Mycenae, and Pylos. They were 
written directly in what I am calling the bicameral period. They 
have long been known, yet long resistant to the most arduous 
labors of cryptographers. Recently, however, they have been 
deciphered and shown to contain a syllabic script, the earliest 
written Greek used only for record purposes.? And it gives us an 
outline picture of Mycenaean society much more in keeping with 
the hypothesis of a bicameral mind: hierarchies of officials, sol¬ 
diers, or workers, inventories of goods, statements of goods owed 
to the ruler and particularly to gods. The actual world of the 
Trojan War, then, was in historical fact much closer to the rigid 
theocracy which the theory predicts than to the free individuality 
of the poem. 

Moreover, the very structure of the Mycenaean state is pro¬ 
foundly different from the loose assemblage of warriors depicted 
in the Iliad. It is indeed quite similar to the contemporary 
divinely ruled kingdoms of Mesopotamia (as described later in 
this essay, particularly in II.2). These records in Linear B call 
the head of the state the wanax, a word which in later classical 
Greek is only used for gods. Similarly, the records call the land 
occupied by his state as his temenos, a word which later is used 
only for land sacred to the gods. The later Greek word for king is 
basileus, but the term in these tablets denotes a much less impor¬ 
tant person. He is more or less the first servant of the wanax, 
just as in Mesopotamia the human ruler was really the steward of 
the lands 'owned' by the god he heard in hallucination — as we 
shall see in II.2. The material from the Linear B tablets is 
difficult to piece together, but they do reveal the hierarchical and 
leveled nature of centralized palace civilizations which the suc¬ 
cession of poets who composed the Iliad in the oral tradition 
completely ignored. 


t M. C. F. Ventris and J. Chadwick, Documents in Mycenaean Greek (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1973). A summary of this material and its relation¬ 
ship to archaeological finds may be found in T. B. L. Webster, From Mycenae to 
Homer (London: Methuen, 1958). 



THE MIND OF ILIAD 




This loosening of the social structure in the fully developed 
Iliad may in part have been caused by the bringing together of 
other much later stories into the main theme of the Trojan War. 
One of the most telling pieces of evidence that the Iliad is a 
composite of different compositions is the large number of incon¬ 
sistencies in the poem, some in very close proximity. For ex¬ 
ample, when Hector is withdrawing from the battle, one line 
(6:117) says, "The black hide beat upon his neck and ankles." 
This can only be the early Mycenaean body-shield. But the next 
line refers to "The rim which ran round the outside of the bossed 
shield," and this is a very different kind and a much later type of 
shield. Obviously, the second line was added by a later poet who 
in his auditory trance was not even visualizing what he was 
saying. 


Further Qualifications 

Indeed, since this is the chaotic period when the bicameral 
mind breaks down and consciousness begins (as we shall see in a 
later chapter), we might expect the poem to reflect both this 
breakdown of civil hierarchies as well as more subjectification 
side by side with the older form of mentality. As it is, I have in 
the previous pages omitted certain discrepancies to the theory 
which I regard as such incursions. These outcroppings of some¬ 
thing close to subjective consciousness occur in parts of the Iliad 
regarded by scholars as later additions to the core poem. 8 

Book 9, for example, which was written and added to the poem 
only after the great migration of the Achaeans into Asia Minor, 
contains references to human deception unlike any in the other 
books. Most of these occur in the great, long rhetorical reply of 
Achilles to Odysseus about Agamemnon's treatment of him 
(9:344, 371, and 375). In particular is Achilles' slur on Aga¬ 
memnon: "Hateful to me as the gates of Hades is the man who 

8 I am here drawing on Walter Leaf, A Companion to the Iliad (London: Mac¬ 
millan, 1892), pp. 170-173. 





The Mind of Man 


hides one thing in his heart and speaks another." (9:3123^). This 
is definitely an indication of subjective consciousness. So also 
may be the difficult-to-translate optative constructions of Helen 
( 3 :i 73 ff-; 6:344ff.) or the apparent reminiscence of Nestor 

(i:26off.). 

There are also two extraordinary places in the text where first 
Agenor (21:553) and then Hector (22:99) to themselves. 
The fact that these two speeches occur late in the poem, in close 
proximity, have highly inappropriate content (they contradict the 
previous characterizations of the speakers), and use some identi¬ 
cal phrases and lines, all suggest that they are formulaic inser¬ 
tions into the story by the same aoidos at a later time. 9 But not 
much later. For they are sufficiently unusual to surprise even 
their speakers. After these soliloquies, both heroes exclaim 
precisely the same astonished words, "But wherefore does my life 
say this to me?" If, indeed, such talks to oneself were common, as 
they would be if their speakers were really conscious, there would 
be no cause for surprise. We shall have occasion to return to 
these instances when we discuss in more detail how conscious¬ 
ness arose. 10 

The main point of this chapter is that the earliest writing of 
men in a language that we can really comprehend, when looked 
at objectively, reveals a very different mentality from our own. 
And this must, I think, be accepted as true. Such instances of 
narratization, analog behavior, or mind-space as occasionally oc¬ 
cur are regarded by scholars as of later authorship. The bulk of 
the poem is consistent in its lack of analog consciousness and 
points back to a very different kind of human nature. Since we 
know that Greek culture very quickly became a literature of 

9 Even Leaf, p. 356, regards these two passages as spurious. 
