
10 A further analysis might be made, establishing dates for the various parts of 
the poem as they are thought by some scholars to have been assembled around the 
much shorter core poem, and then demonstrating that the frequencies of occurrence 
of these subjective outcroppings increase with recency. 



THE MIND OF ILIAD 




consciousness, we may regard the Iliad as standing at the great 
turning of the times, and a window back into those unsubjective 
times when every kingdom was in essence a theocracy and every 
man the slave of voices heard whenever novel situations oc¬ 
curred. 



CHAPTER 4 


The Bicameral Mind 


VI 7 e are conscious human beings. We are trying to under- 
▼ ▼ stand human nature. The preposterous hypothesis we have 
come to in the previous chapter is that at one time human nature 
was split in two, an executive part called a god, and a follower 
part called a man. Neither part was conscious. This is almost 
incomprehensible to us. And since we are conscious, and wish to 
understand, we wish to reduce this to something familiar in our 
experience, as we saw was the nature of understanding in Chap¬ 
ter 2. And this is what I shall attempt in the present chapter. 


THE BICAMERAL MAN 

Very little can be said to make the man side of it seem familiar to 
us, except by referring back to the first chapter, to remember all 
the things we do without the aid of consciousness. But how 
unsatisfying is a list of nots! Somehow we still wish to identify 
with Achilles. We still feel that there must, there absolutely must 
be something he feels inside. What we are trying to do is to 
invent a mind-space and a world of analog behaviors in him just 
as we do in ourselves and our contemporaries. And this inven¬ 
tion, I say, is not valid for Greeks of this period. 

Perhaps a metaphor of something close to that state might be 
helpful. In driving a car, I am not sitting like a back-seat driver 
directing myself, but rather find myself committed and engaged 



THE BICAMERAL MIND 




with little consciousness. 1 In fact my consciousness will usually 
be involved in something else, in a conversation with you if you 
happen to be my passenger, or in thinking about the origin of 
consciousness perhaps. My hand, foot, and head behavior, how¬ 
ever, are almost in a different world. In touching something, I 
am touched; in turning my head, the world turns to me; in 
seeing, I am related to a world I immediately obey in the sense 
of driving on the road and not on the sidewalk. And I am not 
conscious of any of this. And certainly not logical about it. I am 
caught up, unconsciously enthralled, if you will, in a total inter¬ 
acting reciprocity of stimulation that may be constantly threaten¬ 
ing or comforting, appealing or repelling, responding to the 
changes in traffic and particular aspects of it with trepidation or 
confidence, trust or distrust, while my consciousness is still off on 
other topics. 

Now simply subtract that consciousness and you have what a 
bicameral man would be like. The world would happen to him 
and his action would be an inextricable part of that happening 
with no consciousness whatever. And now let some brand-new 
situation occur, an accident up ahead, a blocked road, a flat tire, a 
stalled engine, and behold, our bicameral man would not do what 
you and I would do, that is, quickly and efficiently swivel our 
consciousness over to the matter and narratize out what to do. 
He would have to wait for his bicameral voice which with the 
stored-up admonitory wisdom of his life would tell him noncon- 
sciously what to do. 


THE BICAMERAL GOD 


But what were such auditory hallucinations like? Some people 
find it difficult to even imagine that there can be mental voices 

1 owe the idea of this example to Erwin W. Straus' insightful essay, "Phenome¬ 
nology of Hallucinations," in L. J. West, ed., Hallucinations (New York: Grune and 
Stratton, 1962), pp. 220-232. 





The Mind of Man 


that are heard with the same experiential quality as externally 
produced voices. After all, there is no mouth or larynx in the 
brain! 

Whatever brain areas are utilized, it is absolutely certain that 
such voices do exist and that experiencing them is just like hear¬ 
ing actual sound. Further, it is highly probable that the bicam¬ 
eral voices of antiquity were in quality very like such auditory 
hallucinations in contemporary people. They are heard by many 
completely normal people to varying degrees. Often it is in times 
of stress, when a parent's comforting voice may be heard. 

Or in the midst of some persisting problem. In my late twen¬ 
ties, living alone on Beacon Hill in Boston, I had for about a week 
been studying and autistically pondering some of the problems in 
this book, particularly the question of what knowledge is and how 
we can know anything at all. My convictions and misgivings had 
been circling about through the sometimes precious fogs of epis¬ 
temologies, finding nowhere to land. One afternoon I lay down in 
intellectual despair on a couch. Suddenly, out of an absolute 
quiet, there came a firm, distinct loud voice from my upper right 
which said, "Include the knower in the known!” It lugged me to 
my feet absurdly exclaiming, "Hello?" looking for whoever was in 
the room. The voice had had an exact location. No one was 
there! Not even behind the wall where I sheepishly looked. I do 
not take this nebulous profundity as divinely inspired, but I do 
think that it is similar to what was heard by those who have in 
the past claimed such special selection. 

Such voices may be heard by perfectly normal people on a 
more continuing basis. After giving lectures on the theory in this 
book, I have been surprised at members of the audience who have 
come up afterwards to tell me of their voices. One young biolo¬ 
gist's wife said that almost every morning as she made the beds 
and did the housework, she had long, informative, and pleasant 
conversations with the voice of her dead grandmother in which 
the grandmother's voice was actually heard. This came as some¬ 
thing of a shock to her alarmed husband, for she had never 



THE BICAMERAL MIND 




previously mentioned it, since "hearing voices" is generally sup¬ 
posed to be a sign of insanity. Which, in distressed people, of 
course, it is. But because of the dread surrounding this disease, 
the actual incidence of auditory hallucinations in normal people 
on such a continuing basis is not known. 

The only extensive study was a poor one done in the last 
century in England. 2 Only hallucinations of normal people when 
they were in good health were counted. Of 7717 men, 7.8 per¬ 
cent had experienced hallucinations at some time. Among 7599 
women, the figure was 12 percent. Hallucinations were most 
frequent in subjects between twenty and twenty-nine years of 
age, the same age incidentally at which schizophrenia most com¬ 
monly occurs. There were twice as many visual hallucinations as 
auditory. National differences were also found. Russians had 
twice as many hallucinations as the average. Brazilians had even 
more because of a very high incidence of auditory hallucinations. 
Just why is anyone's conjecture. One of the deficiencies of this 
study, however, is that in a country where ghosts are exciting 
gossip, it is difficult to have accurate criteria of what is actually 
seen and heard as an hallucination. There is an important need for 
further and better studies of this sort. 3 

Hallucinations in Psychotics 

It is of course in the distress of schizophrenia that auditory 
hallucinations similar to bicameral voices are most common and 
best studied. This is now a difficult matter. At a suspicion of 
hallucinations, distressed psychotics are given some kind of 
chemotherapy such as Thorazine, which specifically eliminates 
hallucinations. This procedure is at least questionable, and may 
be done not for the patient, but for the hospital which wishes to 

2 Henry Sidgewick et al., "Report on the census of hallucinations," Proceedings of 
the Society for Psychical Research, 1894, 34: 25-394. 

3 An example of what not to do may be found in D. J. West, "A mass-observation 
questionnaire on hallucinations," Journal of the Society for Psychical Research, 1948, 
34:187-196. 





The Mind of Man 


eliminate this rival control over the patient. But it has never been 
shown that hallucinating patients are more intractable than 
others. Indeed, as judged by other patients, hallucinating schizo¬ 
phrenics are more friendly, less defensive, more likable, and have 
more positive expectancies toward others in the hospital than 
nonhallucinating patientsd And it is possible that even when 
the effect is apparently negative, hallucinated voices may be 
helpful to the healing process. 

At any rate, since the advent of chemotherapy the incidence of 
hallucinatory patients is much less than it once was. Recent 
studies have revealed a wide variation among different hospitals, 
ranging from 50 percent of psychotics in the Boston City Hospi¬ 
tal, to 30 percent in a hospital in Oregons and even lower in 
hospitals with long-term patients under considerable sedation. 
Thus, in what follows, I am leaning more heavily on some of the 
older literature in the psychoses, such as Bleuler's great classic, 
Dementia Praecox, in which the hallucinatory aspect of schizo¬ 
phrenia in particular is more clearly seen. 4 * 6 This is important if 
we are to have an idea of the nature and range of the bicameral 
