voices heard in the early civilizations. 

The Character of the Voices 

The voices in schizophrenia take any and every relationship to 
the individual. They converse, threaten, curse, criticize, consult, 
often in short sentences. They admonish, console, mock, com¬ 
mand, or sometimes simply announce everything that’s happen- 

4 P. M. Lewinsohn, "Characteristics of patients with hallucinations," Journal of 
Clinical Psychology, 1968, 24: 423. 

s P. E. Nathan, H. F. Simpson, and M. M. Audberg, "A systems analytic model 
of diagnosis II. The diagnostic validity of abnormal perceptual behavior," Journal 
of Clinical Psychology, 1969, 25: 115-136. 

6 Eugen Bleuler, Dementia Praecox or The Group of Schizophrenias, Joseph 
Zinkin, trans. (New York: International Universities Press, 1950). Other sources 
for the sections to follow include my own observations and interviews with pa¬ 
tients, works footnoted on subsequent pages, various chapters in L. J. West, and 
miscellaneous case reports. 



THE BICAMERAL MIND 




ing. They yell, whine, sneer, and vary from the slightest whisper 
to a thunderous shout. Often the voices take on some special 
peculiarity, such as speaking very slowly, scanning, rhyming, or 
in rhythms, or even in foreign languages. There may be one 
particular voice, more often a few voices, and occasionally many. 
As in bicameral civilizations, they are recognized as gods, angels, 
devils, enemies, or a particular person or relative. Or occasion¬ 
ally they are ascribed to some kind of apparatus reminiscent of 
the statuary which we will see was important in this regard in 
bicameral kingdoms. 

Sometimes the voices bring patients to despair, commanding 
them to do something and then viciously reproaching them after 
the command is carried out. Sometimes they are a dialogue, as of 
two people discussing the patient. Sometimes the roles of pro 
and con are taken over by the voices of different people. The 
voice of his daughter tells a patient: "He is going to be burnt 
alive!" While his mother's voice says: "He will not be burnt!"? 
In other instances, there are several voices gabbling all at once, so 
that the patient cannot follow them. 


Their Locality and Function 

In some cases, particularly the most serious, the voices are not 
localized. But usually they are. They call from one side or 
another, from the rear, from above and below 3 only rarely do they 
come from directly in front of the patient. They may seem to 
come from walls, from the cellar and the roof, from heaven and 
from hell, near or far, from parts of the body or parts of the 
clothing. And sometimes, as one patient put it, "they assume the 
nature of all those objects through which they speak — whether 
they speak out of walls, or from ventilators, or in the woods and 
fields." 7 8 In some patients there is a tendency to associate the 
good consoling voices with the upper right, while bad voices 

7 Bleuler, p. 97f. 

8 T. Hennell, The Witnesses (London: Davis, 1938), p. 182. 





The Mind of Man 


come from below and to the left. In rare instances, the voices 
seem to the patient to come from his own mouth, sometimes 
feeling like foreign bodies bulging up in his mouth. Sometimes 
the voices are hypostasized in bizarre ways. One patient claimed 
that a voice was perched above each of his ears, one of which was 
a little larger than the other, which is reminiscent of the ka's and 
the way they were depicted in the statues of the pharaohs of 
ancient Egypt, as we shall see in a subsequent chapter. 

Very often the voices criticize a patient's thoughts and actions. 
Sometimes they forbid him to do what he was just thinking of 
doing. And sometimes this occurs even before the patient is 
aware of his intention. One intelligent paranoid who came from 
the Swiss canton of Thurgau harbored hostile feelings toward his 
personal attendant. As the latter stepped into his room, the voice 
said in its most reproachful tone before the patient had done 
anything, "There you have it! A Thurgauer beats up a perfectly 
decent private attendant! "9 

Of immense importance here is the fact that the nervous sys¬ 
tem of a patient makes simple perceptual judgments of which the 
patient's ’self is not aware. And these, as above, may then be 
transposed into voices that seem prophetic. A janitor coming 
down a hall may make a slight noise of which the patient is not 
conscious. But the patient hears his hallucinated voice cry out, 
"Now someone is coming down the hall with a bucket of water." 
Then the door opens, and the prophecy is fulfilled. Credence in 
the prophetic character of the voices, just as perhaps in bicam¬ 
eral times, is thus built up and sustained. The patient then 
follows his voices alone and is defenseless against them. Or else, 
if the voices are not clear, he waits, catatonic and mute, to be 
shaped by them or, alternatively, by the voices and hands of his 
attendants. 

Usually the severity of schizophrenia oscillates during hospital¬ 
ization and often the voices come and go with the undulations of 
the illness. Sometimes they occur only when the patients are 


9 Bleuler, p. 98 . 



THE BICAMERAL MIND 




doing certain things, or only in certain environments. And in 
many patients, before the present-day chemotherapy, there was 
no single waking moment free from them. When the illness is 
most severe, the voices are loudest and come from outside; when 
least severe, voices often tend to be internal whispers; and when 
internally localized, their auditory qualities are sometimes vague. 
A patient might say, "They are not at all real voices but merely 
reproductions of the voices of dead relatives." Particularly intelli¬ 
gent patients in mild forms of the illness are often not sure 
whether they are actually hearing the voices or whether they are 
only compelled to think them, like "audible thoughts," or "sound¬ 
less voices," or "hallucinations of meanings.” 

Hallucinations must have some innate structure in the nervous 
system underlying them. We can see this clearly by studying the 
matter in those who have been profoundly deaf since birth or 
very early childhood. For even they can — somehow — experi¬ 
ence auditory hallucinations. This is commonly seen in deaf 
schizophrenics. In one study, 16 out of 22 hallucinating, pro¬ 
foundly deaf schizophrenics insisted they had heard some kind of 
communication. 10 One thirty-two-year-old woman, born deaf, 
who was full of self-recrimination about a therapeutic abortion, 
claimed she heard accusations from God. Another, a fifty-year- 
old congenitally deaf woman, heard supernatural voices which 
proclaimed her to have occult powers. 

The Visual Component 

Visual hallucinations in schizophrenia occur less commonly, 
but sometimes with extreme clarity and vividness. One of my 
schizophrenic subjects, a vivacious twenty-year-old writer of folk 
songs, had been sitting in a car for a long time, anxiously waiting 
for a friend. A blue car coming along the road suddenly, oddly, 

10 J. D. Rainer, S. Abdullah, and J. C. Altshuler, "Phenomenology of hallucina¬ 
tions in the deaf" in Origin and Mechanisms of Hallucinations, Wolfram Keup, ed. 
(New York: Plenum Press, 1970), pp. 449-465. 





The Mind of Man 


slowed, turned rusty brown, then grew huge gray wings and 
slowly flapped over a hedge and disappeared. Her greater alarm, 
however, came when others in the street behaved as if nothing 
extraordinary had happened. Why? Unless all of them were 
somehow in league to hide their reactions from her. And why 
should that be? It is often the narratization of such false events 
by consciousness, fitting the world in around them in a rational 
way, that brings on other tragic symptoms. 

It is interesting that profoundly deaf schizophrenics who do 
not have auditory hallucinations often have visual hallucinations 
of sign language. A sixteen-year-old girl who became deaf at the 
age of eight months indulged in bizarre communication with 
empty spaces and gesticulated to the walls. An older, congeni¬ 
tally deaf woman communicated with her hallucinated boyfriend 
in sign language. Other deaf patients may appear to be in con¬ 
stant communication with imaginary people using a word salad 
of signs and finger spelling. One thirty-five-year-old deaf woman, 
who lost her hearing at the age of fourteen months, lived a life of 
unrestrained promiscuity alternating with violent temper out¬ 
bursts. On admission, she explained in sign language that every 
morning a spirit dressed in a white robe came to her, saying 
things in sign language which were at times frightening and 
which set the pace of her mood for the day. Another deaf patient 
would spit at empty space, saying that she was spitting at the 
angels who were lurking there. A thirty-year-old man, deaf since 
birth, more benignly, would see little angels and Lilliputian 
people around him and believed he had a magic wand with which 
he could achieve almost anything. 

Occasionally, in what are called acute twilight states, whole 
scenes, often of a religious nature, may be hallucinated even in 
broad daylight, the heavens standing open with a god speaking to 
the patient. Or sometimes writing will appear before a patient as 
before Belshazzar. A paranoid patient saw the word poison in 
the air at the very moment when the attendant made him take 



THE BICAMERAL MIND 




his medicine. In other instances, the visual hallucinations may 
be fitted into the real environment, with figures walking about the 
ward, or standing above the doctor's head, even as I suggest 
Athene appeared to Achilles. More usually, when visual halluci¬ 
nations occur with voices, they are merely shining light or cloudy 
fog, as Thetis came to Achilles or Yahweh to Moses. 

