The Release of the Gods 

If we are correct in assuming that schizophrenic hallucinations 
are similar to the guidances of gods in antiquity, then there 
should be some common physiological instigation in both in¬ 
stances. This, I suggest, is simply stress. In normal people, as 
we have mentioned, the stress threshold for release of hallucina¬ 
tions is extremely high ; most of us need to be over our heads in 
trouble before we would hear voices. But in psychosis-prone 
persons, the threshold is somewhat lower; as in the girl I de¬ 
scribed, only anxious waiting in a parked car was necessary. 
This is caused, I think, by the buildup in the blood of breakdown 
products of stress-produced adrenalin which the individual is, for 
genetical reasons, unable to pass through the kidneys as fast as a 
normal person. 

During the eras of the bicameral mind, we may suppose that 
the stress threshold for hallucinations was much, much lower 
than in either normal people or schizophrenics today. The only 
stress necessary was that which occurs when a change in behav¬ 
ior is necessary because of some novelty in a situation. Anything 
that could not be dealt with on the basis of habit, any conflict 
between work and fatigue, between attack and flight, any choice 
between whom to obey or what to do, anything that required any 
decision at all was sufficient to cause an auditory hallucination. 

It has now been clearly established that decision-making (and 
I would like to remove every trace of conscious connotation from 
the word 'decision') is precisely what stress is. If rats have to 





The Mind of Man 


cross an electric grid each time they wish to get food and water, 
such rats develop ulcers. 11 Just shocking the rats does not do 
this to them. There has to be the pause of conflict or the decision¬ 
making stress of whether to cross a grid or not to produce this 
effect. If two monkeys are placed in harnesses, in such a way 
that one of the monkeys can press a bar at least once every 
twenty seconds to avoid a periodic shock to both monkeys' feet, 
within three or four weeks the decision-making monkey will 
have ulcers, while the other, equally shocked monkey will not. 12 
It is the pause of unknowingness that is important. For if the 
experiment is so arranged that an animal can make an effective 
response and receive immediate feedback of his success, execu¬ 
tive ulcers, as they are often called, do not occur.'3 

So Achilles, repulsed by Agamemnon, in decision-stress by the 
gray sea, hallucinates Thetis out of the mists. So Hector, faced 
with the decision-suffering of whether to go outside the walls of 
Troy to fight Achilles or stay within them, in the stress of the 
decision hallucinates the voice that tells him to go out. The 
divine voice ends the decision-stress before it has reached any 
considerable level. Had Achilles or Hector been modern execu¬ 
tives, living in a culture that repressed their stress-relieving gods, 
they too might have collected their share of our psychosomatic 
diseases. 


THE AUTHORITY OF SOUND 


We must not leave this subject of the hallucinatory mechanism 
without facing up to the more profound question of why such 

11 W. L. Sawrey and J. D. Weisz, "An experimental method of producing gastric 
ulcers," Journal of Comparative and Physiological Psychology, 1956, 49: 269—270. 

12 J. V. Brady, R. W. Porter, D. G. Conrad, and J. W. Mason, "Avoidance be¬ 
havior and the development of gastro-duodenal ulcers," Journal of the Experimental 
Analysis of Behavior, 1958, 1: 69-72. 

'3 J. M. Weiss, "Psychological Factors in Stress and Disease," Scientific American, 
1972, 226: 106. 



THE BICAMERAL MIND 




voices are believed, why obeyed. For believed as objectively real, 
they are, and obeyed as objectively real in the face of all the 
evidence of experience and the mountains of common sense. 
Indeed, the voices a patient hears are more real than the doctor's 
voice. He sometimes says so. "If that is not a real voice, then I 
can just as well say that even you are not now really talking to 
me," said one schizophrenic to his physicians. And another when 
questioned replied: 


Yes, Sir. I hear voices distinctly, even loudly; they interrupt us 
at this moment. It is more easy for me to listen to them than to 
you. I can more easily believe in their significance and actuality, 
and they do not ask questions.^ 


That he alone hears the voices is not of much concern. Some¬ 
times he feels he has been honored by this gift, singled out by 
divine forces, elected and glorified, and this even when the voice 
reproaches him bitterly, even when it is leading him to death. He 
is somehow face to face with elemental auditory powers, more 
real than wind or rain or fire, powers that deride and threaten 
and console, powers that he cannot step back from and see 
objectively. 

One sunny afternoon not long ago, a man was lying back in a 
deck chair on the beach at Coney Island. Suddenly, he heard a 
voice so loud and clear that he looked about at his companions, 
certain that they too must have heard the voice. When they acted 
as if nothing had happened, he began to feel strange and moved 
his chair away from them. And then 


. . . suddenly, clearer, deeper, and even louder than before, 
the deep voice came at me again, right in my ear this time, and 
getting me tight and shivery inside. "Larry Jayson, I told you 
before you weren't any good. Why are you sitting here making 
believe you are as good as anyone else when you're not? Whom 
are you fooling ?” 

'■* Hennell, pp. 181-182. 





The Mind of Man 


The deep voice was so loud and so clear, everyone must have 
heard it. He got up and walked slowly away, down the stairs of 
the boardwalk to the stretch of sand below. He waited to see if 
the voice came back. It did, its words pounding in this time, not 
the way you hear any words, but deeper, 

... as though all parts of me had become ears, with my fingers 
hearing the words, and my legs, and my head too. "You're no 
good," the voice said slowly, in the same deep tones. "You've 
never been any good or use on earth. There is the ocean. You 
might just as well drown yourself. Just walk in, and keep walk- 

ng-" 

As soon as the voice was through, I knew by its cold com¬ 
mand, I had to obey it.‘5 

The patient walking the pounded sands of Coney Island heard his 
pounding voices as clearly as Achilles heard Thetis along the 
misted shores of the Aegean. And even as Agamemnon "had to 
obey" the "cold command" of Zeus, or Paul the command of Jesus 
before Damascus, so Mr. Jayson waded into the Atlantic Ocean to 
drown. Against the will of his voices, he was saved by life¬ 
guards and brought to Bellevue Hospital, where he recovered to 
write of this bicameral experience. 

In some less severe cases, the patients, when accustomed to 
the voices, can learn to be objective toward them and to attenuate 
their authority. But almost all autobiographies of schizophrenic 
patients are consistent in speaking of the unquestioning submis¬ 
sion, at least at first, to the commands of the voices. Why should 
this be so? Why should such voices have such authority either in 
Argos, on the road to Damascus, or the shores of Coney Island? 

Sound is a very special modality. We cannot handle it. We 
cannot push it away. We cannot turn our backs to it. We can 
close our eyes, hold our noses, withdraw from touch, refuse to 
taste. We cannot close our ears though we can partly muffle 
's L. N. Jayson, Mania (New York: Funk and Wagnall, 1937), pp. 1-3. 



THE BICAMERAL MIND 




them. Sound is the least controllable of all sense modalities, and 
it is this that is the medium of that most intricate of all evolution¬ 
ary achievements, language. We are therefore looking at a prob¬ 
lem of considerable depth and complexity. 

The Control of Obedience 

Consider what it is to listen and understand someone speaking 
to us. In a certain sense we have to become the other person; or 
rather, we let him become part of us for a brief second. We 
suspend our own identities, after which we come back to our¬ 
selves and accept or reject what he has said. But that brief 
second of dawdling identity is the nature of understanding lan¬ 
guage; and if that language is a command, the identification of 
understanding becomes the obedience. To hear is actually a kind 
of obedience. Indeed, both words come from the same root and 
therefore were probably the same word originally. This is true in 
Greek, Latin, Hebrew, French, German, Russian, as well as in 
English, where 'obey' comes from the Latin obedire, which is a 
composite of ob + audire, to hear facing someone . 16 

The problem is the control of such obedience. This is done in 
two ways. 

The first but less important is simply by spatial distance. 
Think, if you will, of what you do when hearing someone else 
talk to you. You adjust your distance to some culturally estab¬ 
lished standard. 1 ? When the speaker is too close, it seems he is 
trying to control your thoughts too closely. When too far, he is 
not controlling them enough for you to understand him comfort¬ 
ably. If you are from an Arabian country, a face-to-face distance 
of less than twelve inches is comfortable. But in more northern 

16 Straus, p. 229. 

>7 For those interested in pursuing this subject, see Edward T. Hall's The Hidden 
Dimension (New York: Doubleday, 1966), which stresses the cultural differences, and 
Robert Sommer's Personal Space: The Behavioral Basis of Design (Englewood 
