Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, 1969), which examines spatial behavior in depth. 





The Mind of Man 


countries, the conversation distance most comfortable is almost 
twice that, a cultural difference, which in social exchanges can 
result in a variety of international misunderstandings. To con¬ 
verse with someone at less than the usual distance means at least 
an attempted mutuality of obedience and control, as, for ex¬ 
ample, in a love relationship, or in the face-to-face threatening of 
two men about to fight. To speak to someone within that distance 
is to attempt to truly dominate him or her. To be spoken to 
within that distance, and there remain, results in the strong 
tendency to accept the authority of the person who is speaking. 

The second and more important way that we control other 
people's voice-authority over us is by our opinions of them. Why 
are we forever judging, forever criticizing, forever putting people 
in categories of faint praise or reproof? We constantly rate 
others and pigeonhole them in often ridiculous status hierarchies 
simply to regulate their control over us and our thoughts. Our 
personal judgments of others are filters of influence. If you wish 
to allow another's language power over you, simply hold him 
higher in your own private scale of esteem. 

And now consider what it is like if neither of these methods 
avail, because there is no person there, no point of space from 
which the voice emanates, a voice that you cannot back off 
from, as close to you as everything you call you, when its pres¬ 
ence eludes all boundaries, when no escape is possible — flee and 
it flees with you — a voice unhindered by walls or distances, 
undiminished by muffling one's ears, nor drowned out with any¬ 
thing, not even one's own screaming — how helpless the hearer! 
And if one belonged to a bicameral culture, where the voices 
were recognized as at the utmost top of the hierarchy, taught you 
as gods, kings, majesties that owned you, head, heart, and foot, 
the omniscient, omnipotent voices that could not be categorized 
as beneath you, how obedient to them the bicameral man! 

The explanation of volition in subjective conscious men is still 
a profound problem that has not reached any satisfactory solu- 



THE BICAMERAL MIND 




tion. But in bicameral men, this was volition. Another way to 
say it is that volition came as a voice that was in the nature of a 
neurological command, in which the command and the action 
were not separated, in which to hear was to obey. 



CHAPTER 5 


The Double Brain 


W hat happens in the brain of a bicameral man? Anything as 
important in the history of our species as a completely dif¬ 
ferent kind of mentality existing only a hundred generations ago 
demands some statement of what is going on physiologically. 
How is it possible? Given this profoundly subtle structure of 
nerve cells and fibers inside our skulls, how could that structure 
have been organized so that a bicameral mentality was possible? 
This is the great question of the present chapter. 

Our first approach to an answer is obvious. Since the bicam¬ 
eral mind is mediated by speech, the speech areas of the brain 
must be concerned in some important way. 

Now in discussing these areas, and throughout this chapter, 
and indeed in the rest of this essay, I shall be using terms suitable 
only to right-handed people, in order to avoid a certain clumsi¬ 
ness of expression. Thus, it is the left cerebral hemisphere of the 
brain, controlling the right side of the body, which in right- 
handed people contains the speech areas. It is therefore com¬ 
monly called the dominant hemisphere, while the right 
hemisphere, controlling the left side of the body, is commonly 
called the nondominant. I shall be speaking as if the left hemi¬ 
sphere were dominant in all of us. Actually, however, left- 
handed persons have a variety of degrees of lateral dominance, 
some being completely switched (the right hemisphere doing 
what the left usually does), others not, and still others with 



THE DOUBLE BRAIN 


101 


SUPPLEMENTARY 



The three speech areas of the left hemisphere have different func¬ 
tions and values. The supplementary motor area is mostly involved 
in articulation; Broca's area in articulation, vocabulary, inflection, 
and grammar; and Wernicke's area in vocabulary, syntax, meaning, 
and understanding speech. 


mixed dominance. But being exceptional, only 5 percent of the 
population, they can be left out of the present discussion. 

The speech areas then are three, all on the left hemisphere in 
the great majority of mankind. 1 They are: (I) the supplemen¬ 
tary motor cortex, on the very top of the left frontal lobe, removal 
of which by surgery produces a loss of speech which clears up in 
several weeks; (2) Broca's area, lower down at the back of the 
left frontal lobe, the removal of which produces a loss of speech 
which is sometimes permanent and sometimes not; and (3) 
Wernicke's area, chiefly the posterior part of the left temporal 
lobe with parts of the parietal area, any large destruction of 


1 I am here following the late Wilder Penfield and Lamar Roberts, Speech and 
Brain-Mechanisms (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1959), the traditional 
authority although some of it is out of date in the present explosion of knowledge 
in this area. 



102 The Mind of Man 

which after a certain age produces a permanent loss of meaning¬ 
ful speech. 

It is thus Wernicke's area that is the most indispensable to nor¬ 
mal speech. As we might expect, the cortex in Wernicke's area is 
quite thick with large, widely spaced cells, indicating considerable 
internal and external connections. While there is some disagree¬ 
ment as to its precise boundaries, 2 there is none about its impor¬ 
tance to meaningful communication. 

Of course it is extremely hazardous thinking to isomorphize be¬ 
tween a conceptual analysis of a psychological phenomenon and 
its concomitant brain structure, yet this is what we cannot avoid 
doing. And among these three areas on the left hemisphere, or 
even in their more subtle interrelationships, it is difficult to imag¬ 
ine a duplication of some speech function to the extent and 
separation which my theory of the bicameral mind would 
demand. 

Let us sit down with this problem a moment. Speech areas all 
on the left side. Why? One intriguing puzzle which has long 
fascinated me and anyone else who has considered the evolution 
of all this is why language function should be represented in only 
one hemisphere. Most other important functions are bilaterally 
represented. This redundancy in everything else is a biological 
advantage to the animal, since, if one side is injured, the other 
side can compensate. Why then was not language? Language, 
that most urgent and significant of skills, the pre-emptory and 
exigent ground of social action, the last communicant thread on 
which life itself in the post-glacial millennia must often have 
depended! Why was not this without-which-nothing of human 
culture represented on both hemispheres? 

The problem drifts off into even more mystery when we re¬ 
member that the neurological structure necessary for language 

2 Joseph Bogen with his usual helpfulness has taken the time to point out to me 
the slipperiness of the evidence for just what regions are to be included in Wernicke’s 
area. I am also indebted to my former student, Stevan Hamad, for invaluable discus¬ 
sion on many of these issues. 



THE DOUBLE B RAIN 


103 


exists in the right hemisphere as well as the left. In a child, a 
major lesion of Wernicke's area on the left hemisphere, or of the 
underlying thalamus which connects it to the brainstem, pro¬ 
duces transfer of the whole speech mechanism to the right hemi¬ 
sphere. A very few ambidextrous people actually do have speech 
on both hemispheres. Thus the usually speechless right hemi¬ 
sphere can under certain conditions become a language hemi¬ 
sphere, just like the left. 

And a further range of the problem is what did happen in the 
right hemisphere as the aptic structures for language were evolv¬ 
ing in the left? Just consider those areas on the right hemi¬ 
sphere corresponding to the speech areas of the left: what is their 
function? Or, more particularly, what is their important func¬ 
tion, since it must have been such to preclude its development as 
an auxiliary speech area? If we stimulate such areas on the right 
hemisphere today, we do not get the usual "aphasic arrest" 
(simply the stopping of ongoing speech) which occurs when the 
normal language areas of the left hemisphere are stimulated. 
And because of this apparent lack of function, it has often been 
concluded that large portions of the right hemisphere are simply 
unnecessary. In fact, large amounts of right hemisphere tissue, 
including what corresponds to Wernicke's area, and even in some 
instances the entire hemisphere, have been cut out in human 
patients because of illness or injury, with surprisingly little deficit 
in mental function. 

The situation then is one where the areas on the right hemi¬ 
sphere that correspond to the speech areas have seemingly no 
easily observable major function. Why this relatively less essen¬ 
tial part of the brain? Could it be that these silent 'speech' areas 
on the right hemisphere had some function at an earlier stage in 
man's history that now they do not have? 

The answer is clear if tentative. The selective pressures of 
