evolution which could have brought about so mighty a result are 
those of the bicameral civilizations. The language of men was 



104 


The Mind of Man 


involved with only one hemisphere in order to leave the other 
free for the language of gods. 

If so, we might expect that there would have to be certain 
tracts by which the bicameral voices would relate between the 
right nondominant temporal lobe and the left. The major inter¬ 
connection between the hemispheres is of course the huge corpus 
callosum of over two million fibers. But the temporal lobes in 
men have their own private callosum, so to speak, the much 
smaller anterior commissures. In rats and dogs, the anterior 
commissures connect the olfactory parts of the brain. But in 
men, as seen in my rather imprecise sketch, this transverse band 
of fibers collects from most of the temporal lobe cortex but partic¬ 
ularly the middle gyrus of the temporal lobe included in Wer¬ 
nicke's area, and then squeezes into a tract only slightly more 
than one eighth of an inch in diameter as it plunges over the 
amygdala across the top of the hypothalamus toward the other 
temporal lobe. Here then, I suggest, is the tiny bridge across 
which came the directions which built our civilizations and founded 



In ancient times, what corresponds to Wernicke's area on the right 
hemisphere may have organized admonitory experience and coded 
it into 'voices' which were then 'heard' over the anterior commissure 
by the left or dominant hemisphere. 



THE DOUBLE B RAIN 


105 


the world's religions, where gods spoke to men and were obeyed 
because they were human volition.3 

There are two forms in which this hypothesis can be specified. 

The stronger form, and the one I favor because it is simpler 
and more specific (and thus more easily verified or disconfirmed 
by empirical investigation), is that the speech of the gods was 
directly organized in what corresponds to Wernicke's area on the 
right hemisphere and 'spoken' or 'heard' over the anterior com¬ 
missures to or by the auditory areas of the left temporal lobe. 
(Note how I can only express this metaphorically, personifying 
the right temporal lobe as a person speaking or the left temporal 
lobe as a person listening, both being equivalent and both literally 
false.) Another reason I am inclined to this stronger form is its 
very rationality in terms of getting processed information or 
thought from one side of the brain to the other. Consider the 
evolutionary problem: billions of nerve cells processing complex 
experience on one side and needing to send the results over to the 
other through the much smaller commissures. Some code would 
have to be used, some way of reducing very complicated process¬ 
ing into a form that could be transmitted through the fewer 
neurons particularly of the anterior commissures. And what bet¬ 
ter code has ever appeared in the evolution of animal nervous 
systems than human language? Thus in the stronger form of our 
model, auditory hallucinations exist as such in a linguistic man¬ 
ner because that is the most efficient method of getting compli¬ 
cated cortical processing from one side of the brain to the other. 

The weaker form of the hypothesis is more vague. It states 
that the articulatory qualities of the hallucination were of left 
hemisphere origin like the speech of the person himself, but that 

3 I do not mean to imply that the bicameral transmission was the only function 
of the anterior commissure. This commissure interconnects most of the two temporal 
lobes, including a good part of the posterior portion of the inferior temporal con¬ 
volution. This region is fed by a strong system of fibers sweeping down from the 
occipital lobe and is centrally important to visual gnostic functions. See E. G. Ett- 
linger, Functions of the Corpus Callosum (Boston: Little, Brown, 1965). 



106 The Mind of Man 

its sense and direction and different relation to the person were 
due to right temporal lobe activity sending excitation over the 
anterior commissures and probably the splenium (the back part 
of the corpus callosum) to the speech areas of the left hemi¬ 
sphere, and 'heard' from there. 

At the present time, it does not really matter which form of the 
hypothesis we take. The central feature of both is that the amal¬ 
gamating of admonitory experience was a right hemisphere func¬ 
tion and it was excitation in what corresponds to Wernicke's area 
on the right hemisphere that occasioned the voices of the gods. 

The evidence to support this hypothesis may be brought to¬ 
gether as five observations: (I) that both hemispheres are able 
to understand language, while normally only the left can speak; 
(2) that there is some vestigial functioning of the right Wer¬ 
nicke's area in a way similar to the voices of gods; (3) that the 
two hemispheres under certain conditions are able to act almost 
as independent persons, their relationship corresponding to that 
of the man-god relationship of bicameral times; (4) that contem¬ 
porary differences between the hemispheres in cognitive func¬ 
tions at least echo such differences of function between man and 
god as seen in the literature of bicameral man; and (5) that the 
brain is more capable of being organized by the environment than 
we have hitherto supposed, and therefore could have undergone 
such a change as from bicameral to conscious man mostly on the 
basis of learning and culture. 

The rest of this chapter will be devoted to these five observa¬ 
tions. 

1. That Both Hemispheres Understand Language 

The gods, I have said with some presumption, were amalgams 
of admonitory experience, made up of meldings of whatever 
commands had been given the individual. Thus, while the divine 



THE DOUBLE BRAIN 


107 


areas would not have to be involved in speech, they would have to 
be involved in hearing and in understanding language. And this 
is the case even today. We do in fact understand language with 
both hemispheres. Stroke patients who have hemorrhages on the 
left side of the cortex cannot speak, but still can understands 
If sodium amytal is injected into the left carotid artery leading to 
the left hemisphere (the Wada test), the entire hemisphere is 
anesthetized, leaving only the right hemisphere working; but the 
subject still can follow directions.s Tests on commissurotomized 
patients (which I shall describe more fully in a moment) demon¬ 
strate considerable understanding by the right hemisphere. 4 * 6 
Named objects can usually be retrieved by the left hand, and 
verbal commands obeyed by the left hand. Even when the entire 
left hemisphere, the speech hemisphere, remember, is removed 
in human patients suffering from glioma, the remaining right 
hemisphere immediately after the operation seems to understand 
the surgeon's questions, though unable to reply. 7 

2. That There Exists Vestigial Godlike Function in the Right 
Hemisphere 

If the preceding model is correct, there might be some residual 
indication, no matter how small, of the ancient divine function of 
the right hemisphere. We can, indeed, be more specific here. 
Since the voices of the gods did not, of course, entail articulate 


4 This is a general observation — true of cases I have interviewed personally. 

s The Wada test is presently part of presurgical procedures before brain surgery 
in the Montreal Neurological Institute. See J. Wada and T. Rasmussen, "Intracarotid 
Injection of Sodium Amytal for the Lateralization of Cerebral Speech Dominance," 
Journal of Neurosurgery, i960, 17: 266-282. 

6 M. S. Gazzaniga, J. E. Bogen, R. W. Sperry, "Laterality effects in somesthesis 
following cerebral commissurotomy in man," Neuropsychologia, 1: 209-215. See 
also Stuart Dimond's excellent discussion of the problem in his The Double Brain 
(Edinburgh and London: Churchill Livingstone, 1972), p. 84. 

7 Aaron Smith, "Speech and other functions after left (dominant) hemispherec- 
tomy," Journal of Neurology Neurosurgical Psychiatry, 29 : 467-471. 



io8 

The Mind of Man 

speech, did not entail the use of the larynx and mouth, we can 
rule out what corresponds to Broca's area and the supplementary 
motor area, to a certain extent, and concentrate on what corre¬ 
sponds to Wernicke's area or the posterior part of the temporal 
lobe on the right or so-called nondominant side. If we stimulate it 
in this location, would we hear then the voices of the gods as of 
yore? Or some remnant of them? Something that would allow 
us to think that three thousand years ago its function was that of 
the divine direction of human affairs? 

We may recall that this was indeed the very area which had 
been stimulated by Wilder Penfield in a famous series of studies a 
few years ago. 8 Let me describe them in some detail. 

These observations were made on some seventy patients with a 
diagnosis of epilepsy caused by lesions somewhere in the tem¬ 
poral lobe. As a preliminary to the removal of the damaged brain 
tissue by surgery, various points on the surface of the temporal 
lobe were stimulated with a gentle electric current. The intensity 
of the stimulation was approximately the least current needed to 
excite tingling in the thumb by stimulation of the appropriate 
motor area. If it be objected that the phenomena resulting from 
this stimulation are corrupted by the presence of some focal area 
of gliosis, or sclerosis, or meningo-cerebral cicatrix, all typically 
found in such patients, I think such objections would be dissi¬ 
pated by reviewing the original report. These abnormalities, 
when found, were circumscribed in location and were not in any 
way influencing the responses of the subject as they were being 
stimulated.9 It can thus be assumed with some confidence that 
the results of these studies are representative of what would be 
found in normal individuals. 

In the great majority of these cases, it was the right temporal 

8 Wilder Penfield and Phanor Perot, "The brain's record of auditory and visual 
experience: a final summary and discussion," Brain, 1963, 86: 595—702. 

