8 Though presumably the particular aura of the epilepsy had been occasioned by 
the spread of cortical excitation from the lesion to these same areas. 



THE DOUBLE B RAIN 


109 


lobe that was stimulated, particularly the posterior part of the 
temporal lobe toward its superior convolution, Wernicke's area on 
the right side. A remarkable series of responses from the pa¬ 
tients was obtained. This is, to repeat myself, the point at which 
we might expect to hear the gods of antiquity calling to us again, 
as if from the other part of our bicameral minds. Would these 
patients hear some vestiges of the ancient divinities? 

Here are some representative data. 

When stimulated in this region, Case 7, a twenty-year-old col¬ 
lege student, cried out, "Again I hear voices, I sort of lost touch 
with reality. Humming in my ears and a small feeling like a 
warning." And when stimulated again, "Voices, the same as be¬ 
fore. I was just losing touch with reality again." When asked, he 
replied that he could not understand what the voices were saying. 
They sounded "hazy." 

In the majority of cases, the voices were similarly hazy. Case 
8, a twenty-six-year-old housewife, stimulated in approximately 
the same area, said there seemed to be a voice a way, way off. "It 
sounded like a voice saying words but it was so faint I couldn't get 
it." Case 12, a twenty-four-year-old woman, stimulated at succes¬ 
sive points of the superior gyrus of the posterior temporal lobe, 
said, "I could hear someone talking, murmuring or something." 
And then further on, "There was talking or murmuring, but I 
cannot understand it." And then stimulated about three quarters 
of an inch along the gyrus, she was at first silent, and then gave a 
loud cry. "I heard the voices and then I screamed. I had a feeling 
all over." And then stimulated a little back toward the first 
stimulations, she began to sob. "That man's voice again! The 
only thing I know is that my father frightens me a lot." She did 
not recognize the voice as her father's; it only reminded her of 
him. 

Some patients heard music, unrecognized melodies that could 
be hummed to the surgeon (Cases 4 and 5). Others heard rela¬ 
tives, particularly their mothers. Case 32, a twenty-two-year-old 



110 


The Mind of Man 


woman, heard her mother and father talking and singing, and 
then stimulated on another point, her mother “just yelling.” 

Many patients heard the voices as emanating from strange and 
unknown places. Case 36, a twenty-six-year-old woman, stimu¬ 
lated somewhat anteriorly on the superior gyrus of the right 
temporal lobe, said, “Yes, I heard voices down along the river 
somewhere — a man’s voice and a woman’s voice, calling.” 
When asked how she could tell it was down along the river, she 
said, “I think I saw the river.” When asked what river, she said, 
“I do not know, it seems to be one I was visiting when I was a 
child.” And at other stimulation points, she heard voices of 
people calling from building to building somewhere. And at an 
adjacent point, the voice of a woman calling in a lumberyard, 
though she insisted that she had “never been around any lumber¬ 
yard.” 

When the voices were located as coming from one side or the 
other, as rarely happened, it was from the contralateral side. 
Case 29, a twenty-five-year-old man, stimulated in the middle of 
the right temporal gyrus, said, “Someone telling me in my left 
ear, ‘Sylvere, Sylvere!’ It could have been my brother.” 

The voices and the music, whether garbled or recognized, were 
experienced as actually heard, and the visual hallucinations were 
experienced as-actually seen, just as Achilles experienced Thetis, 
or Moses heard Yahweh out of the burning bush. Case 29, the 
same as above, when stimulated again, also saw “someone speak¬ 
ing to another and he mentioned the name, but I could not 
understand it.” And when asked whether he saw the person he 
replied, “It was just like a dream.” And when asked further if the 
person was there, he said, “Yes, sir, about where the nurse with 
the eyeglasses is sitting over there.” 

In some slightly older patients, only exploratory stimulation 
produced an hallucination. A thirty-four-year-old French-Cana- 
dian, Case 24, after previous stimulations had produced nothing, 
when stimulated on the posterior part of the middle gyrus of the 



THE DOUBLE BRAIN 


111 


right temporal lobe, suddenly said, "Wait a minute, I see some¬ 
one! " And then about an inch higher, "Oui, la, la, la! It was he, 
he came, that fool!" And then stimulated somewhat higher 
though still within what corresponds to Wernicke's area on the 
right side, "There, there, j’entend! It is just that somebody 
wanted to speak to me, and he was going, 'vite, vite, vite!’ 

But at younger ages, there is a definite suggestion that halluci¬ 
nations caused by stimulating the right temporal lobe are more 
striking, vivid, and admonitory. A fourteen-year-old boy (Case 
34) saw two men sitting in armchairs singing at him. A fourteen- 
year-old girl, Case 15, when stimulated on the superior posterior 
gyrus of the right temporal lobe, cried out, "Oh, everybody is 
shouting at me again, make them stop!" The stimulus duration 
was two seconds; the voices lasted eleven seconds. She ex¬ 
plained, "They are yelling at me for doing something wrong, 
everybody is yelling." At all stimulation points along the posterior 
temporal lobe of the right hemisphere, she heard yelling. And 
even when stimulated an inch and a half posterior to the first 
point, she cried out, "There they go, yelling at me; stop them!" 
And the voices coming from just one stimulation lasted twenty- 
one seconds. 

I should not give the impression that it is all this simple. I 
have selected these cases. In some patients, there was no re¬ 
sponse at all. Occasionally such experiences involved autoscopic 
illusions such as we referred to in 1 . 2 . A further complication is 
that stimulation of corresponding points on the left or usually 
dominant hemisphere may also result in similar hallucinations. 
In other words, such phenomena are not confined to the right 
temporal lobe. But the instances of response to stimulation on 
the left are much less frequent and occur with less intensity. 

The important thing about almost all these stimulation-caused 
experiences is their otherness, their opposition from the self, 
rather than the self's own actions or own words. With a few 



112 


The Mind of Man 


exceptions, the patients never experienced eating, talking, sex, 
running, or playing. In almost all instances, the subject was 
passive and being acted upon, exactly as a bicameral man was 
acted upon by his voices. 

Being acted upon by what? Penfield and Perot think it is 
simply past experience, flashbacks to earlier days. They try to 
explain the failure of recognition so consistently observed as 
mere forgetfulness. They assume that these were actual specific 
memories that with more time during the operation could have 
been pushed into full recognition. In fact, their questions to the 
patients during stimulation were guided by this hypothesis. 
Sometimes, indeed, the patient did become specific in his replies. 
But far more representative of the data as a whole is the pa¬ 
tients' persistence under questioning that these experiences could 
not be called memories. 

Because of this, and because of the general absence of per¬ 
sonal active images, which are the usual kind of memories that 
we have, I suggest that the conclusions of Penfield and Perot are 
incorrect. These areas of the temporal lobe are not "the brain's 
record of auditory and visual experience," nor are they its re¬ 
trieval, but combinations and amalgamations of certain aspects 
of that experience. The evidence does not, I think, warrant the 
assertion that these areas "play in adult lives some role in the 
subconscious recall of past experience, making it available for 
present interpretation." Rather the data lead away from this, to 
hallucinations that distill particularly admonition experiences, 
and perhaps become embodied or rationalized into actual experi¬ 
ences in those patients who reported them on being questioned. 


3. That the Two Hemispheres Can Behave Independently 

In our brain model of the bicameral mind, we have assumed 
that the god part and the man part behaved and thought some¬ 
what independently. And if we now say that the duality of this 



THE DOUBLE BRAIN 


113 


ancient mentality is represented in the duality of the cerebral 
hemispheres, is this not personifying parts of the brain without 
warrant? Is it possible to think of the two hemispheres of the 
brain almost as two individuals, only one of which can overtly 
speak, while both can listen and both understand? 

The evidence that this is plausible comes from another group of 
epileptics. These are the dozen or so neurosurgical patients who 
have undergone complete commissurotomy, the cutting down the 
midline of all interconnections between the two hemispheres. 10 
This so-called split-brain operation (which it is not — the deeper 
parts of the brain are still connected) usually cures the other¬ 
wise untreatable epilepsy by preventing the spread of abnormal 
neural excitation over the whole cortex. Immediately after opera¬ 
tion, some patients lose speech for up to two months, while 
others have no problem whatever — no one knows why. Perhaps 
each of us has a slightly different relationship between our hemi¬ 
spheres. Recovery is gradual, all patients showing short-term 
memory deficits (perhaps due to the cutting of the small hippo¬ 
campal commissures), some orientation problems, and mental 
fatigue. 

Now the astonishing thing is that such patients after a year or 
so of recovery do not feel any different from the way they felt 
