before the operation. They sense nothing wrong. At the present 
time they are watching television or reading the paper with no 
complaints about anything peculiar. Nor does an observer notice 
anything different about them. 

But under rigorous control of sensory input, fascinating and 
important defects are revealed. 

10 The literature on these patients of Joseph E. Bogen is still expanding. I would 
recommend his classical papers, particularly "The other side of the hrain, II: An 
appositional mind," Bulletin of the Los Angeles Neurological Society, 1969, 34 (3) : 
135-162. For a discussion by one of the pioneers in hemispheric research, R. W. 
Sperry, "Hemisphere Deconnection and Unity in Conscious Awareness," American 
Psychologist, 1968, 23: 723-733. And for a readable account by the man whose in¬ 
genuity devised ways of testing these patients, read Michael Gazzaniga's The Bisected 
Brain (New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1970). 



114 


The Mind of Man 


As you look at anything, say, the middle word of this line of 
print, all the words to the left are seen only by the right hemi¬ 
sphere, and all the words to the right only by the left. With the 
connections between the hemispheres intact, there is no particu¬ 
lar problem in co-ordinating the two, although it really is aston¬ 
ishing that we can read at all. But if you had your hemispheric 
connections cut, the matter would be very different. Starting at 
the middle of this line, all the print to your right would be seen as 
before and you would be able to read it off almost as usual. But 
all the print and all the page to your left would be a blank. Not a 
blank really, but a nothing, an absolute nothing, far more nothing 
than any nothing you can imagine. So much nothing that you 
would not even be conscious that there was nothing there, 
strange as it seems. Just as in the phenomenon of the blind 
spot, the 'nothing' is somehow 'filled in’, ’stitched together’, as 
if nothing were wrong with nothing. Actually, however, all that 
nothing would be in your other hemisphere which would be 
seeing all that ’you’ were not, all the print to the left, and seeing it 
perfectly well. But since it does not have articulated speech, it 
cannot say that it sees anything. It is as if ’you’ — whatever that 
means — were 'in’ your left hemisphere and now with the com¬ 
missures cut could never know or be conscious of what a quite 
different person, once also ’you’, in the other hemisphere was 
seeing or thinking about. Two persons in one head. 

This is one of the ways these commissurotomized patients are 
tested. The patient fixates on the center of a translucent screen; 
photographic slides of objects projected on the left side of the 
screen are thus seen only by the right hemisphere and cannot be 
reported verbally, though the patient can use his left hand (con¬ 
trolled by the right hemisphere) to point to a matching picture or 
search out the object among others, even while insisting vocally 
that he did not see it. 11 Such stimuli seen by the right nondomi- 

11 M. S. Gazzaniga, J. E. Bogen, and R. W. Sperry, "Observations on visual per¬ 
ception after disconnection of the cerebral hemispheres in man," Brain, 8: 221-236, 

1965. 



THE DOUBLE BRAIN 


115 


nant hemisphere alone are there imprisoned, and cannot be ‘told’ 
to the left hemisphere where the language areas are because the 
connections have been cut. The only way we know that the right 
hemisphere has this information at all is to ask the right hemi¬ 
sphere to use its left hand to point it out — which it can readily do. 

If two different figures are flashed simultaneously to the right 
and left visual fields, as, for example, a “dollar sign” on the left 
and a “question mark” on the right, and the subject is asked to 
draw what he saw, using the left hand out of sight under a screen, 
he draws the dollar sign. But asked what he has just drawn out of 
sight, he insists it was the question mark. In other words, the one 
hemisphere does not know what the other hemisphere has been 
doing. 

Again, if the name of some object, like the word ‘eraser’, is 
flashed to the left visual field, the subject is then able to search 
out an eraser from among a collection of objects behind a screen 
using only the left hand. If the subject is then asked what the 
item is behind the screen after it has been selected correctly, ‘he’ 
in the left hemisphere cannot say what the dumb ‘he’ of the right 
hemisphere is holding in his left hand. Similarly, the left hand 
can do this if the word ‘eraser’ is spoken, but the talking hemi¬ 
sphere does not know when the left hand has found the object. 
This shows, of course, what I have said earlier, that both hemi¬ 
spheres understand language, but it has never been possible to 
find out the extent of language understanding in the right hemi¬ 
sphere previously. 

Further, we find that the right hemisphere is able to under¬ 
stand complicated definitions. Flashing “shaving instrument” 
onto the left visual field and so into the right hemisphere, the left 
hand points to a razor, or with “dirt remover” to soap, and with 
“inserted in slot machines” to a twenty-five-cent piece. 12 

Moreover, the right hemisphere in these patients can respond 
emotionally without the left talking hemisphere knowing what it 

12 M. S. Gazzaniga and R. W. Sperry, “Language after section of the cerebral 
commissures,” Brain, 1967, 90.131-148. 



n6 The Mind of Man 

is all about. If among a series of neutral geometric figures being 
flashed to the right and left visual fields at random, which means 
respectively into the left and right hemispheres, and then a pic¬ 
ture of a nude girl by surprise is flashed on the left side going into 
the right hemisphere, the patient (really the patient's left hemi¬ 
sphere) says that it saw nothing or just a flash of light. But the 
grinning, blushing, and giggling during the next minute contra¬ 
dicts what the speech hemisphere has just said. Asked what all 
the grinning is about, the left or speech hemisphere replies that it 
has no ideals These facial expressions and blushings, inciden¬ 
tally, are not confined to one side of the face, being mediated 
through the deep interconnections of the brainstem. The expres¬ 
sion of affect is not a cortical matter. 

Similarly with other sensory modalities. Odors presented to 
the right nostril and so to the right hemisphere (olfactory fibers 
do not cross) in these patients cannot be named by the talking 
hemisphere, though the latter can say very well whether the smell 
is pleasant or unpleasant. The patient may even grunt, make 
aversive reactions, or exclaim "Phew!" to a stench, but cannot 
say verbally whether it is garlic, cheese, or decayed matter. 1 ^ The 
same odors presented to the left nostril can be named and de¬ 
scribed perfectly well. What this means is that the emotion of 
disgust gets across to the speaking hemisphere through the intact 
limbic system and brainstem, while the more specific information 
processed by the cortex does not. 

Indeed, there is some indication that it is the right hemisphere 
that commonly triggers the emotional reactions of displeasure 
from the limbic system and brainstem. In test situations, where 
the speechless right hemisphere is made to know the correct 
answer, and then hears the left dominant hemisphere making 

*3 R. W. Sperry, "Hemisphere Deconnection." 

u H. W. Gordon and R. W. Sperry, "Olfaction following surgical disconnection 
of the hemisphere in man," Proceedings of the Psychonomic Society, 1968. 



THE DOUBLE BRAIN 


117 


obvious verbal mistakes, the patient may frown, wince, or shake 
his head. It is not simply a way of speaking to say that the right 
hemisphere is annoyed at the erroneous vocal responses of the 
other. And so perhaps the annoyance of Pallas Athene when she 
grasped Achilles by his yellow hair and twisted him away from 
murdering his king (Iliad, 1 .-197). Or the annoyance of Yahweh 
with the iniquities of his people. 

Of course there is a difference. Bicameral man had all his 
commissures intact. But I shall suggest later that it is possible for 
the brain to be so reorganized by environmental changes that the 
inferences of my comparison here are not entirely foolish. At any 
rate, the studies of these commissurotomy patients demonstrate 
conclusively that the two hemispheres can function so as to seem 
like two independent persons, which in the bicameral period were, 
I suggest, the individual and his god. 

4. That Hemispheric Differences in Cognitive Function Echo the 
Differences of God and Man 

If this brain model of the bicameral mind is correct, it would 
predict decided differences in cognitive function between the two 
hemispheres. Specifically, we would expect that these functions 
necessary for the man-side would be in the left or dominant 
hemisphere, and those functions necessary to the gods would be 
more emphasized in the right hemisphere. Moreover, there is no 
reason not to think that the residuals of these different functions 
at least are present in the brain organization of contemporary 
man. 

The function of the gods was chiefly the guiding and planning 
of action in novel situations. The gods size up problems and 
organize action according to an ongoing pattern or purpose, re¬ 
sulting in intricate bicameral civilizations, fitting all the disparate 
parts together, planting times, harvest times, the sorting out of 
commodities, all the vast putting together of things in a grand 



n8 The Mind of Man 

design, and the giving of the directions to the neurological man in 
his verbal analytical sanctuary in the left hemisphere. We might 
thus predict that one residual function of the right hemisphere 
today would be an organizational one, that of sorting out the 
experiences of a civilization and fitting them together into a 
pattern that could 'tell' the individual what to do. Perusal of 
various speeches of gods in the Iliad, the Old Testament, or other 
ancient literatures is in agreement with this. Different events, 
past and future, are sorted out, categorized, synthesized into a 
new picture, often with that ultimate synthesis of metaphor. And 
these functions should, therefore, characterize the right hemi¬ 
sphere. 

Clinical observations are consistent with this hypothesis. From 
the commissurotomized patients of a few pages past, we know 
that the right hemisphere with its left hand is excellent at sorting 
