out and categorizing shapes, sizes, and textures. From brain¬ 
damaged patients, we know that damage to the right hemisphere 
interferes with spatial relations and with gestalt, synthetic 
tasks.Mazes are problems in which various elements of a 
spatial pattern must be organized in learning. Patients in whom 
the right temporal lobe has been removed find learning the path¬ 
ways of visual and tactile mazes almost impossible, while patients 
with lesions of equal extent on the left temporal lobe have little 
difficulty. 16 

Another task involving the organization of parts into a spatial 
pattern is Koh’s Block Test, commonly used in many intelligence 
tests. The subject is shown a simple geometric pattern, and 
asked to duplicate it with blocks that have its elements painted on 
them. Most of us can do it easily. But patients with brain lesions 

>5 H. Hecaen, "Clinical Symptomatology in Right and Left Hemispheric Lesions," 
in Inter hemispheric Relations and Cerebral Dominance, V. B. Mountcastle, ed. 
(Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press, 1962). 

16 Brenda Milner, "Visually guided maze learning in man: effects of bilateral, 
frontal, and unilateral cerebral lesions," Neuropsychologia, 1965, 3: 317-338. 



THE DOUBLE BRAIN 


119 


in the right hemisphere find this extremely difficult, so much so 
that the test is used to diagnose right hemisphere damage. In the 
commissurotomy patients referred to earlier, the right hand often 
cannot succeed at all in putting the design together with the 
blocks. The left hand, in a sense the hand of the gods, has no 
problem whatever. In some of the commissurotomy patients, the 
left hand had even to be held back by the observer as it tried to 
help the right hand in its fumbling attempts at this simple task. 1 ? 
The inference has thus been drawn from these and other studies 
that the right hemisphere is more involved in synthetic and 
spatial-constructive tasks while the left hemisphere is more 
analytic and verbal. The right hemisphere, perhaps like the gods, 
sees parts as having a meaning only within a context; it looks at 
wholes. While the left or dominant hemisphere, like the man 
side of the bicameral mind, looks at parts themselves. 

These clinical results have been confirmed in normal people in 
what promises to be the first of many future studies. 18 EEG 
electrodes were placed over the temporal and parietal lobes on 
both sides of normal subjects who were then given various tests. 
When asked to write various kinds of letters involving verbal and 
analytic abilities, the EEG records show low-voltage fast waves 
over the left hemisphere, denoting that the left hemisphere is 
doing the work, while slow alpha waves (seen on both hemi¬ 
spheres in a resting subject with the eyes closed) are seen over 
the right hemisphere, indicating that it is not doing the work. 
When such subjects are given spatial synthetic tests, such as 
Koh's Block Test as used in the clinical studies above, the reverse 
is found. It is now the right hemisphere that is doing the work. 

Further deductions can be made about what particular func¬ 
tions might be residual in the right hemisphere by considering 

v R. W. Sperry, Film presented at Princeton, February 1971. 

18 David Galin and R. E. Ornstein, "Lateral specialization of cognitive mode: an 
EEG study," Psychofhysiology, 1972, 9: 412-418. 



120 


The Mind of Man 




These faces are mirror images of 
each other. Stare at the nose of 
each. Which face is happier? 


what it is that the divine voices of the bicam¬ 
eral mind would have to do in particular situ¬ 
ations. To sort out and synthesize experience 
into directives to action, the gods would have 
to make certain kinds of recognitions. 
Throughout the speeches of gods in ancient 
literature, such recognitions are common. I do 
not mean recognitions of individuals in particu¬ 
lar, but more generally of types of people, of 
classifications, as well as of individuals. One 
important judgment for a human being of any 
century is the recognition of facial expression, 
particularly in regard to friendly or un¬ 
friendly intent. If a bicameral man saw an 
unrecognized man coming toward him, it 
would be of considerable survival value for 
the god-side of his mentality to decide if the 
person was of friendly or unfriendly intent. 

The adjoining figure is an experiment I de¬ 
signed about ten years ago out of such a sup¬ 
position. The two faces are mirror images of 
each other. I have so far asked almost a thou¬ 
sand people which face looks happier. Quite 
consistently, about 80 percent of right-handed 
people chose the bottom face with the smile 
going up on their left. They were thus judg¬ 
ing the face with their right hemispheres, as¬ 
suming, of course, that they were glancing at 
the center of the face. This result can be made 
stronger by tachistoscopic presentation. With 
the focal point in the center and flashed at one 
tenth of a second, the bottom face always looks 
happier to right-handed persons. 



THE DOUBLE BRAIN 


121 


An alternative hypothesis, of course, is that this tendency to 
judge facial expression by the left visual field is a carry-over of 
reading from left to right. And in our cultures it certainly en¬ 
hances the effect. But that the hemispheric explanation is at the 
bottom of it is suggested by the results for left-handed people. 
Fifty-five percent of left-handers chose the upper face as hap¬ 
pier, suggesting that it was the left hemisphere making the judg¬ 
ment. And this cannot be understood on the reading-direction 
hypothesis. Also, in people who are completely left-lateralized, 
left-handed in every way, the likeliho6d of seeing the top face as 
happier seems to be much higher. 

Recently we have made a similar finding, using photographs of 
an actor expressing sadness, happiness, disgust, and surprise. 1 ? 
Our subjects, carefully screened for right-handedness, first 
stared at the fixation point in a tachistoscope, then were pre¬ 
sented with one photograph flashed for a few milliseconds in the 
central position, and then with another either in the right or left 
visual field for the same duration. The subjects were asked to 
say whether the photographs were the same or different, and the 
time taken to make this decision was recorded. Most of the 
subjects were able to match facial expressions more correctly and 
in less time when the face was presented on the left and hence to 
the right hemisphere. In a control condition, scrambled pictures 
of the same facial expressions (which were really nonsense pat¬ 
terns) also could be matched more quickly and correctly when 
presented on the left, but not nearly as well as the facial expres¬ 
sions themselves. 

Recent clinical evidence is in clear agreement. Failure to 
recognize faces, not just facial expressions, is much more fre¬ 
quently associated with damage to the right hemisphere than to 
the left. In clinical testing, the patient is asked to match the 
frontal view of a face with three-quarter views of the same face 

*9 These experiments were done by Jack Shannon. We are both grateful to Stevan 
Hamad for his criticism and suggestions. 



122 


The Mind of Man 


under different lighting conditions. Patients with lesions in the 
right hemisphere find this extremely difficult in comparison with 
normal subjects or patients who have lesions in the left hemi¬ 
sphere. 20 Recognition of both faces and facial expression is 
therefore primarily a right hemisphere function. 

And to tell friend from non-friend in novel situations was one 
of the functions of a god. 

6 . A New Look at the Brain 

How, it may be argued, can such a system as this, a brain struc¬ 
tured into what I have called a bicameral mind, this substrate 
of human civilization for thousands of years, involving such loci 
as we have mentioned in the model, how can its function change 
over so short a period of time, such that the admonitory voices 
are heard no more and that we have this new organization called 
consciousness? While the amount of genocide going on in the 
world during these changes was enough to allow some natural 
selection and evolution, I in no way wish to rest the case upon 
that. Such natural selection as did occur during these periods of 
the development of consciousness certainly assisted in its per¬ 
petuation, but could not be said to have evolved consciousness out 
of the bicameral mind in the sense that a seaPs flipper is evolved 
out of an ancestral paw. 

A true understanding of the situation requires a different view 
of the brain from that which was usual a few decades ago. Its 
emphasis is the brain's plasticity, its redundant representation of 
psychological capacities within a specialized center or region, the 
multiple control of psychological capacities by several centers 
either paired bilaterally or as what Hughlings Jackson recognized 
as "representations" of a function lying at successively higher 

20 H. Hecaen and R. Angelergues, "Agnosia for Faces (Prosopagnosia)," Archives 
of Neurology 7: 92-100, 1962; A. L. Benton and M. W. Allen, "Impairment in Fa¬ 
cial Recognition in Patients with Cerebral Disease," Cortex, 1968, 4: 345-358. 



THE DOUBLE BRAIN 


123 


and phylogenetically younger levels of the nervous system. 21 
