The organization of the mammalian brain in this fashion allows 
for those experimental phenomena brought together under the 
rubric of "recovery of function." Its emphasis gives a view of the 
brain much more plastic than usual, with a dramatic surplus of 
neurons such that, for example, 98 percent of the optic tracts can 
be cut in the cat, and brightness and pattern discrimination will 
remain. 22 The brain teems with redundant centers, each of 
which may exert direct influence on a final common pathway, or 
modulate the operation of others, or both, their arrangements 
able to assume many forms and degrees of coupling between 
constituent centers. 

All this redundant representation in multiple control gives us 
the notion of a much more changeable kind of brain than the 
earlier neurologists described. A particular behavior or group of 
behaviors engage a host of similar neurons in a given center and 
may call into play several different centers arranged in various 
patterns of inhibition and facilitation, depending upon their evo¬ 
lutionary status. And the tightness of the coupling between cen¬ 
ters varies tremendously from one function to another . 2 3 In 
other words, the amount of changeableness that the locus of 
cortical functions can undergo is different among different func¬ 
tions, but that such changeableness is a pronounced feature of 
the higher mammalian brain is becoming more and more appar¬ 
ent. The biological purpose or selective advantage of such 
redundant representation and multiple control and its resulting 
plasticity is twofold: it protects the organism against the effects 
of brain damage, and, perhaps more important, it provides an 

21 Hughlings Jackson, "Evolution and Dissolution of the Nervous System," in 
Selected Writings of John Hughlings Jackson, J. Taylor, ed. (London: Staples Press, 
1958), 2: 45-75- 

22 R. Galambos, T. T. Norton, and G. P. Fromer, "Optic tract lesions sparing pat¬ 
tern vision in cats," Experimental Neurology, 1967, 18: 18-25. 

2 3 I am paraphrasing the superb recent review of this problem by Burton Rosner, 
"Brain functions," Annual Review of Psychology, 1970, 21: 555-594. 



124 


The Mind of Man 


organism of far greater adaptability to the constantly changing 
environmental challenges. I am thinking here of such challenges 
as characterize the successive glaciations of primate man's exis¬ 
tence, and, of course, that even greater challenge of the break¬ 
down of the bicameral mind to which man adapted with 
consciousness. 

But this does not mean just that adult man's behavior is less 
rigid than his forebear's, though this is of course true. More 
important, it provides an organism where the early develop¬ 
mental history of the individual can make a great difference in 
how the brain is organized. Some years ago, an idea such as this 
would have seemed very far-fetched indeed. But the increasing 
tide of research has eroded any rigid concept of the brain, and 
has emphasized the remarkable degree to which the brain can 
compensate for any structures missing either by injury or by 
congenital malformation. Many studies show that brain injury to 
animals in infancy may make little difference in adult behavior, 
while similar injury to adults may have profound changes. We 
have already noted that early injury to the left hemisphere usu¬ 
ally results in the switch of the entire speech mechanism to the 
right hemisphere. 

One of the most astonishing of the cases that demonstrate this 
resiliency of the brain is that of a thirty-five-year-old man who 
died of an abdominal malignancy. At autopsy, it was revealed 
that he had a congenital absence of the hippocampal fimbria, the 
fornix, septum pellucidum, and the mass intermedia thalami, 
with an abnormally small hippocampus and abnormally small 
hippocampal and dentate gyri. In spite of these remarkable ab¬ 
normalities, the patient had always displayed an "easygoing" per¬ 
sonality and had even led his class in school!^ 

Thus, the growing nervous system compensates for genetic or 
environmental damage by following other but less preferred de- 

2 4 P. W. Nathan and M. C. Smith, "Normal mentality associated with a malde- 
veloped Rhinencephalon," Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry, 
t950, 13: 191—197, as cited in Rosner. 



THE DOUBLE B RAIN 


125 


velopmental paths which utilize intact tissue. In adults, with 
development completed, this is no longer possible. The normally 
preferred modes of neural organization have already been 
achieved. It is only in early development that such reorganiza¬ 
tion of the systems of multiple control can take place. And this is 
definitely true of the relationship between the hemispheres so 
central to this discussion . 2 5 

With this as a background, I do not see the difficulty in con¬ 
sidering that, in the bicameral epochs, what corresponds to Wer¬ 
nicke's area on the right nondominant hemisphere had its strict 
bicameral function, whereas after a thousand years of psycho¬ 
logical reorganization in which such bicamerality was discour¬ 
aged when it appeared in early development, such areas function 
in a different way. And similarly, it would be wrong to think that 
whatever the neurology of consciousness now may be, it is set 
for all time. The cases we have discussed indicate otherwise, 
that the function of brain tissue is not inevitable, and that per¬ 
haps different organizations, given different developmental pro¬ 
grams, may be possible. 

2 5 R. E. Saul and R. W. Sperry, "Absence of commissurotomy symptoms with 
agenesis of the corpus callosum," Neurology, 1968, 18: 307; D. L. Reeves and 

C. B. Carville, "Complete agenesis of corpus callosum: report of four cases," Bulletin 
of Los Angeles Neurological Society, 1938, 3 : 169—181. 



CHAPTER 6 


The Origin of Civilization 


B ut wherefore should there be such a thing as the bicameral 
mind? And why are there gods? What can be the origin of 
things divine? And if the organization of the brain in bicameral 
times was as I have suggested in the previous chapter, what could 
the selective pressures in human evolution have been to bring 
about so mighty a result? 

The speculative thesis which I shall try to explain in this 
chapter — and it is very speculative — is simply an obvious 
corollary from what has gone before. The bicameral mind is a 
form of social control and it is that form of social control which 
allowed mankind to move from small hunter-gatherer groups to 
large agricultural communities. The bicameral mind with its 
controlling gods was evolved as a final stage of the evolution of 
language. And in this development lies the origin of civilization. 
Let us begin by looking at what we mean by social control. 


THE EVOLUTION OF GROUPS 

Mammals in general show a wide variety of social groupings, all 
the way from the solitariness of certain predatory animals to the 
very close social cohesiveness of others. The latter animals are 
the more preyed upon, and a social group is itself a genetic 
adaptation for protection against predators. The structure of 



THE ORIGIN OF CIVILIZATION 


127 


herds in ungulates is relatively simple, utilizing precise genetically 
given anatomical and behavioral signals that are all evolved for 
group protection. Primates have a similar vulnerability, and for 
the same reason are evolved to live in close association with 
others. In dense protective forests, the social group may be as 
small as six, as in gibbons, while on the more exposed terrains, 
the group may be up to eighty, as in the Cape baboons. 1 In ex¬ 
ceptional ecosystems, the group size may be even larger. 

It is the group then that evolves. When dominant individuals 
give a warning cry or run, others of the group flee without 
looking for the source of danger. It is thus the experience of one 
individual and his dominance that is an advantage to the whole 
group. Individuals do not generally respond even to basic physio¬ 
logical needs except within the whole pattern of the group's 
activity. A thirsty baboon, for example, does not leave the group 
and go seeking water; it is the whole group that moves or none. 
Thirst is satisfied only within the patterned activity of the group. 
And so it is with other needs and situations. 

The important thing for us here is that this social structure 
depends upon the communication between the individuals. Pri¬ 
mates have therefore evolved a tremendous variety of complex 
signals: tactile communication ranging from mounting and 
grooming to various kinds of embracing, nuzzling, and fingering; 
sounds ranging from assorted grunts, barks, screeching, and yak¬ 
king, all grading into each other; nonvocal signals such as grind¬ 
ing teeth or beating branches; 2 visual signals in a variety of facial 
expressions, the threatening, direct eye-to-eye gaze, eyelid flutter¬ 
ing in baboons in which the brows are raised and the lids are 
lowered to expose their pale color against the darker background 


1 Irven DeVore and K, R. L. Hall, "Baboon Ecology," Ch. 2 in Primate Behavior, 
I. DeVore, ed. (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1965), pp. 20—52. 

2 K. R. L. Hall, "The sexual, agonistic, and derived social behaviour patterns of 
the wild chacma baboon, Pafio ursinus" Proceedings of the Zoological Society, 
London, 1962, 139: 283—327. 



128 


The Mind of Man 


of the face, together with a yawn that bares the teeth aggres¬ 
sively; various postural signals such as lunging, head jerking, 
feinting with the hands, and all these in various constellations .3 

This huge redundant complexity of signaling is essentially de¬ 
voted to the requisites of the group, its organization into patterns 
of dominance and subordination, the maintenance of peace, re¬ 
production, and care for the young. Except for signifying poten¬ 
