tial group danger, primate signals rarely apply to events outside 
the group, such as the presence of food or water.4 They are 
totally within group affairs and are not evolved to give environ¬ 
mental information in the way human languages are. 

Now this is what we start with. Within a specific ecology, for 
most species, it is this communication system that limits the size 
of the group. Baboons are able to achieve groups as high as 
eighty or more because they have a strict geographical structure 
as they move about on the open plains, with dominant hier¬ 
archies being maintained within each circle of the group. But in 
general the usual primate group does not exceed thirty or forty, a 
limit determined by the communication necessary for the domi¬ 
nance hierarchy to work. 

In gorillas, for example, the dominant male, usually the largest 
silver-backed male, together with all the females and young, 
occupies the central core of each group of about twenty, the other 
males tending to be peripheral. The diameter of a group at any 
given moment rarely exceeds 200 feet, as every animal remains 
attentive to the movements of others in the dense forest environ¬ 
ments The group moves when the dominant male stands motion- 

3 Peter Marler, "Communication in monkeys and apes," Ch. 16, in Primate Be¬ 
havior. 

4 As is known in some birds. See M. Konishi, "The role of auditory feedback in 
the vocal behavior of the domestic fowl,” Zeitschrift fur Tierpsychologie, 1963, 20: 
349 - 367 . 

s G. Schaller, The Mountain Gorilla: Ecology and Behavior (Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press, 1963). 



THE ORIGIN OF CIVILIZATION 


129 


less with his legs spread and faces a certain direction. The other 
members of the group then crowd around him, and the troop 
moves off on its leisurely day’s journey of about a third of a mile. 
The important thing here is that the complex channels of com¬ 
munication are open between the top of the dominance hierarchy 
and all the rest. 

There is no reason to think that early man from the beginning 
of the genus Homo two million years ago lived any differently. 
Such archaeological evidence as has been obtained indicates the 
size of a group to be about thirty. 6 This number, I suggest, was 
limited by the problem of social control and the degree of open¬ 
ness of the communication channels between individuals.? And 
it is the problem of this limitation of group size which the gods 
may have come into evolutionary history to solve. 

But first we must consider the evolution of language as the 
necessary condition for there to be gods at all. 


THE EVOLUTION OF LANGUAGE 


When Did Language Evolve? 

It is commonly thought that language is such an inherent part 
of the human constitution that it must go back somehow through 
the tribal ancestry of man to the very origin of the genus Homo, 
that is, for almost two million years. Most contemporary lin¬ 
guists of my acquaintance would like to persuade me that this is 
true. But with this view, I wish to totally and emphatically 

* 6 Glynn L. Isaac, “Traces of Pleistocene Hunters: An East African Example,” in 
Man the Hunter, Richard B. Lee and Irven DeVore, eds. (Chicago: Aldine Press, 
1968). 

7 This group size is approximately the same for modern tribal hunters when 
they are nomadic. But the case is not the same. See Joseph B. Birdsell, “On popu¬ 
lation structure in generalized hunting and collecting populations,” Evolution, 1958, 
12: 189-205. 



130 


The Mind of Man 


disagree. If early man, through these two million years, had even 
a primordial speech, why is there so little evidence of even simple 
culture or technology? For there is precious little archaeologi- 
cally up to 40,000 B.C., other than the crudest of stone tools. 

Sometimes the reaction to a denial that early man had speech 
is, how then did man function or communicate? The answer is 
very simple: just like all other primates, with an abundance of 
visual and vocal signals which were very far removed from the 
syntactical language that we practice today. And when I even 
carry this speechlessness down through the Pleistocene Age, 
when man developed various kinds of primitive pebble choppers 
and hand axes, again my linguist friends lament my arrogant 
ignorance and swear oaths that in order to transmit even such 
rudimentary skills from one generation to another, there had to 
be language. But consider that it is almost impossible to describe 
chipping flints into choppers in language. This art was trans¬ 
mitted solely by imitation, exactly the same way in which chim¬ 
panzees transmit the trick of inserting straws into ant hills to get 
ants. It is the same problem as the transmission of bicycle riding; 
does language assist at all? 

Because language must make dramatic changes in man's at¬ 
tention to things and persons, because it allows a transfer of 
information of enormous scope, it must have developed over a 
period that shows archaeologically that such changes occurred. 
Such a one is the late Pleistocene, roughly from 70,000 B.C. to 
8000 B.C. This period was characterized climactically by wide 
variations in temperature, corresponding to the advance and re¬ 
treat of glacial conditions, and biologically by huge migrations of 
animals and man caused by these changes in weather. The 
hominid population exploded out of the African heartland into 
the Eurasian subarctic and then into the Americas and Australia. 
The population around the Mediterranean reached a new high 
and took the lead in cultural innovation, transferring man's cul¬ 
tural and biological focus from the tropics to the middle lati- 



THE ORIGIN OF CIVILIZATION 


131 


tudes. 8 9 His fires, caves, and furs created for man a kind of 
transportable microclimate that allowed these migrations to take 
place. 

We are used to referring to these people as late Neander- 
thalers. At one time they were thought to be a separate species of 
man supplanted by Cro-Magnon man around 35,000 B.C. But the 
more recent view is that they were part of the general human 
line, which had great variation, a variation that allowed for an 
increasing pace of evolution, as man, taking his artificial climate 
with him, spread into these new ecological niches. More work 
needs to be done to establish the true patterns of settlement, but 
the most recent emphasis seems to be on its variation, some 
groups continually moving, others making seasonal migrations, 
and others staying at a site all the year round .9 

I am emphasizing the climate changes during this last glacial 
age because I believe these changes were the basis of the selec¬ 
tive pressures behind the development of language through sev¬ 
eral stages. 


Calls, Modifiers, and Commands 

The first stage and the sine qua non of language is the develop¬ 
ment out of incidental calls of intentional calls, or those which 
tend to be repeated unless turned off by a change in behavior of 
the recipient. Previously in the evolution of primates, it was only 
postural or visual signals such as threat postures which were 
intentional. Their evolution into auditory signals was made nec¬ 
essary by the migration of man into northern climates, where 
there was less light both in the environment and in the dark 
caves where man made his abode, and where visual signals could 

8 See J. D. Clark, “Human ecology during the Pleistocene and later times in 
Africa south of the Sahara,” Current Anthropology, i960, 1: 307-324. 

9 See Karl W. Butzer, Environment and Archaeology: An Introduction to Pleisto¬ 
cene Geography (Chicago: Aldine Press, 1964), p. 378. 



132 


The Mind of Man 


not be seen as readily as on the bright African savannahs. This 
evolution may have begun as early as the Third Glaciation Period 
or possibly even before. But it is only as we are approaching the 
increasing cold and darkness of the Fourth Glaciation in northern 
climates that the presence of such vocal intentional signals gave a 
pronounced selective advantage to those who possessed them. 

I am here summarizing a theory of language evolution which I 
have developed more fully and with more caution elsewhere. 10 
It is not intended as a definitive statement of what occurred in 
evolution so much as a rough working hypothesis to approach it. 
Moreover, the stages of language development that I shall de¬ 
scribe are not meant to be necessarily discrete. Nor are they 
always in the same order in different localities. The central 
assertion of this view, I repeat, is that each new stage of words 
literally created new perceptions and attentions, and such new 
perceptions and attentions resulted in important cultural changes 
which are reflected in the archaeological record. 

The first real elements of speech were the final sounds of 
intentional calls differentiating on the basis of intensity. For 
example, a danger call for immediately present danger would be 
exclaimed with more intensity, changing the ending phoneme. 
An imminent tiger might result in 'waheeis while a distant tiger 
might result in a cry of less intensity and so develop a different 
ending such as 'wahoo'. It is these endings, then, that become the 
first modifiers meaning 'near' and 'far'. And the next step was 
when these endings, 'hee' and 'hoo', could be separated from the 
particular call that generated them and attached to some other 
call with the same indication. 

The crucial thing here is that the differentiation of vocal quali¬ 
fiers had to precede the invention of the nouns which they modi¬ 
fied, rather than the reverse. And what is more, this stage of 
speech had to remain for a long period until such modifiers 

10 Julian Jaynes, "The evolution of language in the Late Pleistocene," Annals of 
