the New York Academy of Sciences, Vol. 280, 1976, in press. 



THE ORIGIN OF CIVILIZATION 


133 


became stable. This slow development was also necessary so that 
the basic repertoire of the call system was kept intact to perform 
its intentional functions. This age of modifiers perhaps lasted up 
to 40,000 B.C., where we find archaeologically retouched hand 
axes and points. 

The next stage might have been an age of commands, when 
modifiers, separated from the calls they modify, now can modify 
men's actions themselves. Particularly as men relied more and 
more on hunting in the chilled climate, the selective pressure for 
such a group of hunters controlled by vocal commands must have 
been immense. And we may imagine that the invention of a 
modifier meaning ’sharper’ as an instructed command could 
markedly advance the making of tools from flint and bone, result¬ 
ing in an explosion of new types of tools from 40,000 B.C. up to 
25,000 B.C. 

Nouns 

Once a tribe has a repertoire of modifiers and commands, the 
necessity of keeping the integrity of the old primitive call system 
can be relaxed for the first time, so as to indicate the referents of 
the modifiers or commands. If ’waheels once meant an imminent 
danger, with more intensity differentiation, we might have ’wak 
ee!’ for an approaching tiger, or "wab ee!’ for an approaching 
bear. These would be the first sentences with a noun subject and 
a predicative modifier, and they may have occurred somewhere 
between 25,000 and 15,000 B.C. 

These are not arbitrary speculations. The succession from 
modifiers to commands and, only when these become stable, to 
nouns is no arbitrary succession. Nor is the dating entirely arbi¬ 
trary. Just as the age of modifiers coincides with the making 
of much superior tools, so the age of nouns for animals coincides 
with the beginning of drawing animals on the walls of caves or 
on horn implements. 



134 


The Mind of Man 


The next stage is the development of thing nouns, really a 
carry-over from the preceding. And just as life nouns began 
animal drawings, so nouns for things beget new things. This 
period corresponds, I suggest, to the invention of pottery, pen¬ 
dants, ornaments, and barbed harpoons and spearheads, the last 
two tremendously important in spreading the human species into 
more difficult climates. From fossil evidence we know factually 
that the brain, particularly the frontal lobe in front of the central 
sulcus, was increasing with a rapidity that still astonishes the 
modern evolutionist. And by this time, perhaps what corresponds 
to the Magdalenian culture, the language areas of the brain as we 
know them had developed. 

The Origin of Auditory Hallucinations 

At this point, let us consider another problem in the origin of 
gods, the origin of auditory hallucinations. That there is a prob¬ 
lem here comes from the very fact of their undoubted existence 
in the contemporary world, and their inferred existence in the 
bicameral period. The most plausible hypothesis is that verbal 
hallucinations were a side effect of language comprehension which 
evolved by natural selection as a method of behavioral control. 

Let us consider a man commanded by himself or his chief to 
set up a fish weir far upstream from a campsite. If he is not 
conscious, and cannot therefore narratize the situation and so 
hold his analog 'I' in a spatialized time with its consequences fully 
imagined, how does he do it? It is only language, I think, that 
can keep him at this time-consuming all-afternoon work. A Mid¬ 
dle Pleistocene man would forget what he was doing. But lingual 
man would have language to remind him, either repeated by 
himself, which would require a type of volition which I do not 
think he was then capable of, or, as seems more likely, by a 
repeated 'internal' verbal hallucination telling him what to do. 

To someone who has not fully understood the previous chap¬ 
ters, this type of suggestion will sound extremely strange and far- 



THE ORIGIN OF CIVILIZATION 


135 


fetched. But if one is facing directly and conscientiously the 
problem of tracing out the development of human mentality, 
such suggestions are necessary and important, even though we 
cannot at the present time think how we can substantiate them. 
Behavior more closely based on aptic structures (or, in an older 
terminology, more 'instinctive') needs no temporal priming. But 
learned activities with no consummatory closure do need to be 
maintained by something outside of themselves. This is what 
verbal hallucinations would supply. 

Similarly, in fashioning a tool, the hallucinated verbal com¬ 
mand of "sharper" enables nonconscious early man to keep at his 
task alone. Or an hallucinated term meaning "finer" for an indi¬ 
vidual grinding seeds on a stone quern into flour. It was indeed 
at this point in human history that I believe articulate speech, 
under the selective pressures of enduring tasks, began to become 
unilateral in the brain, to leave the other side free for these 
hallucinated voices that could maintain such behavior. 


The Age of Names 

This has been an all too brief sketch of what must have been 
involved in the evolution of language. But before there could be 
gods, one further step had to be taken, the invention of that most 
important social phenomenon — names. 

It is somehow startling to realize that names were a particular 
invention that must have come into human development at a 
particular time. When? What changes might this make in hu¬ 
man culture? It is, I suggest, as late as the Mesolithic era, about 
10,000 B.C. to 8000 B.C. when names first occurred. This is the 
period of man's adaptation to the warmer postglacial environ¬ 
ment. The vast sheet of ice has retreated to the latitude of 
Copenhagen, and man keys in to specific environmental situa¬ 
tions, to grassland hunting, to life in the forest, to shellfish col¬ 
lecting, or to the exploitation of marine resources combined with 
terrestrial hunting. Such living is characterized by a much 



136 


The Mind of Man 


greater stability of population, rather than the necessary mobility 
of the hunting groups which preceded them with their large 
mortality. With these more fixed populations, with more fixed 
relationships, longer life-spans, and probably larger numbers in 
the group which had to be distinguished, it is not difficult to see 
both the need and the likelihood of a carry-over of nouns into 
names for individual persons. 

Now, once a tribe member has a proper name, he can in a 
sense be recreated in his absence. 'He' can be thought about, 
using 'thoughts here in a special nonconscious sense of fitting into 
language structures. While there had been earlier graves of a 
sort, occasionally somewhat elaborate, this is the first age in 
which we find ceremonial graves as a common practice. If you 
think of someone close to you who has died, and then suppose 
that he or she had no name, in what would your grief consist? 
How long could it last? Previously, man, like other primates, 
had probably left his dead where they fell, or else hidden them 
from view with stones, or in some instances roasted and eaten 
them. 11 But just as a noun for an animal makes that relation¬ 
ship a much more intense one, so a name for a person. And 
when the person dies, the name still goes on, and hence the 
relationship, almost as in life, and hence burial practices and 
mourning. The Mesolithic midden-dwellers of Morbihan, for ex¬ 
ample, buried their dead in skin cloaks fastened by bone pins and 
sometimes crowned them with stag antlers and protected them 
with stone slabs. 12 Other graves from the period show burials 
with little crowns, or various ornaments, or possibly flowers in 
carefully excavated places, all, I suggest, the result of the inven¬ 
tion of names. 

But a further change occurs with names. Up to this time au¬ 
ditory hallucinations had probably been casually anonymous and 

11 As at Choukoutien during the Middle Pleistocene and later in the Croatian cave 
of Krapina. See Grahame Clark and Stewart Piggott, Prehistoric Societies (Lon¬ 
don: Hutchinson, 1965), p. 61. 

12 Grahame Clark, The Stone Age Hunters (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1967), 

p. 105. 



THE ORIGIN OF CIVILIZATION 


137 


not in any sense a significant social interaction. But once a specific 
hallucination is recognized with a name, as a voice originating 
from a particular person, a significantly different thing is occur¬ 
ring. The hallucination is now a social interaction with a much 
greater role in individual behavior. And a further problem here is 
just how hallucinated voices were recognized, as whom, and if 
there were many, how sorted out. Some light on these questions 
comes from the autobiographical writings of schizophrenic pa¬ 
tients. But not enough to pursue the matter here. We are greatly 
in need of specific research in this area of schizophrenic experi¬ 
ence to help us in understanding Mesolithic man. 


The Advent of Agriculture 

We are now at the threshold of the bicameral period, for the 
mechanism of social control which can organize large popula¬ 
tions of men into a city is at hand. Everyone agrees that the 
change from a hunting and gathering economy to a food-produc¬ 
ing economy by the domestication of plants and animals is the 
gigantic step that made civilization possible. But there is wide 
disagreement as to its causes and the means by which it came 
