about. 

The traditional theory emphasizes the fact that when the 
glaciers covered most of Europe during the Late Pleistocene, the 
whole area from the Atlantic coast across North Africa and the 
Near East to the Zagros Mountains in Iran enjoyed such an 
abundant rainfall that it was indeed a vast procreant Eden, lux¬ 
uriant with plant life ample to support a wide range of fauna, 
including Paleolithic man. But the recession of the polar ice cap 
moved these Atlantic rain-winds northward, and the entire Near 
East became increasingly arid. The wild food-plants and the 
game on which man had preyed were no longer sufficient to allow 
him to live by simple food-gathering, and the result was that 
many tribes emigrated out of the area into Europe, while those 
who remained — in the words of Pumpelly, who originated this 



138 


The Mind of Man 


hypothesis from his own excavations — "concentrating on the 
oases and forced to conquer new means of support, began to 
utilize the native plants; and from among these he learned to use 
seeds of different grasses growing on the dry land and in marshes 
at the mouths of larger streams on the desert.”^ And this view 
has been followed by a series of more recent authors, including 
Childe,^ as well as Toynbee/s who called this supposed desic¬ 
cation of the Near East environment the "physical challenge" to 
which agricultural civilization was the response. 

Recent evidence 16 shows that there was no such extensive 
desiccation, and that agriculture was not economically 'forced* on 
anyone. I have been placing an overwhelming importance on 
language in the development of human culture in Mesolithic 
times and I would do so here as well. As we saw in Chapter 3, 
language allows the metaphors of things to increase perception 
and attention, and so to give new names to things of new impor¬ 
tance. It is, I think, this added linguistic mentality, surrounded 
as it was in the Near East by a fortuitous grouping of suitable 
domesticates, wild wheats and wild barley, whose native distribu¬ 
tion overlaps with the much broader habitats of the herd animals 
of southwestern Asia, goats, sheep, cattle, and wild pigs, that 
resulted in agriculture. 


THE FIRST GOD 


Let us look more directly for a moment at the best defined and 
most fully studied Mesolithic culture, the Natufian, named after 
the Wadi en-Natuf in Israel, where the first of the sites was 

*3 R. Pumpelly, Explorations in Turkestan: Expedition of 1904: Prehistoric 
Civilizations of Anau (Washington: Carnegie Institution, 1908), pp. 65-66. 

u V. G. Childe, The Most Ancient East, 4th ed. (London: Routledge and Kegan 
Paul, 1954). 

’5 A. J. Toynbee, A Study of History (London: Oxford University Press, 1962), 
Vol. 1, pp. 304-305- 
16 Butzer, p. 416. 



THE ORIGIN OF CIVILIZATION 


139 


found. In 10,000 B.C., like their Paleolithic predecessors, the 
Natufians were hunters, about five feet tall, often living in the 
mouths of caves, were skillful in working bone and antler and in 
chipping retouched blades and burins out of flint, drew animals 
almost as well as the artists of the cave drawings of Lascaux, and 
wore perforated shells or animal teeth as ornaments. 

By 9000 B.C., they are burying their dead in ceremonial graves 
and adopting a more settled life. The latter is indicated by the 
first signs of structural building, such as the paving and walling 
of platforms with much plaster, and cemeteries sometimes large 
enough for eighty-seven burials, a size unknown in any previous 
age. It is, as I have suggested, the age of names, with all that it 
implies. 

It is the open-air Natufian settlement at Eynan which shows 
this change most dramatically. 1 ? Discovered in 1959, this heav¬ 
ily investigated site is about a dozen miles north of the Sea of 
Galilee on a natural terrace overlooking the swamps and pools of 
Lake Huleh. Three successive permanent towns dating from 
about 9000 B.C. have been carefully excavated. Each town com¬ 
prised about fifty round stone houses with reed roofs, with diam¬ 
eters up to 23 feet. The houses were arranged around an open 
central area where many bell-shaped pits had been dug and 
plastered for the storage of food. Sometimes these pits were 
reused for burials. 

Now here is a very significant change in human affairs. In¬ 
stead of a nomadic tribe of about twenty hunters living in the 
mouths of caves, we have a town with a population of at least 
200 persons. It was the advent of agriculture, as attested by the 
abundance of sickle blades, pounders and pestles, querns and 
mortars, recessed in the floor of each house, for the reaping and 
preparation of cereals and legumes, that made such permanence 
and population possible. Agriculture at this time was exceedingly 

v See J. Perrot, "Excavations at Eynan, 1959 season," Israel Exploration Journal} 
1961, 10: ij James Mellaart, Earliest Civilizations of the Near East (New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 1965), Ch. 2; Clark and Piggott, p. 150ft. 



140 


The Mind of Man 


primitive and only a supplement to the wide variety of animal 
fauna — wild goats, gazelles, boars, fox, hare, rodents, birds, 
fish, tortoises, crustaceans, mussels, and snails — which, as carbon- 
dated remains show, were the significant part of the diet. 

The Hallucinogenic King 

A town! Of course it is not impossible that one chief could 
dominate a few hundred people. But it would be a consuming 
task if such domination had to be through face-to-face encounters 
repeated every so often with each individual, as occurs in those 
primate groups that maintain strict hierarchies. 

I beg you to recall, as we try to picture the social life of Eynan, 
that these Natufians were not conscious. They could not nar- 
ratize and had no analog selves to 'see' themselves in relation to 
others. They were what we could call signal-bound, that is, re¬ 
sponding each minute to cues in a stimulus-response manner, 
and controlled by those cues. 

And what were the cues for a social organization this large? 
What signals were the social control over its two or three hun¬ 
dred inhabitants? 

I have suggested that auditory hallucinations may have 
evolved as a side effect of language and operated to keep individ¬ 
uals persisting at the longer tasks of tribal life. Such hallucina¬ 
tions began in the individual's hearing a command from himself 
or from his chief. There is thus a very simple continuity between 
such a condition and the more complex auditory hallucinations 
which I suggest were the cues of social control in Eynan and 
which originated in the commands and speech of the king. 

Now we must not make the error here of supposing that these 
auditory hallucinations were like tape recordings of what the king 
had commanded. Perhaps they began as such. But after a time 
there is no reason not to suppose that such voices could 'think' 
and solve problems, albeit, of course, unconsciously. The 'voices' 



THE ORIGIN OF CIVILIZATION 


141 


heard by contemporary schizophrenics ‘think’ as much and often 
more than they do. And thus the ‘voices’ which I am supposing 
were heard by the Natufians could with time improvise and ‘say’ 
things that the king himself had never said. Always, however, 
we may suppose that all such novel hallucinations were strictly 
tied in consistency to the person of the king himself. This is not 
different from ourselves when we inherently know what a friend 
is likely to say. Thus each worker, gathering shellfish or trapping 
small game or in a quarrel with a rival or planting seed where the 
wild grain had previously been harvested, had within him the 
voice of his king to assist the continuity and utility to the group of 
his labors. 


The God-King 

We have decided that the occasion of an hallucination was 
stress, as it is in our contemporaries. And if our reasonings have 
been correct, we may be sure that the stress caused by a person’s 
death was far more than sufficient to trigger his hallucinated 
voice. Perhaps this is why, in so many early cultures, the heads 
of the dead were often severed from the body, or why the legs of 
the dead were broken or tied up, why food is so often in the 
graves, or why there is evidence so often of a double burial of the 
same corpse, the second being in a common grave after the voices 
have stopped. 

If this were so for an ordinary individual, how much more so 
for a king whose voice even while living ruled by hallucination. 
We might therefore expect a very special accordance given to the 
house of this unmoving man whose voice is still the cohesion of 
the entire group. 

At Eynan, still dating about 9000 B.C., the king’s tomb — the 
first such ever found (so far) — is a quite remarkable affair. 
The tomb itself, like all the houses, was circular, about 16 feet in 
diameter. Inside, two complete skeletons lay in the center ex- 



142 


The Mind of Man 


tended on their backs, with legs detached after death and bent 
out of position. One wore a headdress of dentalia shells and was 
presumed to have been the king's wife. The other, an adult male, 
presumably the king, was partly covered with stones and partly 
propped up on stones, his upright head cradled in more stones, 
