facing the snowy peaks of Mount Hermon, thirty miles away. 

At some later time, soon after or years later, we do not know, 
the entire tomb was surrounded by a red-ochered wall or para¬ 
pet. Then, without disturbing its two motionless inhabitants, 
large flat stones were paved over the top, roofing them in. Then, 
on the roof a hearth was built. Another low circular wall of 
stones was built still later around the roof-hearth, with more 
paving stones on top of that, and three large stones surrounded 
by smaller ones set in the center. 

I am suggesting that the dead king, thus propped up on his 
pillow of stones, was in the hallucinations of his people still 
giving forth his commands, and that the red-painted parapet and 



The first god: the dead king of 
Eynan propped up on a pillow of 
stones in about 9000 B.C., as dis¬ 
covered by excavations in 1959. 


THE ORIGIN OF CIVILIZATION 


143 


its top tier of a hearth were a response to the decomposition of 
the body, and that, for a time at least, the very place, even the 
smoke from its holy fire, rising into visibility from furlongs 
around, was, like the gray mists of the Aegean for Achilles, a 
source of hallucinations and of the commands that controlled 
the Mesolithic world of Eynan. 

This was a paradigm of what was to happen in the next eight 
millennia. The king dead is a living god. The king's tomb is the 
god's house, the beginning of the elaborate god-house or temples 
which we shall look at in the next chapter. Even the two-tiered 
formation of its structure is prescient of the multitiered ziggurats, 
of the temples built on temples, as at Eridu, or the gigantic 
pyramids by the Nile that time in its majesty will in several 
thousand years unfold. 

We should not leave Eynan without at least mentioning the 
difficult problem of succession. Of course, we have next to noth¬ 
ing to go on in Eynan. But the fact that the royal tomb contained 
previous burials that had been pushed aside for the dead king and 
his wife suggests that its former occupants may have been ear¬ 
lier kings. And the further fact that beside the hearth on the 
second tier above the propped-up king was still another skull 
suggests that it may have belonged to the first king's successor, 
and that gradually the hallucinated voice of the old king became 
fused with that of the new. The Osiris myth that was the power 
behind the majestic dynasties of Egypt had perhaps begun. 

The king's tomb as the god's house continues through the 
millennia as a feature of many civilizations, particularly in Egypt. 
But, more often, the king's-tomb part of the designation withers 
away. This occurs as soon as a successor to a king continues to 
hear the hallucinated voice of his predecessor during his reign, and 
designates himself as the dead king's priest or servant, a pattern 
that is followed throughout Mesopotamia. In place of the tomb is 
simply a temple. And in place of the corpse is a statue, enjoying 
even more service and reverence, since it does not decompose. 



144 


The Mind of Man 


We shall be discussing these idols, or replacements for the 
corpses of kings, more fully in the next two chapters. They are 
important. Like the queen in a termite nest or a beehive, the 
idols of a bicameral world are the carefully tended centers of 
social control, with auditory hallucinations instead of pheromones. 

The Success of Civilization 

Here then is the beginning of civilization. Rather abruptly, 
archaeological evidence for agriculture such as the sickle blades 
and pounding and milling stones of Eynan appear more or less 
simultaneously in several other sites in the Levant and Iraq 
around 9000 B.C., suggesting a very early diffusion of agriculture 
in the Near Eastern highlands. At first, this is as it was at 
Eynan, a stage in which incipient agriculture and, later, animal 
domestication were going on within a dominant food-collecting 
economy. 18 

But by 7000 B.C., agriculture has become the primary subsis¬ 
tence of farming settlements found in assorted sites in the 
Levant, the Zagros area, and southwestern Anatolia. The crops 
consisted of einkorn, emmer, and barley, and the domesticated 
animals were sheep, goats, and sometimes pigs. By 6000 B.C., 
farming communities spread over much of the Near East. And 
by 5000 B.C., the agricultural colonization of the alluvial valleys 
of the Tigris-Euphrates and Nile was rapidly spreading, swelling 
populations into an intensive cultural landscape. 1 ? Cities of 
10,000 inhabitants, as at Merinde on the western edge of the Nile 
delta, were not uncommon. 20 The great dynasties of Ur and of 
Egypt begin their mighty impact on history. The date 5000 B.C., 

18 See R. J. Braidwood, "Levels in pre-history: A model for the consideration of 
the evidence," in Evolution After Darwin, S. Tax, ed. (Chicago: University of Chi¬ 
cago Press, i960), Vol. 2, pp. 143-15 1. 

>9 Butzer, p. 464. 

20 See K. W. Butzer, "Archaeology and geology in ancient Egypt," Science, i960, 
132: 1617—1624. 



THE ORIGIN OF CIVILIZATION 


145 


or perhaps five hundred years earlier, is also the beginning of 
what is known to geologists as the Holocene Thermal Maximum, 
lasting to approximately 3000 B.C., in which the world's climate, 
particularly as revealed by pollen studies, was considerably 
warmer and moister than today, allowing even further agricul¬ 
tural dispersal into Europe and northern Africa, as well as more 
productive agriculture in the Near East. And in this immensely 
complex civilizing of mankind, the evidence, I think, suggests 
that the modus operandi of it all was the bicameral mind. 

It is to that evidence that we now turn. 





BOOK TWO 
The Witness of History 



CHAPTER l 


Gods, Graves, and Idols 


C ivilization is the art of living in towns of such size that 
everyone does not know everyone else. Not a very inspiring 
definition, perhaps, but a true one. We have hypothesized that it 
is the social organization provided by the bicameral mind that 
made this possible. In this and the ensuing chapter, I am attempt¬ 
ing to integrate without excessive particularization the worldwide 
evidence that such a mentality did in fact exist wherever and 
whenever civilization first began. 

While the matter is in much current debate, the view I am 
adopting is that civilization began independently in various sites in 
the Near East, as described in the previous chapter, then spread 
along the valleys of the Tigris and Euphrates rivers, into Anatolia 
and the valley of the Nile; then into Cyprus, Thessaly, and Crete; 
and then somewhat later by diffusion into the Indus River valley 
and beyond, and into the Ukraine and Central Asia; then, partly 
by diffusion and partly spontaneously, along the Yangtze; then 
independently in Mesoamerica; and again, partly by diffusion and 
partly independently, in the Andean highlands. In each of these 
areas, there was a succession of kingdoms all with similar char¬ 
acteristics that, somewhat prematurely, I shall call bicameral. 
While there were certainly other bicameral kingdoms in the 
history of the world, perhaps along the margins of the Bay of 
Bengal or the Malay peninsular, in Europe, certainly in central 
Africa by diffusion from Egypt, and possibly among the North 



150 


The Witness of History 


American Indians during the so-called Mississippi Period, too little 
has been recovered of these civilizations to be of assistance in 
checking out the main hypothesis. 

Given the theory as I have outlined it, I suggest that there are 
several outstanding archaeological features of ancient civiliza¬ 
tions which can only be understood on this basis. These silent 
features are the subject of this chapter, the literate civilizations 
of Mesopotamia and Egypt being reserved for the next. 


THE HOUSES OF GODS 

Let us imagine ourselves coming as strangers to an unknown 
land and finding its settlements all organized on a similar 
plan: ordinary houses and buildings grouped around one larger 
and more magnificent dwelling. We would immediately assume 
that the large magnificent dwelling was the house of the prince 
who ruled there. And we might be right. But in the case of older 
civilizations, we would not be right if we supposed such a ruler 
was a person like a contemporary prince. Rather he was an 
hallucinated presence, or, in the more general case, a statue, 
often at one end of his superior house, with a table in front of 
him where the ordinary could place their offerings to him. 

Now, whenever we encounter a town or city plan such as this, 
with a central larger building that is not a dwelling and has no 
other practical use as a granary or barn, for example, and par¬ 
ticularly if the building contains some kind of human effigy, we 
may take it as evidence of a bicameral culture or of a culture 
derived from one. This criterion may seem fatuous, simply be¬ 
cause it is the plan of many towns today. We are so used to the 
town plan of a church surrounded by lesser houses and shops 
that we see nothing unusual. But our contemporary religious and 
city architecture is partly, I think, the residue of our bicameral 
past. The church or temple or mosque is still called the House of 
