


GODS, GRAVES, AND IDOLS 


151 


God. In it, we still speak to the god, still bring offerings to be 
placed on a table or altar before the god or his emblem. My 
purpose in speaking in this objective fashion is to defamiliarize 
this whole pattern, so that standing back and seeing civilized man 
against his entire primate evolution, we can see that such a 
pattern of town structure is unusual and not to be expected from 
our Neanderthal origins. 


From Jericho to Ur 

With but few exceptions, the plan of human group habitation 
from the end of the Mesolithic up to relatively recent eras is of a 
god-house surrounded by man-houses. In the earliest villages, 1 
such as the excavated level of Jericho corresponding to the ninth 
millennium B.C., such a plan is not entirely clear and is perhaps 
debatable. But the larger god-house at Jericho, surrounded by 
what were lesser dwellings, at a level corresponding to the 
seventh millennium B.C., with its perhaps columned porchway 
leading into a room with niches and curvilinear annexes, defies 
doubt as to its purpose. It is no longer the tomb of a dead king 
whose corpse is propped up on stones. The niches housed nearly 
life-sized effigies, heads modeled naturalistically in clay and set 
on canes or bundles of reeds and painted red. Of similar halluci¬ 
nogenic function may have been the ten human skulls, perhaps 
of dead kings, found at the same site, with features realistically 
modeled in plaster and white cowrie shells inserted for eyes. And 
the Hacilar culture in Anatolia of about 7000 B.C. also had hu¬ 
man crania set up on floors, suggesting similar bicameral control 
to hold the members of the culture together in their food-produc¬ 
ing and protection enterprise. 

1 General sources consulted here include Grahame Clark and Stuart Piggott, Pre¬ 
historic Societies (London: Hutchinson, 1965); James Mellaart, Earliest Civiliza¬ 
tions of the Near East (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1965); and Grahame Clark, 
World Prehistory: A New Outline (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1969). 



152 


The Witness of History 



Plan of building-level VI B at Qatal Hiiyiik, about 6000 B.C. Note 
that there is a shrine signified by S in almost every household. 


The largest Neolithic site in the Near East is the 32-acre Qatal 
Hiiyiik, of which only one or two acres have been as yet exca¬ 
vated. Here the arrangement was slightly different. Excavations 
at levels dating from about 6000 B.C. show that almost every 
house had a series of four to five rooms nestled around a god's 
room. Numerous groups of statues in stone or baked clay have 
been found within these god's rooms. 

At Eridu, five centuries later, god-houses were set on mud-brick 
platforms, which were the origin of ziggurats. In a long central 
room, the god-idol on a platform at one end looked at an offering 
table at the other. And it is this Eridu sequence of sanctuaries up 
to the Ubaid culture in southern Iraq which, spreading over the 
whole of Mesopotamia around 4300 B.C., lays the foundations of 
the Sumerian civilization and its Babylonian successor which I 
consider in the next chapter. With cities of many thousands 
came the building of the huge monumental god-houses which 
characterize and dominate cities from then on, perhaps being 
hallucinogenic aids to everyone for miles around. To stand even 
today under such mountainous ziggurats as that of Ur, still heav¬ 
ing up above the excavated ruins of its once bicameral civiliza- 


GODS, GRAVES, AND IDOLS 


153 


tion, with its ramps of staircases rising to but half the height it 
once had, and to imagine its triple tier of temples on top rising 
into the sun is to feel the grip such architecture alone can have 
upon one’s mentality. 


A Hittite Variation 

The Hittites in the center of their capital, Hattusas, now 
Boghazkoy in central Turkey, 2 had four huge temples with great 
granite sanctuaries that projected beyond the main fagades of the 
limestone walls to obtain lateral lighting for some huge idols. 

But, perhaps taking the place of a ziggurat, that is, of a high 
place that could be seen wherever lands were being farmed, is the 
beautiful outdoor mountain shrine of Yazilikaya just above the 
city, its sanctuary walls streaming with reliefs of gods .3 That the 
mountains themselves were hallucinatory to the Hittites is indi¬ 
cated by relief sculptures still clearly visible on the rocks within 
the sanctuary, showing the usual stereotyped drawings of moun¬ 
tains topped with the heads and headdresses used for gods. As 
the Psalmist sings, “I will lift up mine eyes unto the hills whence 
cometh my help.” 

On one of the faces of this mountain temple, the robed king is 
carved in profile. Just behind him in the stone relief towers a god 
with a much loftier crown; the god’s right arm is outstretched, 
showing the king the way, while the god’s left arm is hugged 
around the king’s neck and grasps the king’s right wrist firmly. It 
is testament to an emblem of the bicameral mind. 

The depicting of gods in long files, unique I think to the Hit- 

2 The Hittites may be an example of a group of nomadic tribes learning’ a bi¬ 
cameral civilization from their neighbors. It is the sudden intrusion of brightly 
decorated polychrome pottery among the burnished monochrome pottery of the 
Cappadocian plateau in the archaelogical record dating about 2100 b.c. that is taken 
to be the indication of their arrival, probably from the steppes of southern Russia. 

3 Good photographs of Yazilikaya may he seen in Ch. 3 of Seton Lloyd, Early 
Highland Peoples of Anatolia (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1967). An explanatory 
discussion may be found in Ekron Akurgal, Ancient Civilizations and Ruins of Turkey 
(Istanbul, 1969). 



154 


The Witness of History 



Rock relief at Yazilikaya, about 
1250 B.C. The god Sharruma 
holds his steward-king, Tudha- 
liys, in his embrace. The pretzel¬ 
like hieroglyph for deity is seen 
both as the head in the god’s 
ideogram on the upper left and 
repetitively on the god’s crown. 
It is also seen in the king's ideo¬ 
gram on the upper right, indicat¬ 
ing, I think, that the king too was 
'heard' in hallucination by his 
subjects. 


tites, suggests a solution to an old problem in Hittite research. 
This is the translation of the important word pankush. Scholars 
originally interpreted it as signifying the whole human commu¬ 
nity, perhaps some sort of national assembly. But other texts 
have forced a revision of this to some kind of an elite. A further 
possibility, I suggest, is that it indicates the whole community of 
these many gods, and, particularly, the choice-decisions in which 
all the bicameral voices were in agreement. The fact that during 
the last century or so of Hittite rule, from around 1300 B.C., no 
mention of the pankush appears in any text could indicate their 
collective silence and the beginning of the troublous change 
toward subjectivity. 




GODS, GRAVES, AND IDOLS 


155 


Olmec and Maya 

The earliest bicameral kingdoms of America are also charac¬ 
terized by these huge, otherwise useless centrally located build¬ 
ings: the queer-shaped clumsy Olmec pyramid at La Venta of 
about 500 B.C. with its corridor of lesser mounds smothering 
mysterious jaguar-face mosaics; or the rash of great temple pyra¬ 
mids constructed about 200 B.Cd The largest of them, the gigan¬ 
tic pyramid of the sun at Teotihuacan (literally “Place of the 
Gods”) has a greater cubic content than any in Egypt, being an 
eighth of a mile long on each side, and higher than a twenty-story 
building.s A room for a god on its summit was reached by 
systems of steep stairs. And on top of the god-room, tradition 
states, there was a gigantic statue of the sun. A processional way 
flanked by other pyramids leads toward it, and, for miles around 
on the Mexican plateau, one can still see the remains of a great 
city, houses for priests, numerous courtyards, and smaller build¬ 
ings, all of one story so that from anywhere in the city one could 
see the great pyramidal houses of gods. 6 

Beginning somewhat later, but co-temporaneous with Teoti¬ 
huacan, are the many Maya cities in the Yucatan peninsula? 
showing the same bicameral architecture, each city centering 
upon steeply rising pyramids topped with god-houses and richly 
decorated with Olmec-type jaguar masks and other murals and 
carvings, in which an endless variety of dragons with human 
faces crawl fiercely through the intricate stone decoration. Ex¬ 
ceptionally interesting is the fact that some of the pyramids 

4 See in this connection C. A. Burland, The Gods of Mexico (London: Eyre and 
Spottiswoode, 1967) ; and also G. H. S. Bushnell, The First Americans: The Pre- 
Columbian Civilizations (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1968). 

5 It was constructed of nearly 3 million tons of clay adobes, thus requiring* a 
tremendous number of man-hours. For a way of understanding such hand labor 
(Mesoamerica did not have the wheel), see p. 427. 

6 See S. Linne, Archaeological Researches at Teotihuacan, Mexico (Stockholm: 
Ethnographic Museum of Sweden, 1934); also Miguel Covarrubias, Indian Art of 
Mexico and Central America (New York: Knopf, 1957). 

7 See Victor W. von Hagen, World of the Maya (New York: New American 
