Library, i960). 



156 


The Witness of History 


contain burials as in Egypt, perhaps indicating a phase in which 
the king was a god. In front of these Mayan pyramids are usually 
stelae carved with the figures of gods and glyphic inscriptions 
which have yet to be fully understood. Since this kind of writing 
is always in connection with religious images, it is possible that 
the hypothesis of the bicameral mind may assist in unwinding 
their mysteries. 

I also think that the curious unhospitable sites on which Mayan 
cities were often built and their sudden appearance and disap¬ 
pearance can best be explained on the basis that such sites and 
movements were commanded by hallucinations which in certain 
periods could be not only irrational but downright punishing — 
as was Jahweh sometimes to his people, or Apollo (through the 
Delphic Oracle) to his, by siding with the invaders of Greece 
(see III. 1, III.2, n. 12). 

Occasionally, there are actual depictions of the bicameral act. 
On two stone reliefs from Santa Lucia Cotz umalhaupa, a non- 
Mayan site on the Pacific slope of Guatemala, this is very clearly 
the case. A man is shown prostrate on the grass being spoken to 
by two divine figures, one half-human, half-deer, and the other a 
death figure. That this is an actual bicameral scene is clear from 
modern observations of the so-called chilans or prophets of the 
area. Even today, they hallucinate voices while face down in this 
identical posture, although it is thought by some that such con¬ 
temporary hallucinations are aided by eating peyote. 8 

Andean Civilizations 

The half dozen or so civilizations of the Andes that precede the 
Inca are even more lost in the overgrowth of time .9 The earliest, 

8 J. Erik S. Thompson, Maya History and Religion (Norman: University of 
Oklahoma Press, 1970), p. 186. Peyote, incidentally, was used by most Mesoamerican 
Indians when their bicamerality was breaking down. The exceptions were the Maya 
and they are the only ones to have any kind of writing". Is it possible that 'reading' 
or hallucinating from glyphs functioned for the Maya as did hallucinogenic peyote 
for others? 

s This is partly due to the fact that a new bicameral civilization in an area tends to 
obliterate the remains of its predecessor. Bicameral gods are jealous gods. 



GODS, GRAVES, AND IDOLS 


157 


Kotosh, dating before 1800 B.C., is centered about a rectangular 
god-house built on a stepped platform 25 feet high on a large 
mound, where it was surrounded by the remains of other build¬ 
ings. Its interior walls had a few tall rectangular niches in each, 
in one of which was a pair of crossed hands modeled in plaster, 
perhaps part of a larger idol, now dust. How similar to Jericho 
five millennia earlier! 

While it is possible that Kotosh was the work of migrants from 
Mexico, the next civilization, the Chavin, beginning about 1200 
B.C., shows decided Olmec features: the cultivation of maize, a 
number of pottery characteristics, and the jaguar theme in its 
religious sculpture. At Chavin itself in the north highlands, a 
great platformlike temple, honeycombed with passages, houses 
an impressive idol in the form of a prismatic mass of granite 
carved in low relief to represent a human being with a jaguar 
head. 10 Following them, the Mochicas, 11 ruling the northern 
Peruvian desert from AD. 400 to 1000, built huge pyramids for 
their gods, towering in front of walled enclosures which probably 
contained the cities, as can be seen today in the Chicama valley 
near Trujillo. 12 

Then on the bleak uplands near Lake Titicaca from a.d. iooq 
to 1300 came the great empire of Tiahuanaco, with an even 
larger stone-faced pyramid, set about with giant pillarlike gods 
weeping tears (why?) of condor heads and snake heads. 13 

Then the Chimu, on an even vaster scale. Its capital of Chan- 

10 The next culture, the Paracas, from about 400 B.C. to a.d. 400, is a mysterious 
anomaly. They left no building sites, only 400 or so brightly robed mummies in deep 
subterranean caverns on the Paracas peninsular. 

11 So-called. As in all these early civilizations we have no idea what they called 
themselves. 

12 Aerial views of their cities look very similar to those of Mesopotamia in the 
bicameral period. Other cultures, such as the lea Nazca, also existed at the same 
time to the south. Little, however, remains except the mysterious lines and figures, 
some running for miles in length in the dry valleys of Nazca, and gigantic bird or 
insect outlines, acres in area, for which no one can suggest an explanation. 

■3 So complete and swift was their collapse around a.d. 1300, perhaps due to over¬ 
expansion (see II.3 for reasons why bicameral kingdoms are unstable), that 250 
years later, after the European invasion, no one had heard anything about them. 



158 


The Witness of History 


Chan, covering eleven square miles, was walled off into ten great 
compounds, each a city in miniature with its own pyramid, its 
own palacelike structure, its own irrigated areas, reservoirs, and 
cemeteries. Precisely what these neighboring separated walled 
compounds could mean in the light of the bicameral hypothesis 
is a fascinating problem for research. 

The Golden Realm of the Incas 

And then the Incas themselves, like a synthesis of Egypt and 
Assyria. At least at the beginning of their power about AD. 1200, 
their realm was suggestive of a god-king type of bicameral king¬ 
dom. But within a century, the Incas had conquered all before 
them, perhaps thereby weakening their own bicamerality, as did 
Assyria in another age and another clime. 

The Inca empire at the time of its conquest by Pizarro was 
perhaps a combination of things bicameral and things protosub- 
jective. This meeting was probably the closest thing there is to a 
clash between the two mentalities this essay is about. On the 
subjective side was the vast empire which, if we suppose it was 
administered with the horizontal and vertical social mobility 
such an administration demands today,^ would be very difficult 
to control in a purely bicameral fashion. From hearsay reports, it 
is believed that conquered chiefs were allowed to retain their 
titles, and their sons sent to Cuzco for training and perhaps held 
as hostages, a difficult conception in a bicameral world. Con¬ 
quered peoples seem to have retained their own speech, although 
all officials had to learn the religious language, Quechua. 

But on the bicameral side, there are a large number of features 
which are most certainly bicameral in origin, even though they 
may have been acted out partially through the inertia of tradition, 
as the small city-state of Cuzco on the upper reaches of the 
Amazon exploded into this Roman empire of the Andes. The 

u J. H. Rowe, "Inca Culture at the time of the Spanish Conquest," in J. H. 
Steward, Handbook of South American Indians, Vol. 2 (Washington, D.C., 1946-50). 



GODS, GRAVES, AND IDOLS 


159 


Inca himself was the god-king, a pattern so similar to Egypt’s that 
less conservative historians of American antiquity have felt that 
there must have been some diffusion. But I suggest that given 
man, language, and cities organized on a bicameral basis, there 
are only certain fixed patterns into which history can fit. 

The king was divine, a descendant of the sun, the creator-god 
of land and earth, of people, of the sun’s sweat (gold) and the 
moon’s tears (silver). Before him, even his highest lords might 
tremble with such awe as to shake them from their feet, 15 an 
awe that is impossible for modern psychology to appreciate. His 
daily life was deep in elaborate ritual. His shoulders were 
mantled in quilts of fresh bat-webs, and his head circled with a 
fringe of red tassels, like a curtain before his eyes to protect his 
lords from too awesome a view at his unwatchable divinity. 
When the Inca died, his concubines and personal servants first 
drank and danced, and then were eagerly strangled to join him 
on his journey to the sun, just as had previously happened in 
Egypt, Ur, and China. The Inca’s body was mummified and 
placed in his house, which thereafter became a temple. A life-sized 
golden statue was made of him sitting on his golden stool as in 
his life, and served daily with food as in the kingdoms of the Near 
East. 

While it is possible that the sixteenth-century Inca and his 
hereditary aristocracy were walking through bicameral roles 
established in a much earlier truly bicameral kingdom, even as 
perhaps the Emperor Hirohito, the divine sun god of Japan, does 
to this day, the evidence suggests that it was much more than this. 
The closer an individual was to the Inca, the more it seems his 
mentality was bicameral. Even the gold and jeweled spools 
which the top of the hierarchy, including the Inca, wore in their 
ears, sometimes with images of the sun on them, may have 
indicated that those same ears were hearing the voice of the 
sun. 

’5 As reported by Pedro Pizarro, a cousin of the Conquistador, quoted by V. W. 
von Hagen, Realm of the Incas, p. 113. 



i6o 

The Witness of History 

But perhaps most suggestive of all is the manner in which this 
huge empire was conquered. 16 The unsuspicious meekness of 
the surrender has long been the most fascinating problem of the 
European invasions of America. The fact that it occurred is 
clear, but the record as to why is grimy with supposition, even in 
the superstitious Conquistadors who later recorded it. How could 
an empire whose armies had triumphed over the civilizations of 
half a continent be captured by a small band of 150 Spaniards in 
the early evening of November 16, 1532? 

It is possible that it was one of the few confrontations between 
subjective and bicameral minds, that for things as unfamiliar as 
Inca Atahualpa was confronted with — these rough, milk¬ 
