skinned men with hair drooling from their chins instead of from 
their scalps so that their heads looked upside down, clothed in 
metal, with avertive eyes, riding strange llamalike creatures with 
silver hoofs, having arrived like gods in gigantic huampus tiered 
like Mochican temples over the sea which to the Inca was 
unsailable — that for all this there were no bicameral voices 
coming from the sun, or from the golden statues of Cuzco in their 
dazzling towers. Not subjectively conscious, unable to deceive or 
to narratize out the deception of others, 1 ? the Inca and his lords 
were captured like helpless automatons. And as its people 
mechanically watched, this shipload of subjective men stripped 
the gold sheathing from the holy city, melted down its golden 
images and all the treasures of the Golden Enclosure, its fields of 
golden corn with stems and leaves all cunningly wrought in gold, 
murdered its living god and his princes, raped its unprotesting 
women, and, narratizing their Spanish futures, sailed away with 
the yellow metal into the subjective conscious value system from 
which they had come. 

It is a long way from Eynan. 

16 For a detailed readable recent account, see John Hemming, The Conquest of 
the Incas (New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1970). 

v There were no thieves in Cuzco and no doors: a stick crosswise in front of the 
open doorway was a sign that the owner was not in and nobody would enter. 



GODS, GRAVES, AND IDOLS l6l 

THE LIVING DEAD 


The burial of the important dead as if they still lived is common 
to almost all these ancient cultures whose architecture we have 
just looked at. This practice has no clear explanation except that 
their voices were still being heard by the living, and were perhaps 
demanding such accommodation. As I have suggested at Eynan 
in 1.6, these dead kings, propped up on stones, whose voices were 
hallucinated by the living, were the first gods. 

Then as these early cultures develop into bicameral kingdoms, 
the graves of their important personages are more and more filled 
with weapons, furniture, ornaments, and particularly vessels of 
food. This is true of the very first chamber tombs all over Europe 
and Asia after 7000 B.C. and is elaborated to an extraordinary 
degree as bicameral kingdoms develop both in size and com¬ 
plexity. The magnificent burials of Egyptian pharaohs in a whole 
succession of intricately built pyramids are familiar to everyone 
(see next chapter). But similar emplacements, if less awesome, 
are found elsewhere. The kings of Ur, during the first half of the 
third millennium B.C., were entombed with their entire retinues 
buried, sometimes alive, in a crouched position around them as 
for service. Eighteen of such tombs have been found, their 
vaulted subterranean rooms containing food and drink, clothing, 
jewelry, weapons, bull-headed lyres, even sacrificed draft animals 
yoked to ornate chariots. 18 Others, dating from slightly later 
periods, have been found at Kish and Ashur. In Anatolia, at 
Alaca Hliyiik, the royal graves were roofed with whole carcasses 
of roasted oxen to ease the sepulchral appetites of their motion¬ 
less inhabitants. 

Even the ordinary dead man in many cultures is treated as still 
living. The very oldest inscriptions on funerary themes are 
Mesopotamian lists of the monthly rations of bread and beer to be 


18 See C. L. Woolley, Ur Excavations, Vol. 2 (London and Philadelphia, 1934). 



162 


The Witness of History 


given to the common dead. About 2500 B.C., in Lagash, a dead 
person was buried with 7 jars of beer, 420 flat loaves of bread, 2 
measures of grain, 1 garment, 1 head support, and 1 bed. 1 ? 
Some ancient Greek graves not only have the various appurte¬ 
nances of life, but actual feeding tubes which seem to indicate 
that archaic Greeks poured broths and soups down into the livid 
jaws of a moldering corpse. 20 And in the Metropolitan Museum 
in New York is a painted krater or mixing bowl (numbered 
14.130.15) which dates from about 850 B.C.; it shows a boy seem¬ 
ingly tearing his hair with one hand as with the other he stuffs 
food into the mouth of a corpse, probably his mother's. This is 
difficult to appreciate unless the feeder was hallucinating some¬ 
thing from the dead at the time. 

The evidence in the Indus civilizations 21 is more fragmentary 
because of the successive coverings of alluvium, the rotting away 
of all their writings on papyrus, and the incompleteness of 
archaeological investigations. But the Indus sites so far exca¬ 
vated often have the cemetery next to the citadel in a high place 
with fifteen or twenty food-pots per dead person, consistent with 
the hypothesis that they were still felt to be living when buried. 
And the Neolithic burials of the Yang-Shao cultures of China 22 , 
wholly undated except insofar as they precede the middle of the 
second millennium B.C., similarly show burials in plank-lined 
graves, the corpse accompanied by pots of food and stone tools. 

*9 This information is given on a cone by Urukagina, king of Lagash, who pro¬ 
ceeded to reduce these amounts somewhat. See Alexander Heidel, The Gilgamesh 
Epic and Old Testament Parallels (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1949), 
p. 151. 

20 E. R. Dodds, The Greeks and the Irrational, 

21 Sir Mortimer Wheeler, Civilizations of the Indus Valley and Beyond (New 
York: McGraw-Hill, 1966), and, more extensively, his The Indus Civilization, 
2nd ed., supplementary volume to The Cambridge History of India (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, i960). 

22 See William Watson, Early Civilization in China (New York: McGraw-Hill, 
1966)-, and also Chang Kwang-Chih, The Archaeology of Ancient China (New 
Haven: Yale University Press, 1963). 



GODS, GRAVES, AND IDOLS 


163 


By 1200 B.C., the Shang dynasty has royal tombs with slaugh¬ 
tered retinues and animals so similar to those of Mesopotamia 
and Egypt a millennium earlier as to convince some scholars that 
civilization came to China by diffusion from the West . 2 3 

Similarly in Mesoamerica, Olmec burials from about 800 to 
300 B.C. were richly furnished with pots of food. In the Mayan 
kingdoms, the noble dead were buried as if living in the plazas of 
temples. A chieftain’s tomb recently found under a temple at 
Palenque is as elaborately splendid as anything found in the Old 
World . 2 4 At the site of Kaminal-juyu, dating AD. 500, a chief¬ 
tain was buried in a sitting position along with two adolescents, a 
child, and a dog for his company. Ordinary men were buried 
with their mouths full of ground maize in the hard-mud floors of 
their houses, with their tools and weapons, and with pots filled 
with drink and food, just as in previous civilizations on the other 
side of the world. Also I should mention the portrait statues of 
Yucatan that held the ashes of a deceased chief, the resculptured 
skulls of Mayapan, and the small catacombs for Andean com¬ 
moners bound in a sitting position in the midst of bowls of chicha 
and the tools and things used in their lives. 2 s The dead were 
then called huaca or godlike, which I take to indicate that they 
were sources of hallucinated voices. And when it was reported by 
the Conquistadors that these people declared that it is only a long 
time after death that the individual ‘dies,’ I suggest that the 
proper interpretation is that it takes this time for the hallucinated 
voice to finally fade away. 

That the dead were the origin of gods is also found in the 
writings of those bicameral civilizations that became literate. In 

2 3 Chariot burials complete with slaughtered horses and charioteers become more 
frequent toward the end of the Shang dynasty in the eleventh century b.c. and 
continue into the Chou dynasty of the eighth century b.c. when they cease. Why all 
this? Unless the dead kings were thought to still live and need their chariots and 
servants because their speech was still heard? 

2 4 Von Hagen, World of the Maya, p. 109. 

2 5 Von Hagen, Realm of the Incas, p. 121. 



164 


The Witness of History 


a bilingual incantation text from Assyria, the dead are directly 
called Ilani or gods. 26 And on the other side of the world three 
millennia later, Sahagun, one of the earliest reporters of the 
Mesoamerican scene, reported that the Aztecs "called the place 
Teotihuacan, burial place of the kings; the ancients said: he who 
has died became a god; or when someone said — he who has 
become a god, meant to say — he has died." 2 ? 

Even in the conscious period there was the tradition that gods 
were men of a previous age who had died. Hesiod speaks of a 
golden race of men who preceded his own generation and became 
the "holy demons upon the earth, beneficent, averters of ills, 
guardians of mortal men." 28 Similar references can be found up 
to four centuries later, as when Plato refers to heroes who after 
death become the demons that tell people what to do. 2 ? 

I do not wish to give the impression that the presence of pots of 
food and drink in the graves of these civilizations is universal 
throughout all these eras; it is general. But exceptions here often 
prove the rule. For example, Sir Leonard Woolley, when he first 
started excavating the personal graves at Larsa in Mesopotamia 
(which date from about 1900 B.C.), was both surprised and 
disappointed by the poverty of their contents. Even the most 
elaborately built vault would have no furnishings other than a 
couple of clay pots at the tomb door perhaps, but nothing of the 
kind of thing found in graves elsewhere. The explanation came 
when he realized that these tombs were always underneath par¬ 
ticular houses, and that the dead man of the Larsa Age needed no 
tomb furniture or large amounts of food because everything in 
the house was still at his disposal. The food and drink at the 
tomb door may have been like an emergency measure, so that 
when the dead man 'mixeds with the family, he came forth in a 
kindly mood. 


26 Heidel, The GilgameshEfic,pp. 153, 196. 
2 ? Quoted by Covarrubias, p. 123. 

28 Hesiod, Works and Days, 12 of. 

2 s> Republic, 469A; and also Cratylus, 398. 


