
GODS, GRAVES, AND IDOLS 


165 


Thus, from Mesopotamia to Peru, the great civilizations have at 
least gone through a stage characterized by a kind of burial as if 
the individual were still living. And where writing could record 
it, the dead were often called gods. At the very least, this is 
consistent with the hypothesis that their voices were still heard in 
hallucination. 

But is this a necessary relationship? Could not grief itself 
promote such practices, a kind of refusal to accept the death of a 
loved one or a revered leader, calling dead persons gods as a kind 
of endearment? Possibly. This explanation, however, is not 
sufficient to account for the entire pattern of the evidence, the 
pervasion of references to the dead as gods in different regions of 
the world, the vastness of some of the enterprise as in the great 
pyramids, and even the contemporary vestiges in lore and litera¬ 
ture of ghosts returning from their graves with messages for the 
living. 


IDOLS THAT SPEAK 

A third feature of primitive civilization that I take to be indica¬ 
tive of bicamerality is the enormous numbers and kinds of 
human effigies and their obvious centrality to ancient life. The 
first effigies in history were of course the propped-up corpses of 
chiefs, or the remodeled skulls we have referred to earlier. But 
thereafter they have an astonishing development. It is difficult to 
understand their obvious importance to the cultures involved 
with them apart from the supposition that they were aids in 
hallucinating voices. But this is far from a simple matter, and 
quite different principles may be intertwined in the full expla¬ 
nation. 

Figurines 

The smallest of these effigies are figurines, which have been 
found in almost all of the ancient kingdoms, beginning with the 



166 


The Witness of History 


first stationary settlements of man. During the seventh and sixth 
millennia B.C, they are extremely primitive, small stones with 
incised features or grotesque clay figures. Evidence of their im¬ 
portance in cultures of about 5600 B.C. is provided by the excava¬ 
tions at Hacilar in southwest Turkey. Flat standing female 
effigies, made of baked clay or stone with incised eyes, nose, hair, 
and chin were found in each housed 0 as if, I suggest, they were 
its occupant's hallucinatory controls. The Amatrian and Gerzean 
cultures of Egypt, about 3600 B.C., had carved tusks with bearded 
heads and black 'targets' for eyes, each about six to eight inches 
and suitable to be held in the hand.3 1 And these were so important 
that they were stood upright in the grave of their owner when he 
died. 

Figurines in huge numbers have been unearthed in most of the 
Mesopotamian cultures, at Lagash, Uruk, Nippur, and Susa. 3 2 
At Ur, clay figures painted in black and red were found in boxes 
of burned brick placed under the floor against the walls but with 
one end opened, facing into the center of the room. 

The function of all these figurines, however, is as mysterious 
as anything in all archaeology. The most popular view goes back 
to the uncritical mania with which ethnology, following Frazer, 
wished to find fertility cults at the drop of a carved pebble. But if 
such figurines indicate something about Frazerian fertility, we 
should not find them where fertility was no problem. But we do. 
In the Olmec civilization of the most fertile part of Mexico, the 
figurines are of an astonishing variety, often with open mouths 
and exaggerated ears, as might be expected if they were fash- 

3 ° Mellaart, p. 106; see also Clark and Piggott, p. 204. 

3 1 See Flinders Petrie, Prehistoric Egypt (London: British School of Archaeology 
in Egypt, 1920), pp. 27, 36. Even gods are sometimes shown using hand-held idols. 
An Anatolian example may be found in Seton Lloyd, Early Highland Peoples of 
Anatolia (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1967), p. 51; and a Mayan example on the 
north face of Stela F in A. P. Maudslay, Archaeology in Biologia Centrali-Americana 
(New York: Arte Primitivo, 1975), Vol. II, Plate 36. 

3 2 For later rituals of giving them supernatural power, see H. W. F. Saggs, The 
Greatness That Was Babylon (New York: Mentor Books, 1962), pp. 301-303. 



GODS, GRAVES, AND IDOLS 167 

ioned as embodiments of heard voices with whom dialogue could 
be carried on .33 

The explanation, however, is not simple. Figurines seemed to 
go through an evolution, just as did the culture of which they are 
a part. The early Olmec figurines, to stay with the same ex¬ 
ample, develop through their first period an exaggerated prog¬ 
nathism until they look almost like animals. And then, in the 
period of Teotihuacan, they are more refined and delicate, with 
huge hats and capes, painted with daubs of fugitive red, yellow, 
and white paint, looking much like Olmec priests. A third period 
of Olmec figurines has them more carefully modeled and real¬ 
istic, some with jointed arms and legs, some with hollow reli¬ 
quaries in their torsos closed by a small square lid and containing 
other minute figurines, perhaps denoting the confusion of bicam¬ 
eral guidance that occurred just before the great Olmec civiliza¬ 
tion collapsed. For it was at the end of this period of a profusion 
of figurines, as well as of huge new half-finished open-mouth 
statues, that the great city of Teotihuacan was deliberately de¬ 
stroyed, its temples burned, its walls leveled, and the city aban¬ 
doned, around A.D. 700. Had the voices ceased, resulting in the 
increased effigy making? Or had they multiplied into confusion? 

Because of their size and number, it is doubtful if the majority 
of figurines occasioned auditory hallucinations. Some indeed may 
have been mnemonic devices, reminders to a nonconscious 
people who could not voluntarily retrieve admonitory experience, 
perhaps functioning like the quipu or knot-string literature of the 
Incas or the beads of rosaries of our own culture. For example, 
the Mesopotamian bronze foundation figurines buried at the 
corners of new buildings and under thresholds of doors are of 
three kinds: a kneeling god driving a peg into the ground, a 
basket carrier, and a recumbent bull. The current theory about 
them, that they are to pin down evil spirits beneath the building, 

33 See Burland, The Gods of Mexico, p. 22f.; Bushnell, The First Americans, 
P- 37 f- 



168 


The Witness of History 


is scarcely sufficient. Instead it is possible that they were semi- 
hallucinatory mnemonic aids for a nonconscious people in setting 
the posts straight, in carrying the materials, or using oxen to pull 
the larger materials to the site. 

But some of these small objects, we may be confident, were 
capable of assisting with the production of bicameral voices. 
Consider the eye-idols in black and white alabaster, thin cracker¬ 
like bodies surmounted by eyes once tinted with malachite paint, 
which have been found in the thousands, particularly at Brak 
on one of the upper branches of the Euphrates, that date about 
3000 B.C. Like the earlier Amatrian and Gerzean tusk idols 



One of many thousands of ala¬ 
baster "eye idols" that can be 
held in the hand. From about 
3300 B.C., excavated at Brak on 
an upper tributary of the Eu¬ 
phrates. The stag is the symbol 
of the goddess Ninhursag. 


of Egypt, they are suitable to be held in the hand. Most have one 
pair of eyes, but some have two; some wear crowns and some 
have markings clearly indicating gods. Larger eye-idols made of 
terra cotta have been found at other sites, Ur, Mari, and Lagash; 
and, because the eyes are open loops, have been called spectacle- 
idols. Others, made of stone and placed on podiums and altars,34 
are like two cylindrical doughnuts positioned a distance above 
an incised square platform that could be a mouth. 

34 See M. E. L. Mallowan, Early Mesopotamia and Iran (New York: McGraw- 
Hill) 1965, Ch. 2. 



GODS, GRAVES, AND IDOLS 


169 


A Theory of Idols 

Now this needs a little more psychologizing. Eye-to-eye con¬ 
tact in primates is extremely important. Below humans, it is 
indicative of the hierarchical position of the animal, the submis¬ 
sive animal turning away grinning in many primate species. But 
in humans, perhaps because of the much longer juvenile period, 
eye-to-eye contact has evolved into a social interaction of great 
importance. An infant child, when its mother speaks to it, looks 
at the mother’s eyes, not her lips. This response is automatic and 
universal. The development of such eye-to-eye contact into 
authority relationships and love relationships is an exceedingly 
important trajectory that has yet to be traced. It is sufficient here 
merely to suggest that you are more likely to feel a superiors 
authority when you and he are staring straight into each other’s 
eyes. There is a kind of stress, an unresolvedness about the 
experience, and withal something of a diminution of conscious¬ 
ness, so that, were such a relationship mimicked in a statue, it 
would enhance the hallucination of divine speech. 

The eyes thus become a prominent feature of most temple 
statuary throughout the bicameral period. The diameter of the 
human eye is about 10 percent of the height of the head, this 
proportion being what I shall call the eye index of an idol. The 
famous group of twelve statues discovered in the Favissa of the 
temple of Abu at Tell Asmar,35 the symbols carved on their bases 
indicating that they are gods, have eye indices of as high as 18 
percent — huge globular eyes hypnotically staring out of the un¬ 
recorded past of 5000 years ago with defiant authority. 

Other idols from other sites show the same thing. A particu¬ 
