larly beautiful and justly famous white marble head from Undo 6 
has an eye index of over 20 percent, the sculpture showing 
that the eyes and the eyebrows were once encrusted with dazzling 
gems, the face colored, the hair tinted, the head part of a life- 

35 Illustrated in many general texts including Mallowan, pp. 43, 45. 

3 6 See Mallowan, Early Mesopotamia, p. 55. 



170 


The Witness of History 



sized wooden statue now dust. Around 2700 
B.C. alabaster and calcite statues of Huffily 
skirted gods, rulers, and priests abounded 
in the luxurious civilization on the middle 
Euphrates called Mari, their eyes up to 18 
percent of the height of the head and heavily 
outlined with black paint. In the main temple 
of Mari ruled the famous Goddess with the 
Flowering Vase, her huge empty eye sockets 
having once contained hypnotic gems, her 
hands holding a tilted aryballos. A pipe from 
a tank going within the idol allowed the ary¬ 
ballos to overflow with water which streamed 
down the idol's robe, clothing her lower parts 
with a translucent liquid veil, and adding a 
sibilant sound suitable to be molded into 
hallucinated speech. And then the famous 
series of statues of the enigmatic Gudea, ruler 
of Lagash, about 2100 B.C., carved in the 
hardest stone, with eye indices of approxi¬ 
mately 17 or 18 percent. 

The eye indices of temple and tomb sculp¬ 
tures of pharaohs in Egypt are sometimes as 
high as 20 percent. The few wooden statues 
from Egypt that have remained show that 
their enlarged eyes were once made of quartz 
and crystal inserted in a copper surround. As 
might be expected from its god-king type of 
theocracy (see next chapter) idols in Egypt 
do not seem to have played so prominent a 
role as in Mesopotamia. 

Few examples of Indus stone sculpture 
survive, but these few show pronounced eye 
indices of over 20 percents? No idols are 


3? See, for example, the illustrations in Wheeler, Civilizations of the Indus Valley. 



GODS, GRAVES, AND IDOLS 


171 


yet known from the bicameral period of China. But as civili¬ 
zation begins again in Mesoamerica around 900 B.C., it is as if we 
were back in the Near East several millennia earlier, though with 
certain unique prospects: huge heads carved out of hard basalt, 
often eight feet tall, usually with a cap, sometimes with large ear 
pads like a football helmet, resting bodiless on the ground near 
La Venta and Tres Zapoltes (some of them now removed to 
Olmec Park at Villahermosa). The eye indices of these heads 
ranged from a normal 11 percent to over 19 percent. Usually the 
mouth is half open as in speech. There are also many Olmec 
ceramic idols of a strange sexless child, always seated with legs 
spread-eagled as if to expose his sexlessness, and leaning forward 
to stare intently through wide slits of eyes, the full-lipped mouth 
half open as in speech. The eye index, if the eyes were open, in 
the several of them I have examined averaged 17 percent. Fig¬ 
urines in the Olmec culture were sometimes half life-sized with 
even larger eye indices 3 they are often found in burials as at the 
Olmec-influenced site of Tlatilco. near Mexico Citv. of about 


The god Abu, with an unknown 
goddess on facing page. Both 
were found in a temple at Tell 
Asmar near present-day Baghdad 
and are now in its museum. 
From about 2600 B.C. 




172 


The Witness of History 



Mayan god, a stela about twelve 
feet high, from Copan in Hon¬ 
duras. It was carved about 
700 A.D. 


500 B.C., as if the deceased was buried with his 
own personal idol which still could tell him 
what to do. 

Mayan idols do not usually show such ab¬ 
normal eye indices. But in the great cities of 
Yucatan, portrait statues were made of de¬ 
ceased leaders for, I think, the same hallu¬ 
cinogenic purpose. The back of the head was 
left hollow and .the cremated ashes of the dead 
placed in it. And according to Landa, who 
witnessed this practice in the sixteenth cen¬ 
tury, "they preserved these statues with a 
great deal of veneration." 3 8 

The Cocoms that once ruled Mayapan, 
around AD. 1200, repeated what the Natufian 
culture of Jericho had done 9000 years ear¬ 
lier. They decapitated their dead "and after 
cooking the heads, they cleaned off the flesh 
and then sawed off half the crown at the back, 
leaving entire the front part with jaws and 
teeth. Then they replaced the flesh . . . 
with a kind of bitumen [and plaster] which 
gave them a natural and lifelike appearance 
. . . these they kept in the oratories in their 
houses and on festive days offered food to 
them . . . they believed that their souls re¬ 
posed within and that these gifts were useful 
to them."39 There is nothing here inconsistent 
with the notion that such prepared heads were 
so treated because they 'contained' the voices 
of their former owners. 


3 s As quoted by von Hagen, World of the Maya, p. 109. 

39 Landa as quoted by von Hagen, World of the Maya, p. 110. 






GODS, GRAVES, AND IDOLS 


173 


Many other kinds of idols were also used by the Maya, and in 
such profusion that when, in 1565, a Spanish mayor ordered the 
abolition of idolatry in his city, he was aghast when "in my 
presence, upwards of a million were brought."40 Another type of 
Mayan idol was made of cedar which the Maya called kuche or 
holy wood. "And this they called to make gods." They were 
carved by fasting priests called chaks, in great fear and trem¬ 
bling, shut into a little straw hut blessed with incense and 
prayer, the god-carvers "frequently cutting their ears and with 
the blood anointing the gods and burning incense to them." 
When finished, the gods were lavishly dressed and placed upon 
daises in small buildings, some of which by being in more inac¬ 
cessible places have escaped the ravages of Christianity or of 
time, and are still being discovered. According to a sixteenth- 
century observer, "the unhappy dupes believed the idols spoke to 
them and so sacrificed to it birds, dogs, their own blood and even 

men."41.42 


The Speech of Idols 

How can we know that such idols 'spoke' in the bicameral 
sense? I have tried to suggest that the very existence of statuary 
and figurines requires an explanation in a way that has not 
previously been perceived. The hypothesis of the bicameral mind 
renders such an explanation. The setting up of such idols in 
religious places, the exaggerated eyes in the early stages of every 
civilization, the practice of inserting gems of brilliant sorts into 
the eye sockets in several civilizations, an elaborate ritual for the 

4 ° Von Hagen, World of the Maya, p. 32. 

4 1 All quotations here are from Landa, a Spaniard who was describing what he 
saw in the sixteenth century as quoted by J. Eric S. Thompson, Maya History and 
Religion, pp. 189—91. 

4 2 The Incas too had a variety of idols that they called gods, some life-sized, cast 
of gold or silver, others of stone crowned and dressed in robes, all these found by 
Spaniards in outlying temples of the Inca empire. See von Hagen, Realm of the 
Incas, pp. 134, 152. 



174 


The Witness of History 


opening of the mouth for new statues in the two most important 
early civilizations (as we shall see in the next chapter), all these 
present a pattern of evidence at least. 

Cuneiform literature often refers to god-statues speaking. 
Even as late as the early first millennium B.C., a royal letter 
reads: 


I have taken note of the portents ... I had them recited 
in order before Shamash . . . the royal image [a statue] of 
