Akkad brought up visions before me and cried out: "What per¬ 
nicious portent have you tolerated in the royal image?" Again 
it spoke: "Say to the Gardener . . . [and here the cunei¬ 
form becomes unreadable, but then goes on] ... it made in¬ 
quiry concerning Ningal-Iddina, Shamash-Ibni, and Na'id- 
Marduk. Concerning the rebellion in the land it said: "Take 
the wall cities one after the other, that a cursed one will not be 
able to stand before the Gardener."43 

The Old Testament also indicated that one of the types of idol 
there referred to, the Terap, could speak. Ezekiel, 21:21, de¬ 
scribes the king of Babylon as consulting with several of them. 
Further direct evidence comes from America. The conquered 
Aztecs told the Spanish invaders how their history began when a 
statue from a ruined temple belonging to a previous culture spoke 
to their leaders. It commanded them to cross the lake from 
where they were, and to carry its statue with them wherever they 
went, directing them hither and thither, even as the unembodied 
bicameral voices led Moses zigzagging across the Sinai desert.44 

And finally the remarkable evidence from Peru. All the first 
reports of the conquest of Peru by the Inquisition-taught Span¬ 
iards are consistent in regarding the Inca kingdom as one com¬ 
manded by the Devil. Their evidence was that the Devil himself 

43 R. H. Pfeiffer, State Letters of Assyria (New Haven: American Oriental So¬ 
ciety, 1935), p. 174. 

44 C. A. Burland, The Gods of Mexico, p. 47. 



GODS, GRAVES, AND IDOLS 


175 


actually spoke to the Incas out of the mouths of their statues. To 
these coarse dogmatized Christians, coming from one of the most 
ignorant counties of Spain, this caused little astonishment. The 
very first report back to Europe said, "in the temple [of 
Pachacamac] was a Devil who used to speak to the Indians in a 
very dark room which was as dirty as he himself."45 And a later 
account reported that 

... it was a thing very common and approved at the Indies, 
that the Devill spake and answered in these false sanctuaries 
... It was commonly in the night they entered backward to 
their idoll and so went bending their bodies and head, after an 
uglie manner, and so they consulted with him. The answer he 
made, was commonly like unto a fearefull hissing, or to a 
gnashing which did terrifie them; and all that he did advertise 
or command them, was hut the way to their perdition and 
ruine. 4 6 

45 Anonymous, The Conquest of Peru, with a translation and annotations by 
J. H. Sinclair (New York: New York Public Library, 1929), p. 37L 

4 6 Father Joseph De Acosta, The Natural and Moral History of the Indies (London : 
Hakluyt Society, 1880), 2: 325! 



CHAPTER 2 


Literate Bicameral Theocracies 


W HAT is writing? Writing proceeds from pictures of visual 
events to symbols of phonetic events. And that is an amaz¬ 
ing transformation! Writing of the latter type, as on the present 
page, is meant to tell a reader something he does not know. But, 
the closer writing is to the former, the more it is primarily a 
mnemonic device to release information which the reader already 
has. The protoliterate pictograms of Uruk, the iconography in 
the early depictions of gods, the glyphics of the Maya, the picture 
codices of the Aztecs, and, indeed, our own heraldry are all of this 
sort. The informations they are meant to release in those who 
look upon them may be forever lost and the writing therefore 
forever untranslatable. 

The two kinds of writing which fall between these two ex¬ 
tremes, half picture and half symbol, are those on which this 
chapter is based. They are Egyptian hieroglyphics with its 
abridged and somewhat cursive form, hieratic, the terms mean¬ 
ing "writing of the gods," and the more widely used writing which 
later scholars called cuneiform from its wedge-shaped characters. 

The latter is for us the most important, and the remains we 
have of it, far more extensive. Thousands of tablets wait to be 
translated and more thousands to be unburied. It was used for at 
least four languages, Sumerian, Akkadian, Hurrian, and later the 
Hittite. Instead of an alphabet of twenty-six letters, as in ours, or 
of twenty-two letters, as in the Aramaic (which except for reli¬ 
gious texts replaced cuneiform around 200 b.c.), it is a clumsy 



LITERATE BICAMERAL THEOCRACIES 


177 


and ambiguous communication system of over 600 signs. Many 
of these are ideographic, in which the same sign can be a syl¬ 
lable, an idea, a name, or a word with more than one meaning, 
according to the class it belonged to, this class irregularly being 
shown by a special mark. Only by the context are we able to 
unravel which it is. For example, the sign means nine 
different things: when pronounced as samsu it means sun; when 
pronounced umu, it means day; when pisu it means white; and it 
also stands for the syllables ud, tu, torn, pir, lah, and his. The 
difficulties of being crystal clear in such a contextual mess were 
great enough in its own day. But when we are exiled from the 
culture that the language describes by 4000 years, translation is 
an enormous and fascinating problem. The same is true in gen¬ 
eral for hieroglyphic and hieratic writing. 

When the terms are concrete, as they usually are, for most of 
the cuneiform literature is receipts or inventories or offerings for 
gods, there is little doubt of the correctness of translation. But as 
the terms tend to the abstract, and particularly when a psycho¬ 
logical interpretation is possible, then we find well-meaning 
translators imposing modern categories to make their transla¬ 
tions comprehensible. The popular and even the scholarly litera¬ 
tures are full of such sugared emendations and palatablized 
glosses to make ancient men seem like us, or at least talk like the 
King James Bible. A translator often reads in more than he reads 
out. Many of those texts that seem to be about decision-making, 
or so-called proverbs, or epics, or teachings, should be reinter¬ 
preted with concrete behavioral precision if we are to trust them 
as data for the psycho-archaeology of man. And I am warning 
the reader that the effect of this chapter is not in accord with 
popular books on the subject. 

With these cautions in mind, then, let us proceed. 

When, in the third millennium B.C., writing, like a theater 
curtain going up on these dazzling civilizations, lets us stare 
directly if imperfectly at them, it is clear that for some time there 



178 


The Witness of History 


have been two main forms of theocracy: (1) the steward-king 
theocracy in which the chief or king is the first deputy of the 
gods, or, more usually, a particular city’s god, the manager and 
caretaker of his lands. This was the most important and wide¬ 
spread form of theocracy among bicameral kingdoms. It was the 
pattern in the many Mesopotamian bicameral city-states, of 
Mycenae as we saw in 1 .3, and, so far as we know, in India, 
China, and probably Mesoamerica. (2) the god-king theocracy in 
which the king himself is a god. The clearest examples of this 
form existed in Egypt and at least some of the kingdoms of the 
Andes, and probably the earliest kingdom of Japan. I have ear¬ 
lier suggested in 1.6 that both types developed out of the more 
primitive bicameral situation where a new king ruled by obeying 
the hallucinated voice of a dead king. 

I shall take these up in turn in the two greatest ancient civili¬ 
zations. 


MESOPOTAMIA: THE GODS 
AS OWNERS 


Throughout Mesopotamia, from the earliest times of Sumer and 
Akkad, all lands were owned by gods and men were their slaves. 
Of this, the cuneiform texts leave no doubt whatever. 1 Each city- 
state had its own principal god, and the king was described in the 
very earliest written documents that we have as "the tenant 
farmer of the god." 

The god himself was a statue. The statue was not of a god (as 
we would say) but the god himself. He had his own house, called 

1 Most of this material is well known and may be found in a number of excellent 
works, including H. W. F. Saggs, The Greatness That Was Babylon (New York: 
Mentor Books, 1962); The Cambridge Ancient History, Vols. 1-3 (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press); George Roux, Ancient Iraq (Baltimore: Penguin 
Books, 1966); and A. L. Oppenheim, Ancient Mesopotamia: Portrait of a Dead 
Civilization (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1964). 



LITERATE BICAMERAL THEOCRACIES 


179 


by the Sumerians the "great house." It formed the center of a 
complex of temple buildings, varying in size according to the im¬ 
portance of the god and the wealth of the city. The god was 
probably made of wood to be light enough to be carried about on 
the shoulders of priests. His face was inlaid with precious metals 
and jewels. He was clothed in dazzling raiment, and usually 
resided on a pedestal in a niche in a central chamber of his 
house. The larger and more important god-houses had lesser 
courts surrounded by rooms for the use of the steward-kings and 
subsidiary priests. 

In most of the great city sites excavated in Mesopotamia, the 
house of a chief god was the ziggurat, a great rectangular tower, 
rising by diminishing stages to a shining summit on which there 
was a chapel. In the center of the ziggurat was the gigunu, a large 
chamber in which most scholars believe the statue of the chief 
god resided, but which others believe was used only for ritual 
purposes. Such ziggurats or similar towering temple structures 
are common to most of the bicameral kingdoms in some period. 

