Since the divine statue was the owner of the land and the 
people were his tenants, the first duty of the steward-king was to 
serve the god not only in the administration of the god's estates 
but also in more personal ways. The gods, according to cunei¬ 
form texts, liked eating and drinking, music and dancing; they 
required beds to sleep in and for enjoying sex with other god- 
statues on connubial visits from time to time; they had to be 
washed and dressed, and appeased with pleasant odors; they had 
to be taken out for drives on state occasions; and all these things 
were done with increasing ceremony and ritual as time went on. 

The daily ritual of the temple included the washing, dressing, 
and feeding of the statues. The washing was probably done 
through the sprinkling of pure water by attendant priests, the 
origin, perhaps, of our christening and anointing ceremonies. 
The dressing was by enrobing the figure in various ways. In 
front of the god were tables, the origin of our altars, on one of 



180 The Witness of History 

which flowers were placed, and on the other food and drink for 
the divine hunger. Such food consisted of bread and cakes, the 
flesh of bulls, sheep, goats, deer, fish, and poultry. According to 
some interpretations of the cuneiform, the food was brought in 
and then the statue-god was left to enjoy his meal alone. Then, 
after a suitable period of time, the steward-king entered the 
shrine room from a side entrance and ate what the god had 
left. 

The divine statues also had to be kept in good temper. This 
was called "appeasing the liver" of the gods, and consisted in 
offerings of butter, fat, honey, sweetmeats placed on the tables as 
with regular food. Presumably, a person whose bicameral voice 
was condemnatory and angry would come bringing such offerings 
to the god's house. 

How is all this possible, continuing as it did in some form for 
thousands of years as the central focus of life, unless we posit 
that the human beings heard the statues speak to them even as 
the heroes of the Iliad heard their gods or Joan of Arc heard 
hers? And indeed had to hear them speak to know what to do. 

We can read this directly in the texts themselves. The great 
Cylinder B of Gudea (about 2100 B.C.) describes how in a new 
temple for his god Ningirsu, the priestesses placed 

... the goddesses Zazaru, Impae, Urentaea, Khegirnunna, 
Kheshagga, Guurmu, Zaarmu, who are the seven children of 
the brood of Bau that were begotten by the lord Ningirsu, to 
utter favorable decisions by the side of the lord Ningirsu. 2 

The particular decisions to be uttered here were about various 
aspects of agriculture that the grain might "cover the banks of 
the holy fields’ and "all the rich graineries of Lagash to make to 

2 Column 11, lines 4-14, as in George A. Barton, The Royal Inscriptions of 
burner and Akkad (New Haven: American Oriental Society, 1929). Italics mine as in 
quotations following. 



LITERATE BICAMERAL THEOCRACIES l8l 

overflow." And a clay cone from the dynasty of Larsa about 1700 
B.C. praises the goddess Ninegal as 

. . . counsellor, exceeding wise commander, princess of all 
the great gods, exalted speaker, whose utterance is unrivaled .3 

Everywhere in these texts, it is the speech of gods who decide 
what is to be done. A cone from Lagash reads: 

Mesilin king of Kish at the command of his deity Kadi concern¬ 
ing the plantation of that field set up a stele in that place. Ush, 
patesi of Umma, incantations to seize it formed; that stele he 
broke in pieces; into the plain of Lagash he advanced. 
Ningirsu, the hero of Enlil, by his righteous command, upon 
Umma war made. At the command of Enlil his great net en¬ 
snared. Their burial mound on the plain in that place he 
erected.1 

It is not the human beings who are the rulers, but the halluci¬ 
nated voices of the gods Kadi, Ningirsu, and Enlil. Note that this 
passage is about a stele, or stone column, engraved with a god's 
words in cuneiform and set up in a field to tell how that field was 
to be farmed. That such stelae themselves were epiphanous is 
suggested by the way they were attacked and defended and 
smashed or carried away. And that they were sources of auditory 
hallucinations is suggested in other texts. One particularly perti¬ 
nent passage from a different context describes reading a stele at 
night: 

The polished surface of its side his hearing makes known; its 
writing which is engraved his hearing makes known; the light 
of the torch assists his hearing? 

3 Ibid., p. 327. 

4 Ibid p. 61. Inim-ma is here translated as "incantations." 

5 Ibid., p. 47. 



182 


The Witness of History 


Reading in the third millennium B.C. may therefore have been a 
matter of hearing the cuneiform, that is, hallucinating the speech 
from looking at its picture-symbols, rather than visual reading of 
syllables in our sense. 

The word for ‘hearing’ here is a Sumerian sign that transliter¬ 
ates GiS-TUG-Pi. Many other royal inscriptions state how the king 
or other personage is endowed by some god with this gis-tug-pi 
hearing which enables him to great things. Even as late as 1825 
B.C., Warad-Sin, king of Larsa, claims in an inscription on a clay 
cone that he rebuilt the city with gis-tug-pi dagal, or “hearing 
everywhere” his god Enki. 6 

The Mouth-Washing Ceremonies 

Further evidence that such statues were aids to the halluci¬ 
nated voices is found in other ceremonies all described precisely 
and concretely on cuneiform tablets. The statue-gods were made 
in the bit-mummu, a special divine craftsman’s house. Even the 
craftsmen were directed in their work by a craftsman-god, 
Mummuy who ‘dictated’ how to make the statue. Before being 
installed in their shrines, the statues underwent mis-pi which 
means mouth-washing, and the ritual of pit-pi or “opening of the 
mouth.” 

Not only when the statue was being made, but also periodi¬ 
cally, particularly in the later bicameral era when the halluci¬ 
nated voices may have become less frequent, an elaborate 
washing-of-the-mouth ceremony could renew the god's speech. 
The god with its face of inlaid jewels was carried by dripping 
torchlight to the riverbank, and there, imbedded in ceremonies 
and incantation, his wood mouth washed several times as the god 
was faced east, west, north, and then south. The holy water with 
which the mouth was washed out was a solution of a multitude of 
exotic ingredients: tamarisks, reeds of various kinds, sulphur, 


6 Ibid., p. 320. 



LITERATE BICAMERAL THEOCRACIES 


183 


various gums, salts, and oils, date honey, with various precious 
stones. Then after more incantations, the god was "led by the 
hand" back into the street with the priest incanting "foot that 
advanceth, foot that advanceth . . At the gate of the temple, 
another ceremony was performed. The priest then took "the 
hand" of the god and led him in to his throne in the niche, where 
a golden canopy was set up and the statue's mouth washed again.7 

Bicameral kingdoms should not be thought of as everywhere 
the same or as not undergoing considerable development through 
time. The texts from which the above information has come are 
from approximately the late third millennium B.C. They may 
therefore represent a late development of bicamerality in which 
the very complexity of the culture could have been making the 
hallucinated voices less clear and frequent, thus giving rise to 
such a cleansing ritual in hope of rejuvenating the voice of the 
god. 

The Personal God 

But it is not to be supposed that the ordinary citizen heard 
directly the voices of the great gods who owned the cities; such 
hallucinatory diversity would have weakened the political fabric. 
He served the owner gods, worked their estates, took part in their 
festivals. But he appealed to them only in some great crisis, and 
then only through intermediaries. This is shown on countless 
cylinder seals. A large proportion of the inventory type of cunei¬ 
form tablets have impressions on the reverse side rolled from 
such seals; commonly, they show a seated god and another minor 
divinity, usually a goddess, conducting the owner of the tablet 
by the right hand into the divine presence. 

Such intermediaries were the personal gods. Each individual, 
king or serf, had his own personal god whose voice he heard and 

7 See the translation of this text by Sidney Smith in the Journal of the Royal 
Asiatic Society, January 1925, as quoted by S. H. Hooke, Babylonian and Assyrian 
Religion (Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1963), pp. 118-121. 



184 The Witness of History 

obeyed. 8 In almost every house excavated, there existed a shrine- 
room that probably contained idols or figurines as the inhabitant's 
personal gods. Several late cuneiform texts describe rituals for 
them similar to the mouth-washing ceremonies for the great 
gods.9 

These personal gods could be importuned to visit other gods 
higher up in the divine hierarchy for some particular boon. Or, in 
the other direction, strange as it seems to us: when the owner 
gods had chosen a prince to be a steward-king, the city-god in¬ 
formed the appointee's personal god of the decision first, and only 
then the individual himself. According to my discussion in I. 5, 
all this layering was going on in the right hemisphere and I am 
well aware of the problem of authenticity and group acceptance 
of such selection. As elsewhere in antiquity, it was the personal 
god who was responsible for what the king did, as it was for the 
commoner. 

