Other cuneiform texts state that a man lived in the shadow of 
his personal god, his Hi. So inextricably were a man and his per¬ 
sonal god bound together that the composition of his personal 
name usually included the name of the personal god, thus mak¬ 
ing obvious the bicameral nature of the man. It is of considerable 
interest when the name of the king is indicated as the personal 
god: Rim-Sin-Ili, which means "Rim-Sin is my god," Rim-Sin 
being a king of Larsa, or, more simply, Sharru-Ili, "the king is 
my god." 10 These instances suggest that the steward-king himself 
could sometimes be hallucinated. 

When the King Becomes a God 

This possibility shows that the distinction I have made between 
the steward-king type of theocracy and the god-king is not an 

8 Thorkild Jacobsen has felt that the personal god "appears as the personification 
of a man's luck and success." I am insisting that this is an unwarranted modem 
imposition. See his "Mesopotamia," in The Intellectual Adventure of Ancient Man, 
H. Frankfort, et at, eds. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1946), p. 203. 

■> Saggs, p. 30if. 

10 Frankfort et al., p. 306. 



LITERATE BICAMERAL THEOCRACIES 185 

absolute one. Moreover, on several cuneiform tablets, a number 
of the earlier Mesopotamian kings have beside their names the 
eight-pointed star which is the determinative sign indicating 
deity. In one early text, eleven out of a larger number of kings of 
Ur and Isin are given this or another divine determinative. A 
number of theories have been proposed as to what this means, 
none of them very gripping. 

The clues to look at are, I think, that the divine determinative 
is often given to these kings only late in their reigns, and then 
only in certain of their cities. This may mean that the voice of a 
particularly powerful king may have been heard in hallucination 
but only by a certain proportion of his people, only after he had 
reigned for some time, and only in certain places. 

Yet even in these instances, there seems throughout Mesopo¬ 
tamia a significant and continuing distinction between such 
divine kings and the gods proper. 11 But this is not at all true of 
Egypt, to which we now turn. 


EGYPT: THE KINGS AS GODS 


The great basin of the Euphrates and Tigris rivers looses its 
identity, feature by feature, into the limitless deserts of Arabia 
and the gradual foothills of the mountain chains of Persia and 
Armenia. But Egypt, except in the south, is clearly defined by 
bilaterally symmetrical immutable frontiers. A pharaoh extend¬ 
ing his authority in the Nile Valley soon reached what he might 
raid but never conquer. And thus Egypt was always more uni¬ 
form both geographically and ethnologically, both in space and in 
time. Its people through the ages were also of a remarkably 
similar physique, as has been shown from studies of remaining 
skulls. 12 It is this protected homogeneity, I suggest, which al- 

11 Saggs, p. 343! 

12 G. M. Morant, "Study of Egyptian craniology from prehistoric to Roman times," 
Biometrika, 1925, 17: 1-52. 



186 The Witness of History 

lowed the perpetuation of that more archaic form of theocracy, 
the god-king. 


The Memphite Theology 

Let us begin with the famous "Memphite Theology."^ This is 
an eighth-century B.C. granite block on which a previous work 
(presumably a rotting leather roll of around 3000 B.C.) was 
copied. It begins with a reference to a "creator" god Ptah, pro¬ 
ceeds through the quarrels of the gods Horus and Seth and their 
arbitration by Geb, describes the construction of the royal god- 
house at Memphis, and then, in a famous final section, states that 
the various gods are variations of Ptah's voice or "tongue." 

Now when "tongue" here is translated as something like the 
"objectified conceptions of his mind," as it so often is, this is 
surely an imposing of modern categories upon the texts .h Ideas 
such as objectified conceptions of a mind, or even the notion of 
something spiritual being manifested, are of much later develop¬ 
ment. It is generally agreed that the ancient Egyptian language, 
like the Sumerian, was concrete from first to last. To maintain 
that it is expressing abstract thoughts would seem to me an 
intrusion of the modern idea that men have always been the 
same. Also, when the Memphite Theology speaks of the tongue 
or voices as that from which everything was created, I suspect 
that the very word "created" may also be a modern imposition, and 
the more proper translation might be commanded. This theol¬ 
ogy, then, is essentially a myth about language, and what Ptah is 
really commanding is indeed the bicameral voices which began, 
controlled, and directed Egyptian civilization. 

‘3 In addition to texts otherwise cited, I have used for this part of the chapter 
John A. Wilson, The Culture of Ancient Egypt (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1951); Cyril Aldred, Egypt to the End of the Old Kingdom (New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 1965); W. W. Hallo and W. K. Simpson, The Ancient Near East: A 
History (New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1971). 

>4 Henri Frankfort, Kingship and the Gods (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1948), p. 28. 



LITERATE BICAMERAL THEOCRACIES 


187 


Osiris} the Dead King's Voice 

There has been some astonishment that mythology and reality 
should be so mixed that the heavenly contention of Homs and 
Seth is over real land, and that the figure of Osiris in the last 
section has a real grave in Memphis, and also that each king at 
death becomes Osiris, just as each king in life is Homs. If it is 
assumed that all of these figures are particular voice hallucina¬ 
tions heard by kings and their next in rank, and that the voice of 
a king could continue after his death and 'be' the guiding voice of 
the next, and that the myths about various contentions and rela¬ 
tionships with other gods are attempted rationalizations of con¬ 
flicting admonitory authoritative voices mingled with the 
authoritative structure in the actuality of the society, at least we 
are given a new way to look at the subject. 

Osiris, to go directly to the important part of this, was not a 
"dying god," not "life caught in the spell of death," or "a dead 
god," as modern interpreters have said. He was the hallucinated 
voice of a dead king whose admonitions could still carry weight. 
And since he could still be heard, there is no paradox in the fact 
that the body from which the voice once came should be mummi¬ 
fied, with all the equipment of the tomb providing life's neces¬ 
sities: food, drink, slaves, women, the lot. There was no 
mysterious power that emanated from him; simply his remem¬ 
bered voice which appeared in hallucination to those who had 
known him and which could admonish or suggest even as it had 
before he stopped moving and breathing. And that various natu¬ 
ral phenomena such as the whispering of waves could act as the 
cue for such hallucinations accounts for the belief that Osiris, or 
the king whose body has ceased to move and is in his mummy 
cloths, continues to control the flooding of the Nile. Further, the 
relationship between Horus and Osiris, 'embodied' in each new 
king and his dead father forever, can only be understood as the 
assimilation of an hallucinated advising voice into the king's own 
voice, which then would be repeated with the next generation. 



i88 


The Witness of History 


Mansions for Voices 

That the voice and therefore the power of a god-king lived on 
after his body stopped moving and breathing is certainly sug¬ 
gested by the manner of his burial. Yet burial is the wrong word. 
Such divine kings were not morosely entombed, but gaily empal- 
aced. Once the art of building with stone was mastered shortly 
after 3000 B.C., what once had been the stepped matsaba tombs 
leap up into those playhouses of bicameral voices in immortal life 
we call the pyramids: complexes of festive courts and galleries 
merry with holy pictures and writing, often surrounded by acres 
of the graves of the god's servants, and dominated by the god's 
pyramidal house itself, soaring sunward like a shining ziggurat 
with an almost too confident exterior austerity, and built with an 
integrity that did not scruple to use the hardest of stones, pol¬ 
ished basalts, granites, and diorites, as well as alabaster and 
limestone. 

The psychology of all this is yet to be uncovered. So seriously 
has the evidence been torn away by collectors of all ranks of guilt 
that the whole question may be forever wrapped in unanswer¬ 
ableness. For the unmoving mummy of the god-king is often in a 
curiously plain sarcophagus, while the gaudy effigies made of 
him are surrounded with a different reverence — perhaps be¬ 
cause it was from them that the hallucinations seemed to come. 
Like the god-statues of Mesopotamia they were life-sized or 
larger, sometimes elaborately painted, usually with jewels for eyes 
long since hacked out of their sockets by conscious nonhallucinating 
robbers. But unlike their eastern cousins, they did not have to be 
moved and so were finely chiseled out of limestone, slate, diorite, 
or other stone, and only in certain eras carved from wood. Usu¬ 
ally, they were set permanently in niches, some seated, some 
standing free, some in multiples of the god-king in standing or 
seated rows, and some walled up in small chapels called serdabs 
with two small eyeholes in front of the jewel-eyes so that the god 
could see out into the room before him, where there were offer- 



LITERATE BICAMERAL THEOCRACIES 


189 


ings of food and treasure and we know not what else, so have 
these tombs been plundered. Occasionally the actual voices hal¬ 
lucinated from the deceased god-king came to be written down as 
in "The Instructions which the Majesty of King Amenemhet I 
justified, gave when he spoke in a dream-revelation to his son." 

The commoner also was buried in a manner as if he still lived. 
