The peasant since predynastic times had been buried with pots 
of food, tools, and offerings for his continued life. Those higher 
in the social hierachy were given a funeral feast in which the 
corpse itself somehow took part. Scenes showing the deceased 
eating at his own funerary table came to be carved on slabs and 
set into a niche in the wall of the grave-mound or mastaba. Later 
graves elaborated this into stone-lined chambers with painted 
reliefs and serdabs with statues and offerings as in the pyramids 
proper. 

Often, ”true-of-voice" was an epithet added to the name of a 
dead person. This is difficult to understand apart from the present 
theory. "True-of-voice" originally applied to Osiris and Horus 
with reference to their victories over their opponents. 

Letters too were written to the dead as if they still lived. 
Probably this occurred only after some time when the person so 
addressed could no longer be 'heard' in hallucinations. A man 
writes his dead mother asking her to arbitrate between himself 
and his dead brother. How is this possible unless the living 
brother had been hearing his dead brother in hallucination? Or a 
dead man is begged to awaken his ancestors to help his widow 
and child. These letters are private documents dealing with 
everyday matters, and are free of official doctrine or make- 
believe. 


A New Theory of the Ka 

If we could say that ancient Egypt had a psychology, we would 
then have to say that its fundamental notion is the ka, and the 
problem becomes what the ka is. Scholars struggling with the 



190 


The Witness of History 


meaning of this particularly disturbing concept, which we find 
constantly in Egyptian inscriptions, have translated it in a litter 
of ways, as spirit, ghost, double, vital force, nature, luck, destiny, 
and what have you. It has been compared to the life-spirit of the 
Semites and Greeks, as well as to the genius of the Romans. But 
obviously, these later concepts are the hand-me-downs of the 
bicameral mind. Nor can this slippery diversity of meanings be 
explained by positing an Egyptian mentality in which words were 
used in several ways as approaches to the same mysterious entity, 
or by assuming "the peculiar quality of Egyptian thought which 
allows an object to be understood not by a single and consistent 
definition, but by various and unrelated approaches."^ None of 
this is satisfactory. 

The evidence from hieratic texts is confusing. Each person 
has his ka and speaks of it as we might of our will power. Yet 
when one dies, one goes to one's ka. In the famous Pyramid 
Texts around 2200 B.C., the dead are called "masters of their 
ka's.” The symbol in hieroglyphics for the ka is one of admonish¬ 
ing: two arms uplifted with flat outspread hands, the whole 
placed upon a stand which in hieroglyphics is only used to sup¬ 
port the symbols of divinities. 

It is obvious from the preceding chapters that the ka requires a 
reinterpretation as a bicameral voice. It is, I believe, what the ili 
or personal god was in Mesopotamia. A man's ka was his articu¬ 
late directing voice which he heard inwardly, perhaps in parental 
or authoritative accents, but which when heard by his friends or 
relatives even after his own death, was, of course, hallucinated as 
his own voice. 

If we can here relax our insistence upon the unconsciousness 
of these people, and, for a moment, imagine that they were 
something like ourselves, we could imagine a worker out in the 
fields suddenly hearing the ka or hallucinated voice of the vizier 
over him admonishing him in some way. If, after he returned to 


'5 Ibid., p. 61. 



LITERATE BICAMERAL THEOCRACIES 


191 


his city, he told the vizier that he had heard the vizier's ka 
(which in actuality there would be no reason for his doing), the 
vizier, were he conscious as are we, would assume that it was the 
same voice that he himself heard and which directed his life. 
Whereas in actuality, to the worker in the fields, the vizier's ka 
sounded like the vizier's own voice. While to the vizier himself, 
his ka would speak in the voices of authorities over him, or some 
amalgamation of them. And, of course, the discrepancy could 
never be discovered. 

Consistent with this interpretation are several other aspects of 
the ka. The Egyptians' attitude toward the ka is entirely passive. 
Just as in the case of the Greek gods, hearing it is tantamount to 
obeying it. It empowers what it commands. Courtiers in some of 
their inscriptions referring to the king say, "I did what his ka 
loved" or "I did that which his ka approved," 16 which may be 
interpreted as the courtier hearing the hallucinated voice of his 
king approving his work. 

In some texts it is said that the king makes a man's ka, and 
some scholars translate ka in this sense as fortune. 1 ? Again, this 
is a modern imposition. A concept such as fortune or success is 
impossible in the bicameral culture of Egypt. What is meant here 
according to my reading is that the man acquires an admonitory 
hallucinated voice which then can direct him in his work. Fre¬ 
quently the ka crops up in names of Egyptian officials as did the 
ili with Mesopotamian officials. Kaininesut, "my ka belongs to 
the king," or Kainesut, "the king is my ka." 18 In the Cairo 
Museum, stela number 20538 says, "the king gives his servants 
Ka's and feeds those who are faithful." 

The ka of the god-king is of particular interest. It was heard, I 
suggest, by the king in the accents of his own father. But it was 


16 Ibid., p. 68. 

>7 But see Alan H. Gardiner, Egyptian Grammar (Oxford, 1957), p. 172, note 12. 
18 Frankfort, p. 68; cf. also John A. Wilson, "Egypt: the values of life," Ch. 4 
in Frankfort, et at, p. 97. 



192 


The Witness of History 


heard in the hallucinations of his courtiers as the king's own 
voice, which is the really important thing. Texts state that when a 
king sat at a meal and ate, his ka sat and ate with him. The 
pyramids are full of false doors, sometimes simply painted on the 
limestone walls, through which the deceased god-king’s ka could 
pass out into the world and be heard. It is only the king's ka 
which is pictured on monuments, sometimes as a standard bearer 
holding the staff of the king's head and the feather, or as a bird 
perched behind the king's head. But most significant are the 
representations of the king's ka as his twin in birth scenes. In 
one such scene, the god Khnum is shown forming the king and 
his ka on his potter's wheel. They are identical small figures 
except that the ka has his left, hand pointing to his mouth, 
obviously suggesting that he is what we might describe as a 
persona of speech.^ 

Perhaps evidence for a growing complexity in all this are 
several texts from the eighteenth dynasty or 1500 B.C. onward, 



The god Khnum forming the 
future king with the right hand 
and the king's ka with the left 
on the potter's wheel. Note that 
the ka points with its left hand 
to its mouth, indicating its 
verbal function. The lateraliza¬ 
tion throughout is in accordance 
with the neurological model pre¬ 
sented in I.5. 


*9 Illustrated in Figure 23 in Frankfort. 


LITERATE BICAMERAL THEOCRACIES 


193 


which casually say that the king has fourteen ka's! This very 
perplexing statement may indicate that the structure of the gov¬ 
ernment had become so complicated that the king's hallucinated 
voice was heard as fourteen different voices, these being the 
voices of intermediaries between the king and those who were 
carrying out his orders directly. The notion of the king having 
fourteen ka’s is inexplicable by any other notion of what a ka is. 

Each king then is Horus, his father dead becoming Osiris, and 
has his ka, or in later ages, his several ka’s, which could best be 
translated now as voice-persona. An understanding of this is 
essential for the understanding of the entire Egyptian culture 
since the relation of king, god, and people is defined by means of 
the ka. The king's ka is, of course, the ka of a god, operates as 
his messenger, to himself is the voice of his ancestors, and to his 
underlings is the voice they hear telling them what to do. And 
when a subject in some of the texts says, "my ka derives from the 
king" or "the king makes my ka" or "the king is my ka," this 
should be interpreted as an assimilation of the person's inner 
directing voice, derived perhaps from his parents, with the voice 
or supposed voice of the king. 

Another related concept in ancient Egyptian mentality is the 
ba. But at least in the Old Kingdom, the ba is not really on the 
same level as the ka. It is more like our common ghost, a visual 
manifestation of what auditorily is the ka. In funerary scenes, 
the ba is usually depicted as a small humanoid bird, probably 
because visual hallucinations often have flitting and birdlike 
movements. It is usually drawn attendant on or in relationship to 
the actual corpse or to statues of the person. That after the fall 
of the more king-dominated Old Kingdom, the ba takes on some 
of the bicameral functions of the ka is indicated by a change in its 
hieroglyph from a small bird to one beside a lamp (to lead the 
way), and by its auditory hallucinatory role in the famous Pa¬ 
pyrus Berlin 3024, which dates about 1900 B.C. All translations of 
this astounding text are full of modern mental impositions, in- 



194 
