

The Witness of History 


eluding the most recent, 20 otherwise a fascinating chore of 
scholarship. And no commentator has dared to take this "Dispute 
of a man with his Ba" at face value, as a dialogue with an 
auditory hallucination, much like that of a contemporary schizo¬ 
phrenic. 


THE TEMPORAL CHANGES IN 
THEOCRACIES 

In the previous chapter, I stressed the uniformities among bicam¬ 
eral kingdoms, the large central worshiping places, treatment of 
the dead as if they were still living, and the presence of idols. But 
over and beyond these grosser aspects of ancient civilizations are 
many subtleties which space has not permitted me to mention. 
For just as we know that cultures and civilizations can be strik¬ 
ingly different, so we must not assume that the bicameral mind 
resulted in precisely the same thing everywhere it occurred. Dif¬ 
ferences in populations, ecologies, priests, hierarchies, idols, in¬ 
dustries, all would, I think, result in profound differences in the 
authority, frequency, ubiquity, and affect of hallucinatory control. 

In this chapter, on the other hand, I have been making my 
emphasis the differences between the two greatest of such civili¬ 
zations. But I have been speaking of them as if unchanging over 
time. And this is untrue. To give the impression of a static 
stability through time and space of bicameral theocracies is en¬ 
tirely mistaken. And I would like to redress the balance in this 
last section of this chapter by mentioning the changes and differ¬ 
ences in the structure of bicameral kingdoms. 

The Complexities 

The most obvious fact of theocracies is their success in a 
biological sense. Populations were continually increasing. As 

20 Hans Goedicke, The Report About the Dispute of a Man with his Ba, Papyrus 
Berlin 3024 (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press, 1970). 



LITERATE BICAMERAL THEOCRACIES 


195 


they did so, problems of social control by hallucinations called 
gods became more and more complex. The structuring of such 
control in a village of a few hundred back at Eynan in the ninth 
millennium B.C. is obviously enormously different from what it 
was in the civilizations we have just discussed with their hierar¬ 
chical layer of gods, priests, and officers. 

Indeed, I suggest that there is a built-in periodicity to bicameral 
theocracies, that the complexities of hallucinatory control with 
their very success increase until the civil state and civilized rela¬ 
tions can no longer be sustained, and the bicameral society col¬ 
lapses. As I noted in the previous chapter, this occurred many 
times in the pre-Columbian civilizations of America, whole popu¬ 
lations suddenly deserting their cities, with no external cause, 
and anarchically melting back into tribal living in surrounding 
terrain, but returning to their cities and their gods a century or so 
later. 

In the millennia we have been looking at in this chapter, the 
complexities were apparently mounting. Many of the ceremonies 
and practices I have described were initiated as ways of reducing 
this complexity. Even in writing, the first pictographs were to 
label and list and sort out. And some of the first syntactical 
writing speaks of the overpopulation. The Sumerian epic known 
to us as Atrahasis bursts open with the problem: 

The people became numerous . . . 

The god was depressed by their uproar 

Enlil heard their noise, 

He exclaimed to the great gods 

The noise of mankind has become burdensome . . . 21 

as if the voices were having difficulty. The epic goes on to de¬ 
scribe how the great gods send plagues, famines, and finally a 
great flood (the origin of the story of the Biblical flood) to get rid 
of some of the "black headed ones" as the Mesopotamian gods 
disparagingly referred to their human slaves. 

21 Quoted by Saggs, Greatness That Was Babylon, pp. 384-385. 



196 


The Witness of History 


The apparatus of divinity was becoming strained. In the early 
millennia of the bicameral age, life had been simpler, confined to 
a small area, with a simpler political organization, and the 
needed gods were then few. But as we approach and continue 
through to the end of the third millennium B.C., the tempo and 
complexity of social organization demand a far greater number 
of decisions in a far greater number of contexts in any week or 
month. And hence, the enormous proliferation of deities which 
could be invoked in whatever situation a man might find himself. 
From the great god-houses of the Sumerian and Babylonian 
cities of the major gods, to the personal gods enchapeled in each 
household, the world must have literally swarmed with sources of 
hallucination, and hence the increasing need for priests to order 
them into strict hierarchies. There were gods for everything one 
might do. One finds, for example, the coming into existence of 
obviously popular wayside shrines, such as the Pa-Sag Chapel 
where the statue-god Pa-Sag helped in making decisions about 
journeys through the desert . 22 

The response of these Near Eastern theocracies to this increas¬ 
ing complexity is both different and extremely illuminating. In 
Egypt, the older god-king form of government is less resilient, 
less developing of human potential, less allowing of innovation, 
of individuality among subordinate domains. Yet it stretched out 
for huge distances along the Nile. Regardless of what theory of 
civil cohesion one may hold, there is no doubt that in the last 
century of the third millennium B.C., all authority in Egypt broke 
down. There may have been a triggering cause in some geologi¬ 
cal catastrophe: some ancient texts referring back to the period 
of 2100 B.C. seem to speak of the Nile becoming dry, of men 
crossing it on foot, of the sun being hidden, of crops being dimin¬ 
ished. Whatever the immediate cause, the pyramid of authority 
headed by the god-king at Memphis simply collapsed at about 

22 According to cuneiform tablets found by Sir Leonard Woolley in association 
with Pa-Sag's rather poorly carved limestone effigy. See C. L. Woolley, Excavations 
at Ur: A Record of Twelve Years Work (London: Benn, 1954), pp. 190-192. 



LITERATE BICAMERAL THEOCRACIES 


197 


that time. Literary sources describe people fleeing towns, noble¬ 
men grubbing for food in the fields, brothers fighting, men killing 
their parents, pyramids and tombs ransacked. Scholars are insis¬ 
tent that this total disappearance of authority was due to no 
outside force but to some unfathomable internal weakness. And I 
suggest that this is indeed the weakness of the bicameral mind, 
its fragility in the face of increasing complexity, and that the 
collapse of authority in so absolute a manner can only be so 
understood. Egypt at the time had extremely important sepa¬ 
rated districts stretching from the delta to the upper Nile that 
could have been self-sustaining. But the very fact that in the 
midst of this anarchy there was no rebellion, no striving of these 
sections for independence is, I think, indicative of a very different 
mentality from our own. 

This breakdown of the bicameral mind in what is called the 
Intermediate Period is reminiscent at least of those periodic 
breakdowns of Mayan civilizations when all authority suddenly 
collapsed, and the population melted back into tribal living in the 
jungles. And just as the Maya cities became inhabited again or 
new ones formed after a period of breakdown, so Egypt after less 
then a century of breakdown has unified itself at the beginning of 
the second millennium under a new god-king, beginning what is 
called the Middle Kingdom. The same breakdown occurred else¬ 
where in the Near East from time to time, as in Assur about 1700 
B.C., as we shall see in the next chapter. 

The Idea of Law 

But nothing of this extent ever happens in southern Mesopo¬ 
tamia. Of course there are wars. City-states fought each other 
over whose god and therefore which steward was to rule over 
which fields. But there was never any total collapse of authority 
as occurred in Mesoamerica and in Egypt at the end of the Old 
Kingdom. 

One of the reasons, I think, was the greater resiliency of the 



198 


The Witness of History 


steward-king type of theocracy. And another, not unconnected 
reason was the use to which writing was put. Unlike in Egypt, 
writing in Mesopotamia was early put to civil use. By 2100 B.C. 
in Ur, the judgments of gods through their steward mediums 
began to be recorded. This is the beginning of the idea of law. 
Such written judgments could be in several places and be con¬ 
tinuous through time, thus allowing the cohesiveness of a larger 
society. We know of nothing similar in Egypt until almost a 
millennium later. 

In 1792 B.C., the civil use of writing in this way breaks open an 
almost new kind of government in that commanding figure of 
Mesopotamian history, the greatest of all steward kings, Ham¬ 
murabi, steward of Marduk, the city god of Babylon. His long 
stewardship, lasting to 1750 B.C., is a pulling together of most of 
the city-states of Mesopotamia into an hegemony under his god 
Marduk in Babylon. This process of conquest and influence is 
made possible by letters and tablets and stelae in an abundance 
that had never been known before. It is even thought that he was 
the first literate king who did not need a scribe, since all his 
cuneiform letters are apparently incised in wet clay by the same 
hand. Writing was a new method of civil direction, indeed the 
model that begins our own memo-communicating government. 
Without it such a unification of Mesopotamia could not have 
