been accomplished. It is a method of social control which by 
hindsight we know will soon supplant the bicameral mind. 

His most famous remains are the somewhat overinterpreted 
and perhaps misnamed Code of Hammurabi . 2 3 Originally, it was 
an eight-foot-high black basalt stele erected at the end of his 
reign beside a statue or possibly idol of himself. So far as we can 
make out, someone seeking redress from another would come to 
the steward's statue, to "hear my words" (as the stele says at the 
bottom), and then move over to the stele itself, where the previ- 

2 3 For a translation I have used Robert Francis Flarper, The Code of Hammurabi, 
King of Babylon (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1904). 



LITERATE BICAMERAL THEOCRACIES 


199 



Hammurabi hallucinating judgments from his god Marduk (or 
possibly Shamash) as carved on the top of a stele listing those judg¬ 
ments. About 1750 B.C. 


ous judgments of the steward's god are recorded. His god, as I 
have said, was Marduk, and the top of the stele is sculptured to 
depict the scene of judgment-giving. The god is seated on a 
raised mound which in Mesopotamian graphics symbolizes a 
mountain. An aura of flames flashes up from his shoulders as he 
speaks (which has made some scholars think it is Shamash, the 
sun-god). Hammurabi listens intently as he stands just below 
him ("under-stands”). The god holds in his right hand the attri¬ 
butes of power, the rod and circle very common to such divine 
depictions. With these symbols, the god is just touching the left 
elbow of his steward, Hammurabi. One of the magnificent things 
about this scene is the hypnotic assurance with which both god 
and steward-king intently stare at each other, impassively majes¬ 
tic, the steward-king’s right hand held up between us, the ob¬ 
servers, and the plane of communication. Here is no humility, no 
begging before a god, as occurs just a few centuries later. Ham- 




200 


The Witness of History 


murabi has no subjective-self to narratize into such a relation¬ 
ship. There is only obedience. And what is being dictated by 
Marduk are judgments on a series of very specific cases. 

As written on the stele beneath this sculptured relief, the 
judgments of Marduk are sandwiched in between an introduction 
and an epilogue by Hammurabi himself. Here with pomp and 
fury he boasts of his deeds, his power, his intimacy with Marduk, 
describes the conquests he has made for Marduk, the reason for 
the setting up of this stele, and ends with dire implications as to 
the evil that will befall anyone who scratches out his name. In 
vainglory and naivete both prologue and epilogue remind us of 
the Iliad. 

But in between are the 282 quiet pronouncements of the god. 
They are serenely reasoned decisions about the apportioning of 
commodities among different occupations, how house slaves or 
thieves or unruly sons were punished, the eye-for-an-eye-and- 
tooth-for-a-tooth kind of recompensing, judgments about gifts 
and deaths and adopting children (which seems to have been a 
considerable practice), and of marriage and servants and slaves 
— all in a cold economy of words in contrast to the bellicose 
blustering of the prologue and epilogue. Indeed they sound like 
two very different 'men' and in the bicameral sense I think they 
were. They were two separately integrated organizations of 
Hammurabi's nervous system, one of them in the left hemisphere 
writing the prologue and epilogue and standing in effigy at the 
side of the stele, and the other in the right hemisphere composing 
judgments. And neither of them was conscious in our sense. 

While the stele itself is clearly evidence for the bicameral 
mind in some form, the problems to which the god's words are 
addressed are indeed complex. It is very difficult to imagine 
doing the things that these laws say men did in the eighteenth 
century B.C. without having a subjective consciousness in which 
to plan and devise, deceive and hope. But it should be remem¬ 
bered how rudimentary all this was and how misleading our 



LITERATE BICAMERAL THEOCRACIES 


201 


modern words can be. The word that is incorrectly translated as 
"money" or even as "loan” is simply kaspu, meaning silver. It 
cannot mean money in our sense since no coins have ever been 
found. Similarly, what has been translated as rents is really 
tithing, an agreement marked on a clay tablet to return a portion 
of the produce of a field to its owner. Wine was not so much 
purchased as exchanged, one measure of wine for one measure 
of grain. And the use of some modern banking terms in some 
translations is downright inaccurate. As I have mentioned be¬ 
fore, in many translations of cuneiform material, there is the 
constant attempt on the part of scholars to impose modern cate¬ 
gories of thought on these ancient cultures in order to make them 
more familiar and therefore supposedly more interesting to mod¬ 
ern readers. 

These rules of the stele should not be thought of in the modern 
terms of laws which are enforced by police, something unknown 
at that time. Rather they are lists of practices in Babylon itself, 
the statements of Marduk, which needed no more enforcement 
than their authenticity on the stele itself. 

The fact that they were written down and, more generally, the 
wide use of visual writing for communication indicate, I think, a 
reduction in the auditory hallucinatory control of the bicameral 
mind. Together, they put into motion cultural determinants 
which, coming together with other forces a few centuries later, 
resulted in a change in the very structure of the mind itself. 

Let me summarize. 

I have endeavored in these two chapters to examine the record 
of a huge time span to reveal the plausibility that man and his 
early civilizations had a profoundly different mentality from our 
own, that in fact men and women were not conscious as are we, 
were not responsible for their actions, and therefore cannot be 
given the credit or blame for anything that was done over these 
vast millennia of time; that instead each person had a part of his 



202 


The Witness of History 


nervous system which was divine, by which he was ordered about 
like any slave, a voice or voices which indeed were what we call 
volition and empowered what they commanded and were related 
to the hallucinated voices of others in a carefully established 
hierarchy. 

The total pattern, I suggest, is in agreement with such a view. 
It is, of course, not conclusive. However, the astonishing consis¬ 
tency from Egypt to Peru, from Ur to Yucatan, wherever civiliza¬ 
tions arose, of death practices and idolatry, of divine government 
and hallucinated voices, all are witness to the idea of a different 
mentality from our own. 

But it would be an error, as I have tried to show, to regard the 
bicameral mind as a static thing. True, it developed from the 
ninth millennium B.C. to the second millennium B.C. with the 
slowness that makes any single century seem as static as its 
ziggurats and temples. Millennia are its units of time. But the 
tempo of development at least in the Near East picks up as we 
reach the second millennium B.C. The gods of Akkad, like the 
ka's of Egypt, have multiplied in complexity. And as this com¬ 
plexity develops, there is the first unsureness, the first need for 
personal gods to intercede with the higher gods, who seem to be 
receding into the heavens where in one brief millennium they 
will have disappeared. 

From the royal corpse propped up on its stones under its red 
parapet in Eynan, still ruling its Natufian village in the halluci¬ 
nations of its subjects, to the mighty beings that cause thunder 
and create worlds and finally disappear into heavens, the gods 
were at the same time a mere side effect of language evolution 
and the most remarkable feature of the evolution of life since the 
development of Homo sapiens himself. I do not mean this simply 
as poetry. The gods were in no sense 'figments of the imagina¬ 
tion' of anyone. They were man’s volition. They occupied his 
nervous system, probably his right hemisphere, and from stores 
of admonitory and preceptive experience, transmuted this experi- 



LITERATE BICAMERAL THEOCRACIES 


203 


ence into articulated speech which then 'told' the man what to do. 
That such internally heard speech often needed to be primed 
with the props of the dead corpse of a chieftain or the gilded 
body of a jewel-eyed statue in its holy house, of that I have really 
said nothing. It too requires an explanation. I have by no means 
dared the bottom of the matter, and it is only to be hoped that 
complete and more correct translations of existing texts and the 
increasing tempo of archaeological excavation will give us a truer 
understanding of these long long millennia which civilized man¬ 
kind. 



CHAPTER 3 


The Causes of Consciousness 


A n old Sumerian proverb has been translated as “Act 
promptly, make your god happy.” 1 If we forget for a mo¬ 
ment that these rich English words are but a probing approxima¬ 
tion of some more unknowable Sumerian thing, we may say that 
this curious exaction arches over into our subjective mentality as 
saying, “Don’t think: let there be no time space between hearing 
your bicameral voice and doing what it tells you.” 

This was fine in a stable hierarchical organization, where the 
