voices were the always correct and essential parts of that hier¬ 
archy, where the divine orders of life were trussed and girdered 
with unversatile ritual, untouched by major social disturbance. 
But the second millennium B.C. was not to last that way. Wars, 
catastrophes, national migrations became its central themes. 
Chaos darkened the holy brightnesses of the unconscious world. 
Hierarchies crumpled. And between the act and its divine source 
came the shadow, the pause that profaned, the dreadful loosen¬ 
ing that made the gods unhappy, recriminatory, jealous. Until, 
finally, the screening off of their tyranny was effected by the 
invention on the basis of language of an analog space with an 
analog ‘I’. The careful elaborate structures of the bicameral mind 
had been shaken into consciousness. 

These are the momentous themes of the present chapter. 

* * * * 


1 Proverb 1:145 i n Edmund I. Gordon, Sumerian Proverbs (Philadelphia: Uni¬ 
versity Museum, 1959), p. 113. 



THE CAUSES OF CONSCIOUSNESS 


205 


The Instability of Bicameral Kingdoms 

In the contemporary world, we associate rigid authoritarian 
governments with militarism and police repression. This associa¬ 
tion should not be applied to the authoritarian states of the 
bicameral era. Militarism, police, rule by fear, are all the desper¬ 
ate measures used to control a subjective conscious populace 
restless with identity crises and divided off into their multitudi¬ 
nous privacies of hopes and hates. 

In the bicameral era, the bicameral mind was the social con¬ 
trol, not fear or repression or even law. There were no private 
ambitions, no private grudges, no private frustrations, no private 
anything, since bicameral men had no internal ‘space’ in which to 
be private, and no analog to be private with. All initiative was 
in the voices of gods. And the gods needed to be assisted by their 
divinely dictated laws only in the late federations of states in the 
second millennium B.C. 

Within each bicameral state, therefore, the people were prob¬ 
ably more peaceful and friendly than in any civilization since. 
But at the interfaces between different bicameral civilizations, 
the problems were complex and quite different. 

Let us consider a meeting between two individuals from two 
different bicameral cultures. Let us assume they do not know 
each other’s language and are owned by different gods. The 
manner of such meetings would be dependent upon the kind of 
admonitions, warnings, and importunings with which the indi¬ 
vidual had been reared. 

In peaceful times, with the god of the city basking in prosper¬ 
ity, the human tilling of his fields, the harvesting, storing, and 
sorting out of his produce all going on without hitch or question, 
as in a colony of ants, it could be expected that his divine voice 
would be basically amicable, and that indeed all man’s voice- 
visions would tend to be beautiful and peaceful, exaggerating the 
very harmony this method of social control was evolved to pre¬ 


serve. 



206 


The Witness of History 


Thus, if the bicameral theocracies of both individuals meeting 
have been unthreatened for their generation, both their directive 
gods would be composed of friendly voices. The result may have 
been a tentative exchange of gestural greetings and facial expres¬ 
sions that might grow to friendship, or even an exchange of gifts. 
For we can be very certain that the relative rarity of each other's 
possessions (coming from different cultures) would make such 
an exchange mutually wished for. 

This is probably how trade began. The beginning of such 
exchanges goes back to food sharing in the family group which 
grew into exchanges of goods and produce within the same city. 
Just as the harvested grain of the first agricultural settlements 
had to be doled out by certain god-given rules, so, as labor became 
more specialized, other products, wine, adornments, clothes, and 
the building of houses, all had to have their god-set equivalents to 
each other. 

Trade between different peoples is simply the extension of 
such exchanging of goods to another kingdom. Texts from 2500 
B.C. found in Sumer speak of such exchanging as far away as the 
Indus Valley. And the recent discovery of a new city site at Tepe 
Yahya, halfway between Sumer and the Indus Valley, at the 
mouth of the Persian Gulf, whose artifacts clearly indicate that it 
was the main source of steatite or soapstone, used for utensils 
extensively in Mesopotamia, establish it as a center of exchange 
between these bicameral kingdoms. 2 Small two-inch-square tab¬ 
lets have been found with counting marks on them which were 
probably simple exchange rates. All this was during a peaceful 
era in the middle of the third millennium B.C. I shall suggest 
later that extensive exchanging of goods between bicameral the¬ 
ocracies may in itself have weakened the bicameral structure that 
made civilization possible. 

Now let us return to our two individuals from different cul¬ 
tures. We have been discussing what occurs in a peaceful world 

2 New York Times, December 20, 1970, p. 53. 



THE CAUSES OF CONSCIOUSNESS 


207 


with peaceful gods. But what if the opposite were the case? If 
both came from threatened cultures, both would probably hear 
warlike hallucinated voices directing each to kill the other, 
whereupon hostilities would follow. But the same result would 
happen if either came from a threatened culture, putting the 
other into a posture of defense, as either the same god or another 
directed him as well to engage in fighting. 

There is thus no middle ground in intertheocracy relations. 
Admonitory voices echoing kings, viziers, parents, etc., are un¬ 
likely to command individuals into acts of compromise. Even 
today, our ideas of nobility are largely residues of bicameral 
authority: it is not noble to whine, it is not noble to plead, it is not 
noble to beg, even though these postures are really the most 
moral of ways to settle differences. And hence the instability of 
the bicameral world, and the fact that during the bicameral era 
boundary relations would, I think, be more likely to end in all-out 
friendship or all-out hostility than anything between these 
extremes. 

Nor is this the bottom of the matter. The smooth working of a 
bicameral kingdom has to rest on its authoritarian hierarchy. 
And once the priestly or secular hierarchy is disputed or upset, 
its effects would be exaggerated in a way that in a police state 
would not occur. Once cities become a certain size, as we have 
already seen, the bicameral control must be extremely precari¬ 
ous. The hierarchy of priests to sort out the various voices and 
give them their recognitions must have become a major preoccu¬ 
pation as bicameral cities grew in size. One jar to this balance of 
human and hallucinated authority, and, like a house of cards, the 
whole thing might collapse. As I have mentioned in both previ¬ 
ous chapters, such theocracies occasionally did indeed suddenly 
collapse without any known external cause. 

In comparison with conscious nations, then, bicameral nations 
were more susceptible to collapse. The directives of gods are 
limited. If on top of this inherent fragility, something really new 



208 


The Witness of History 


occurred, such as a forced intermingling of bicameral peoples, 
the gods would be hard pressed to sort anything out in a peace¬ 
able way. 

The Weakening of Divine Authority with Writing 

These limitations of gods were both relieved and greatly 
exacerbated in the second millennium B.C. by the success of 
writing. On the one hand, writing could allow a civil structure 
such as that of Hammurabi to remain stable. But, on the other, it 
was gradually eroding the auditory authority of the bicameral 
mind. More and more, the accountings and messages of govern¬ 
ment were placed in cuneiform tablets particularly. Whole li¬ 
braries of them are still being discovered. Letters of officials 
became a commonplace. By 1500 B.C., even miners high in the 
rocky wastes of Sinai incised their names and their relationships 
to the goddess of the mine on its walls.3 

The input to the divine hallucinatory aspect of the bicameral 
mind was auditory. It used cortical areas more closely connected 
to the auditory parts of the brain. And once the word of god was 
silent, written on dumb clay tablets or incised into speechless 
stone, the god's commands or the king's directives could be 
turned to or avoided by one’s own efforts in a way that auditory 
hallucinations never could be. The word of a god had a con¬ 
trollable location rather than an ubiquitous power with immediate 
obedience. This is extremely important. 

The Failure of the Gods 

This loosening of the god-man partnership perhaps by trade 
and certainly by writing was the background of what happened. 
But the immediate and precipitate cause of the breakdown of the 

3 Romain F. Butin, "The Sarabit Expedition of 1930: IV, The Protosinaitic In¬ 
scriptions." Harvard Theological Review, 1932, 25, pp. 130-204. 



THE CAUSES OF CONSCIOUSNESS 


209 


bicameral mind, of the wedge of consciousness between god and 
man, between hallucinated voice and automaton action, was that 
