in social chaos the gods could not tell you what to do. Or if they 
did, they led to death, or at the intimate least to an increase in the 
stress that physiologically occasioned the voice in the first place, 
until voices came in an unsolvable Babel of confusion. 

The historical context of all this was enormous. The second 
millennium B.C. was heavy laden with profound and irreversible 
changes. Vast geological catastrophes occurred. Civilizations 
perished. Half the world’s population became refugees. And 
wars, previously sporadic, came with hastening and ferocious 
frequency as this important millennium hunched itself sickly into 
its dark and bloody close. 

It is a complex picture, the variables evoking these changes 
multileveled, the facts as we have them now not at all certain. 
Almost yearly they are revised as each new generation of archae¬ 
ologists and ancient historians finds fault with its predecessors. 
As an approximation to these complexities, let us look at the two 
major elements of these upheavals. One was the mass migra¬ 
tions and invasions of peoples all around the eastern Mediterra¬ 
nean due to the volcanic eruption of Thera, and the other was the 
rise of Assyria, in three great phases, warring its way reign by 
reign westward to Egypt, northward to the Caspian, incorporat¬ 
ing all of Mesopotamia, forming a very different kind of empire 
from any that the world had known before. 

The Assyrian Spring 

Let us first look at the situation in northern Mesopotamia 
around the city that belongs to the god Ashur, as the second 
millennium B.C. opensd Originally a part of Akkad, and then of 
Old Babylonia two hundred miles south, by 1950 B.C., this peace- 

4 For the overall contours of Assyrian history I have relied on various authorities, 
but particularly H. W. F. Saggs, The Greatness That Was Babylon (New York: 
Mentor Books, 1962) ; and various articles by William F. Albright. 



210 


The Witness of History 


ful bicameral city on an upper reach of the gentle Tigris has been 
left pretty much to itself. Under the guidance of Ashur's chief 
human servant, Puzen-Ashur I, its benign influence and wealth 
begin to expand. More than in any nation before it, the feature of 
that expansion is exchange of goods with other theocracies. 
About two hundred years later, the city owned by Ashur becomes 
Assyria, with exchange posts as much as seven hundred miles by 
road away to the northeast in Anatolia or present-day Turkey. 

Exchange of goods between cities had been going on for some 
time. But it is doubtful if it was as extensive as that practiced by 
the Assyrians. Recent excavations have revealed karums or, in 
smaller towns, ubartums, the exchange posts just outside several 
Anatolian cities in which the trading took place. Particularly 
interesting excavations have been made of the karum just outside 
Kiiltepe: small buildings whose walls have no windows, stone 
and wooden shelves on which are cuneiform tablets yet to be 
translated, and sometimes jars with what appear to be counters 
within them.s The writing, indeed, is old Assyrian, and, presum¬ 
ably brought there by these traders, is the first writing known in 
Anatolia. 

Such trade was not, however, a true market. There were no 
prices under the pressures of supply and demand, no buying and 
selling, and no money. It was trade in the sense of equivalences 
established by divine decree. There is a complete lack of refer¬ 
ence to business profits or loss in any of the cuneiform tablets 
that have so far been translated. There are occasional excep¬ 
tions, even a suggestion of 'inflation,' perhaps during a famine 
year when the exchanges became different, but they do not seri¬ 
ously impair Polanyi’s view, which I am following here. 6 

Let us consider these Assyrian merchants for a moment. They 

s Nimet Osguc, "Assyrian trade colonies in Anatolia," Archeology, 1965, 4: 250- 
255 - 

6 Karl Polanyi, Trade and Market in the Early Empires (Glencoe: Free Press, 
1957 )- 



THE CAUSES OF CONSCIOUSNESS 


211 


were, we may presume, merely agents, holding their position by 
descent and apprenticeship, and carrying out exchanges much as 
their fathers had done for centuries. But there are so many 
questions that face the psychohistorian at this point. What would 
happen to the bicameral voices of these merchants as much as 
seven hundred miles from the source of their city-god’s voice, and 
in daily contact and probably (though not necessarily) speaking 
the language of bicameral men ruled by a different pantheon of 
voices? Is it possible that something like a protosubjective con¬ 
sciousness occurred in these traders at the boundaries of different 
civilizations? Did they, returning periodically to Ashur, bring 
with them a weakened bicamerality that perhaps spread to a new 
generation? So that the bicameral tie between gods and men was 
loosened? 

The causes of consciousness are multiple, but at least I do not 
think it is a coincidence that the key nation in this development 
should also have been that nation most involved in exchanges of 
goods with others. If it is true that the power of the gods and 
particularly of Ashur were being weakened at this time, it could 
account for the absolute collapse of his city in 1700 B.C., begin¬ 
ning the dark ages of Assyrian anarchy that lasted two hundred 
years. For this event there is no explanation whatever. No his¬ 
torian understands it. And there is little hope of ever doing so, 
for not a single Assyrian cuneiform inscription from this period 
has ever been found. 

The reorganization of Assyria after its collapse had to wait 
upon other events. In 1450 B.C., Egypt pushed the Mitanni out of 
Syria right across the Euphrates into lands between the two great 
rivers that had once been Assyrian. But a century later the 
Mitanni were conquered by the Hittites from the north, thus 
making possible the rebuilding of an Assyrian empire in 1380 
B.C. after two centuries of anarchic darkness. 

And what an empire it is! No nation had been so militaristic 
before. Unlike any previous inscriptions anywhere, those of mid- 



212 


The Witness of History 


die Assyria now bristle with brutal campaigns. The change is 
dramatic. But the success of the Assyrian invasions as they 
relentlessly savage their way toward world domination is like a 
ratchet catching at the whorl of catastrophes of another kind. 


Eruption, Migration, Conquest 

The collapse of the bicameral mind was certainly accelerated 
by the collapse under the ocean of a good part of the Aegean 
people's land. This followed an eruption or series of eruptions of 
the volcano on the island of Thera, also called Santorini, now an 
Aegean tourist attraction, barely sixty-two miles north of Crete.7 
Then, it had been part of what Plato 8 and later legend called the 
lost continent of Atlantis, which with Crete made up the Minoan 
empire. The major part of it and perhaps parts of Crete as well 
were suddenly 1000 feet underwater. Most of the remaining land 
of Thera was covered with a 150-foot-deep crust of volcanic ash 
and pumice. 

Geologists have hypothesized that the black cloud caused by 
the eruption darkened the sky for days and affected the atmo¬ 
sphere for years. The air shock waves have been estimated at 
350 times more powerful than a hydrogen bomb. Thick poisonous 
vapors puffed out over the blue sea for miles. A tsunami or huge 
tidal wave followed. Towering 700 feet high and traveling at 350 
miles per hour, it smashed into the fragile coasts of the bicameral 
kingdoms along the Aegean mainland and its islands. Everything 
for two miles inland was destroyed. A civilization and its gods 
had ended. 

Just when it happened, whether it was a series of eruptions or 
a two-stage affair with a year between the eruption and the 
collapse, will require better scientific methods of dating volcanic 

7 See Jerome J. Pollit, "Atlantis and Minoan Civilization: An archeological nexus"; 
and Robert S. Brumbaugh, "Plato's Atlantis," both in the Yale Alumni Magazine, 

1970,33,20-29. 

8 See particularly Critias, io8e-ii9e, passim. 



THE CAUSES OF CONSCIOUSNESS 


213 


ash and pumice. Some believe it to have occurred in 1470 B.C. 9 
Others have dated the collapse of Thera between 1180 and 1170 
B.C. when the whole of the Mediterranean, including Cyprus, the 
Nile delta, and the coast of Israel, suffered universal calamity of 
a magnitude that dwarfed the 1470 B.C. destruction. 10 

Whenever it was, whether it was one or a series of eruptions, it 
set off a huge procession of mass migrations and invasions which 
wrecked the Hittite and Mycenaean empires, threw the world into 
a dark ages within which came the dawn of consciousness. Only 
Egypt seems to have retained the elaboration of its civilized life, 
although the exodus of the Israelites about the time of the Trojan 
War, perhaps 1230 B.C., is close enough to be considered a part 
of this great world event. The legend of the parting of the Red 
Sea probably refers to tidal changes in the Sea of Reeds related to 
the Thera eruption. 

The result is that, in the space of a single day, whole popula¬ 
tions or what survive of them are suddenly refugees. Like files of 
dominoes, anarchy and chaos ripple and lurch across the fright¬ 
ened land as neighbor invades neighbor. And what can the gods 
say in these ruins? What can the gods say, with hunger and 
death more strict than they, with strange people staring at 
strange people, and strange language bellowed at uncomprehend¬ 
ing ears? The bicameral man was ruled in the trivial circum¬ 
stance of everyday life by unconscious habit, and in his encoun¬ 
ters with anything new or out of the ordinary in his own behavior 
or others' by his voice-visions. Ripped out of context in the larger 
hierarchical group, where neither habit nor bicameral voice could 
assist and direct him, he must have been a pitiable creature 
indeed. How could the storings up and distillings of admonitory 
