experience gained in the peaceful authoritarian ordering of a 
bicameral nation say anything that would work now? 

Huge migrations begin moving into Ionia and then south. The 

9 S. Marinatos, Crete and Mycaenae (New York: Abrams, i960). 

10 New York Times, Sept. 28, 1966, p. 34. 



214 


The Witness of History 


coastal lands of the Levant are invaded by land and sea by 
peoples from eastern Europe, of whom the Philistines of the Old 
Testament were a part. The pressure of the refugees is so great 
in Anatolia that in 1200 B.C. the puissant Hittite empire col¬ 
lapses, driving the Hittites down into Syria where other refugees 
are seeking new lands. Assyria was inland and protected. And 
the chaos resulting from these invasions allowed the cruel Assyr¬ 
ian armies to push all the way into Phrygia, Syria, Phoenicia, 
and even to the subjugation of the mountain peoples of Armenia 
in the north and those of the Zagros Mountains to the east. Could 
Assyria do this on a strictly bicameral basis? 

The most powerful king of this middle Assyria was Tiglath- 
Pileser I (1115-1077 B.C.). Note how he no longer joins the 
name of his god to his name. His exploits are well known from a 
large clay prism of monstrous boasts. His laws have come down 
to us in a collection of cruel tablets. Scholars have called his 
policy "a policy of frightfulness." 11 And so it was. The Assyrians 
fell like butchers upon harmless villagers, enslaved what refu¬ 
gees they could, and slaughtered others in thousands. Bas-reliefs 
show what appear to be whole cities whose populace have been 
stuck alive on stakes running up through the groin and out the 
shoulders. His laws meted out the bloodiest penalties yet known 
in world history for even minor misdemeanors. They make a 
dramatic contrast to the juster admonishments that the god of 
Babylon dictated to bicameral Hammurabi six centuries earlier. 

Why this harshness? And for the first time in the history of 
civilization? Unless the previous method of social control had 
absolutely broken down. And that form of social control was the 
bicameral mind. The very practice of cruelty as an attempt to 
rule by fear is, I suggest, at the brink of subjective consciousness. 

The chaos is widespread and continuing. In Greece it is darkly 
known as the Dorian invasions. The Acropolis is in flames by the 

11 H. W. F. Saggs, The Greatness That Was Babylon (New York: Mentor Books, 
1962), p. 101. 



THE CAUSES OF CONSCIOUSNESS 


215 


end of the thirteenth century B.C. Mycenae no longer exists by 
the end of the twelfth century B.C. It has been ground out into 
legend and wonder. And we can imagine the first aoidos, still 
bicameral, wandering entranced from ruined camp to camp of 
refugees, singing the bright goddess through his white lips of the 
wrath of Achilles in a golden age that was and is no more. 

Even from somewhere around the Black Sea, hordes that some 
called the Mushku, known in the Old Testament as Meshech, 
thrust down into the ruined Hittite kingdom. Then twenty thou¬ 
sand of them drifted further south invading the Assyrian prov¬ 
ince of Kummuh. Hordes of Aramaeans continuously pressed in 
on the Assyrian from the western deserts and continued to do so 
up into the first millennium B.C. 

In the south, more of these refugees, called in hieroglyphics 
the “People from the Sea,” attempt to invade Egypt by the Nile 
delta at the beginning of the eleventh century B.C. Their defeat 
by Rameses III can still be seen on the north wall of his funerary 
temple at Medinet Habu in western Thebes. 12 The invaders in 
ships, chariots, and on foot, with families and oxcarts of posses¬ 
sions, stream through these murals in refugee fashion. Had the 
invasion been successful, it is possible that Egypt might have 
done for the intellect what Greece was to do in the next millen¬ 
nium. And so the People from the Sea are pressed back east¬ 
ward into the clutch of Assyrian militarism. 

And finally all these pressures become too great for even Assyr¬ 
ian cruelty. In the tenth century B.C., Assyria itself cannot 
control the situation and shrivels back into poverty behind the 
Tigris. But only to breathe. For in the very next century, the 
Assyrians begin their reconquest of the world with unprecedented 
sadistic ferocity, butchering and terroring their way back to their 
former empire and then beyond and all the way to Egypt and up 
the fertile Nile to the holy sun-god himself, even as Pizarro was 

12 For illustrations of these see William Stevenson Smith, Interconnections in the 
Ancient Near East (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1965), pp. 220-221. 



216 


The Witness of History 


to take the divine Inca captive two and a half millennia later on 
the opposite side of the earth. And by this time, the great tran- 
silience in mentality had occurred. Man had become conscious of 
himself and his world. 

How Consciousness Began 

So far, all our analysis has been about how and why the 
bicameral mind collapsed. It could indeed be asked at this point 
why man did not simply revert to his previous condition. Some¬ 
times he did. But the inertia of the more complex cultures pre¬ 
vented the return to tribal life. Man was trapped in his own 
civilization. Huge cities simply are there, and their ponderous 
habits of working keep going even as their divine control lapses 
away. Language too is a brake upon social change. The bi¬ 
cameral mind was an offshoot of the acquisition of language, and 
language by this time had a vocabulary demanding such attention 
to a civilized environment as to make a reversion to something of 
at least 5000 years earlier almost impossible. 

The facts of the transition from the bicameral mind to the 
subjective conscious mind are what I try to develop in the ensuing 
two chapters. But just how it happened is the consideration here, 
and this needs a great deal more research. What we need is a 
paleontology of consciousness, in which we can discern stratum by 
stratum how this metaphored world we call subjective conscious¬ 
ness was built up and under what particular social pressures. All 
that I can present here is a few suggestions. 

I would also remind the reader of two things. First, I am not 
talking here of the metaphoric mechanisms by which conscious¬ 
ness was generated that I discussed in 1 .3. Here I am concerned 
with their origin in history, why those features were generated by 
metaphors at a particular time. Secondly, we are speaking only 
about the Near East. Once consciousness is established, there are 
quite different reasons why it is so successful, and why it spreads 



THE CAUSES OF CONSCIOUSNESS 


217 


to the remaining bicameral peoples, problems which we shall 
take up in a later chapter. 

The observation of difference may be the origin of the analog 
space of consciousness. After the breakdown of authority and of 
the gods, we can scarcely imagine the panic and the hesitancy 
that would feature human behavior during the disorder we have 
described. We should remember that in the bicameral age men 
belonging to the same city-god were more or less of similar opin¬ 
ion and action. But in the forced violent intermingling of peoples 
from different nations, different gods, the observation that 
strangers, even though looking like oneself, spoke differently, 
had opposite opinions, and behaved differently might lead to the 
supposition of something inside of them that was different. In¬ 
deed, this latter opinion has come down to us in the traditions of 
philosophy, namely, that thoughts, opinions, and delusions are 
subjective phenomena inside a person because there is no room 
for them in the ‘real,’ ‘objective’ world. It is thus a possibility that 
before an individual man had an interior self, he unconsciously 
first posited it in others, particularly contradictory strangers, as 
the thing that caused their different and bewildering behavior. In 
other words, the tradition in philosophy that phrases the problem 
as the logic of inferring other minds from one’s own has it the 
wrong way around. We may first unconsciously (sic) suppose 
other consciousnesses, and then infer our own by generalization. 

The Origin of Narratization in Epics 

It sounds strange to speak about gods learning. But occupying 
a good part of the right temporal-parietal region (if the model of 
I.5 is correct), they, too, like the left temporal-parietal region, or 
perhaps even more so, would learn new abilities, storing up new 
experience, reworking their admonitory function in new ways to 
meet new needs. 



218 


The Witness of History 


Narratization is a single word for an extremely complex set of 
patterning abilities which have, I think, a multiple ancestry. But 
the thing in its larger patterning, such as lifetimes, histories, the 
past and future, may have been learned by dominantly left- 
hemisphered men from a new kind of functioning in the right 
hemisphere. The new kind of functioning was narratization, and 
it had previously been learned, I suggest, by the gods at a certain 
period of history. 

When could this have been? It is doubtful if there can ever be 
a certain answer, partly because there is no sharp boundary 
between the relation of an event that has just happened and an 
epic. Also our search into the past is always confounded with the 
development of writing. But it is interesting that about the mid¬ 
dle of the third millennium B.C., or just before, there seems to 
arise a new feature of civilization in southern Mesopotamia. Be¬ 
fore what is known as the Early Dynastic II period, excavations 
show that towns or cities in this area were not fortified, had no 
defenses. But thereafter, in the principal regions of urban devel¬ 
opment, walled cities arose at a fairly constant distance from one 
another, the inhabitants farming the intervening fields and occa¬ 
