sionally fighting each other for control of them. At about this 
same period came the first epics that we know of, such as the 
several about Emmerkar, the builder of Uruk, and his relations 
with the neighboring city-state of Aratta. And their topics are 
precisely this relationship between neighboring states. 

My suggestion is that narratization arose as a codification of 
reports of past events. Writing up to this time — and it is only a 
few centuries since its invention — had been primarily an inven¬ 
tory device, a way of recording the stores and exchanges of a 
god's estates. Now it becomes a way of recording god-com¬ 
manded events, whose recitation after the fact becomes the nar¬ 
ratization of epics. Since reading, as I have suggested in the 
previous chapter, may have been hallucinating from the cunei¬ 
form, it may, then, have been a right temporal lobe function. 



THE CAUSES OF CONSCIOUSNESS 


219 


And since these were the recordings of the past, it is the right 
hemisphere that becomes at least the temporary seat of the remi¬ 
niscence of gods. 

We should note in passing how different the reading from 
stable cuneiform tablets in Mesopotamia was from the oral re¬ 
composing of the epics in Greece by a succession of aoidoi: It is 
possible that the oral tradition in Greece was an immense benefit 
in its demand that ‘Apollo’ or the ‘Muses’ in the right hemisphere 
become the sources of memory and learn how to narratize so as 
to keep the memories of Achilles together in the epic pattern. 
And then, in the chaos of transilience to consciousness, man 
assimilates both this memory ability and the ability to narratize 
memories into patterns. 


The Origin of the Analog T in Deceit 

Deceit may also be a cause of consciousness. But we must 
begin any discussion of the topic by making a distinction between 
instrumental or short-term deceit and long-term deceit, which 
might better be expressed as treachery. Several examples of the 
former have been described in chimpanzees. Female chimpan¬ 
zees will ‘presents in sexual posture to a male to whisk away his 
banana when his prandial interest is thus distracted. In another 
instance, a chimpanzee would fill his mouth with water, coax a 
disliked keeper over to the cage bars, and spit the water in his 
face. In both such instances, the deceit involved is a case of 
instrumental learning, a behavior pattern that is followed im¬ 
mediately by some rewarding state of affairs. And it needs no 
further explanation. 

But the kind of deceit that is treachery is quite another matter. 
It is impossible for an animal or for a bicameral man. Long-term 
deceit requires the invention of an analog self that can ‘do’ or ‘be’ 
something quite different from what the person actually does or 
is, as seen by his associates. It is an easy matter to imagine how 



220 


The Witness of History 


important for survival during these centuries such an ability 
would be. Overrun by some invader, and seeing his wife raped, a 
man who obeyed his voices would, of course, immediately strike 
out, and thus probably be killed. But if a man could be one thing 
on the inside and another thing on the outside, could harbor his 
hatred and revenge behind a mask of acceptance of the inevi¬ 
table, such a man would survive. Or, in the more usual situation 
of being commanded by invading strangers, perhaps in a strange 
language, the person who could obey superficially and have 
'within him’ another self with ’thoughts’ contrary to his disloyal 
actions, who could loathe the man he smiled at, would be much 
more successful in perpetuating himself and his family in the 
new millennium. 


Natural Selection 

My last comment brings up the possibility that natural selec¬ 
tion may have played a role in the beginning of consciousness. 
But in putting up this question, I wish to be very clear that 
consciousness is chiefly a cultural introduction, learned on the 
basis of language and taught to others, rather than any biological 
necessity. But that it had and still has a survival value suggests 
that the change to consciousness may have been assisted by a 
certain amount of natural selection. 

It is impossible to calculate what percentage of the civilized 
world died in these terrible centuries toward the end of the sec¬ 
ond millennium B.C. I suspect it was enormous. And death 
would come soonest to those who impulsively lived by their un¬ 
conscious habits or who could not resist the commandments of 
their gods to smite whatever strangers interfered with them. It is 
thus possible that individuals most obdurately bicameral, most 
obedient to their familiar divinities, would perish, leaving the 
genes of the less impetuous, the less bicameral, to endow the 
ensuing generations. And again we may appeal to the principle 



THE CAUSES OF CONSCIOUSNESS 


221 


of Baldwinian evolution as we did in our discussion of language. 
Consciousness must be learned by each new generation, and 
those biologically most able to learn it would be those most likely 
to survive. There is even Biblical evidence, as we shall see in a 
future chapter, that children obdurately bicameral were simply 
killed. !3 

Conclusion 

This chapter must not be construed as presenting any evidence 
about the origin of consciousness. That is the burden of several 
ensuing chapters. My purpose in this chapter has been descrip¬ 
tive and theoretical, to paint a picture of plausibility, of how and 
why a huge alteration in human mentality could have occurred 
toward the end of the second millennium B.C. 

In summary, I have sketched out several factors at work in 
the great transilience from the bicameral mind to consciousness: 
(1) the weakening of the auditory by the advent of writing; (2) 
the inherent fragility of hallucinatory control; (3) the unwork¬ 
ableness of gods in the chaos of historical upheaval; (4) the 
positing of internal cause in the observation of difference in 
others; (5) the acquisition of narratization from epics; (6) the 
survival value of deceit; and (7) a modicum of natural se¬ 
lection. 

I would conclude by bringing up the question of the strictness 
of all this. Did consciousness really come de novo into the world 
only at this time? Is it not possible that certain individuals at 
least might have been conscious in much earlier time? Possibly 
yes. As individuals differ in mentality today, so in past ages it 
might have been possible that one man alone, or more possibly a 
cult or clique, began to develop a metaphored space with analog 
selves. But such aberrant mentality in a bicameral theocracy 


*3 Zechariah, 13 : 3-4. 



222 The Witness of History 

would, I think, be short-lived and scarcely what we mean by 
consciousness today. 

It is the cultural norm that we are here concerned with, and 
the evidence that that cultural norm underwent a dramatic 
change is the substance of the following chapters. The three 
areas of the world where this transilience can be most easily 
observed are Mesopotamia, Greece, and among the bicameral 
refugees. We shall be discussing these in turn. 



CHAPTER 4 


A Change of Mind in 
Mesopotamia 

A bout 1230 b.c., Tukulti-Ninurta I, tyrant of Assyria, had a 
stone altar made that is dramatically different from anything 
that preceded it in the history of the world. In the carving on its 
face, Tukulti is shown twice, first as he approaches the throne of 
his god, and then as he kneels before it. The very double image 
fairly shouts aloud about this beggarly posture unheard of in a 
king before in history. As our eyes descend from the standing 
king to the kneeling king just in front of him, it is as emphatic as 
a moving picture, in itself a quite remarkable artistic discovery. 
But far more remarkable is the fact that the throne before which 
this first of the cruel Assyrian conquerors grovels is empty. 

No king before in history is ever shown kneeling. No scene 
before in history ever indicates an absent god. The bicameral 
mind had broken down. 

Hammurabi, as we have seen in II.2, is always carved standing 
and listening intently to a very present god. And countless cylin¬ 
der seals from his period show other personages listening eye to 
eye or being presented to the just-as-real figures of human¬ 
shaped gods. The Ashur altar of Tukulti is in shocking contrast 
to all previous depictions of the relations of gods and men. Nor is 
it simply some artistic idiosyncrasy. Other altar scenes of Tukulti 
are similarly devoid of gods. And cylinder seals of Tukulti's 
period also show the king approaching other nonpresent divin¬ 
ities, sometimes represented by a symbol. Such comparisons 



224 


The Witness of History 



Carving on the front of the Tukulti Altar now in the Berlin Mu¬ 
seum. Tukulti stands and then kneels before the empty throne of 
his god. Note the emphasis of the pointing forefinger. 


strongly suggest that the time of the breakdown of the bicameral 
mind in Mesopotamia is some time between Hammurabi and 
Tukulti. 

