This hypothesis is confirmed in the cuneiform remains of 
Tukulti and his period. What is known as the Epic of Tukulti- 
Ninurta 1 is the next clearly dated and well-preserved cuneiform 
document of note after Hammurabi. In the latter's time there is 
no doubt of the gods' eternal undeviant presence among men, 
directing them in their activities. But at the beginning of Tu- 
kulti's somewhat propagandalike epic, the gods of the Babylonian 
cities are angry with the Babylonian king for his inattention to 
them. They therefore forsake their cities, leaving the inhabitants 

1 Translations of this and the other texts discussed in this section can be found in 
W. G. Lambert, Babylonian Wisdom Literature (Oxford: Clarendon Press, i960). 




A CHANGE OF MIND IN MESOPOTAMIA 


225 


without divine guidance, so that the victory of Tukulti's Assyrian 
armies is assured. This conception of gods forsaking their hu¬ 
man slaves under any circumstances whatever is impossible in 
the Babylon of Hammurabi. It is something new in the world. 

Moreover, it is found throughout whatever literature remains 
of the last three centuries of the second millennium B.C. 

One who has no god, as he walks along the street, 

Headache envelops him like a garment. 

So one cuneiform tablet from about the reign of Tukulti. 

If the breakdown of the bicameral mind involved the involun¬ 
tary inhibition of temporal lobe areas of the right hemisphere, as 
we have conjectured earlier, this statement takes on an added in¬ 
terest. 

Also from about the same period come the famous three tablets 
and a questionable fourth named for its first words, Ludlul bel 
nemeqiy usually translated as "I will praise the lord of wisdom." 
"Wisdom" here is an unwarranted modern imposition. The trans¬ 
lation should be something closer to 'skill' or 'ability to control 
misfortune,' the lord here being Marduk, the highest god of Baby¬ 
lon. The first completely readable lines of the damaged first 
tablet are: 


My god has forsaken me and disappeared, 

My goddess has failed me and keeps at a distance. 

The good angel who walked beside me has departed. 

This is de facto the breakdown of the bicameral mind. The 
speaker is one Shubshi-Meshre-Shakkan (as we are told in the 
third tablet), a feudal lord possibly under Tukulti. He goes on to 
describe how, with the departure of his gods, his king becomes 
irreconciliably angry at him, how his feudal position of ruling a 



226 


The Witness of History 


city is taken away, how he thus becomes a social outcast. The 
second tablet describes how, in this godless state, he is the target 
of all disease and misfortune. Why have the gods left him? And 
he catalogs the prostrations, the prayers, and the sacrifices which 
have not brought them back. Priests and omen-readers are con¬ 
sulted, but still 

My god has not come to the rescue in taking me by the hand, 

Nor has my goddess shown pity on me by going at my side. 

In the third tablet, he realizes that it is the almighty Marduk who 
is behind all that is happening to him. In dreams, the angels of 
Marduk appear to him in bicameral fashion, and speak messages 
of consolation and promises of prosperity from Marduk himself. 
At this assurance, Shubshi is then delivered from his toils and 
illnesses and goes to the temple of Marduk to give thanks to the 
great god who "made the wind bear away my offenses." 

The mighty themes of the religions of the world are here 
sounded for the first time. Why have the gods left us? Like 
friends who depart from us, they must be offended. Our misfor¬ 
tunes are our punishments for our offenses. We go down on our 
knees, begging to be forgiven. And then find redemption in some 
return of the word of a god. These aspects of present-day religion 
find an explanation in the theory of the bicameral mind and its 
breakdown during this period. 

The world had long known rules and dues. They were divinely 
ordained and humanly obeyed. But the idea of right and wrong, 
the idea of a good man and of redemption from sin and divine 
forgiveness only begin in this uneasy questioning of why the 
hallucinated guidances can no longer be heard. 

The same dominant theme of lost gods cries out to us from the 
tablets known as The Babylonian Theodicy . 2 This dialogue be- 

2 A fascinating problem is why the reference to gods at this time becomes plural 
even when it takes a singular verb. This occurs in contexts which in previous litera¬ 
ture would have meant it was the personal god. This occurs in both the Ludlul, 



A CHANGE OF MIND IN MESOPOTAMIA 


227 


tween a sufferer and his advising friend is of an obviously later 
date, perhaps 900 B.C., but wails with the same pleas. Why have 
the gods left us? And since they control everything, why did they 
shower misfortune upon us? The poem also shimmers with a 
new sense of an individual or what we would call an analog self 
denoting a new consciousness. It ends with the ciy which has 
echoed through all later history: 

May the gods who have thrown me off give help, 

May the goddess who has abandoned me show mercy. 

From here to the psalms of the Old Testament is no great 
journey. There is no trace whatever of such concerns in any 
literature previous to the texts I am describing here. 

The consequences of the disappearance of auditory hallucina¬ 
tions from human mentality are profound and widespread, and 
occur on many different levels. One thing is the confusion of 
authority itself. What is authority? Rulers without gods to guide 
them are fitful and unsure. They turn to omens and divination, 
which we shall take up shortly. And as I have mentioned earlier, 
cruelty and oppression become the ways in which a ruler imposes 
his rule upon his subjects in the absence of auditory hallucina¬ 
tions. Even the king’s own authority in the absence of gods 
becomes questionable. Rebellion in the modern sense becomes 
possible. 

Indeed this new kind of rebellion is what happened to Tukulti 
himself. He had founded a whole new capital for Assyria across 
the Tigris from Ashur, naming it godlessly after himself — Kar- 
Tukultininurta. But, led by his own son and successor, his more 
conservative nobles imprisoned him in his new city, put it to the 
torch, and burned it to the ground, his fiery death leading his reign 


II:i2, 25, 33, as well as through the Theodicy, and later in the plural elohim of the 
Eloist contributions to the Old Testament. One should remember here the Muses of 
the Greeks and possibly the p ankush of Hittite tablets. Do and did hallucinations 
sound like choirs as their reliability is being neurologically weakened? 



228 


The Witness of History 


into legend. (He glimmers in the murky history of the Old 
Testament as Nimroda [Genesis:to] and in Greek myths as King 
Ninos. 4 ) Disorders and social chaos had of course happened 
before. But such a premeditated mutiny and parricide of a king 
is impossible to imagine in the god-obedient hierarchies of the 
bicameral age. 

But of much greater importance are the beginnings of some 
new cultural themes which are responses to this breakdown of 
the bicameral mind and its divine authority. History does not 
move by leaps into unrelated novelty, but rather by the selective 
emphasis of aspects of its own immediate past. And these new 
aspects of human history in response to the loss of divine author¬ 
ity are all developments and emphases out of the bicameral 
age. 

Prayer 

In the classical bicameral mind, that is, before its weakening 
by writing about 2500 B.C., I suggest that there was no hesitancy 
in the hallucinated voice and no occasion for prayer. A novel 
situation or stress, and a voice told you what to do. Certainly this 
is so in contemporary schizophrenic patients who are hallucinat¬ 
ing. They do not beg to hear their voices; it is unnecessary. In 
those few patients where this does happen, it is during recovery 
when the voices are no longer heard with the same frequency. 
But as civilizations and their interrelationships become more 
complex toward the end of the third millennium B.C., the gods 
are occasionally asked to respond to various requests. Usually, 
however, such requests are not what we think of as prayer. They 
consist of several stylized imprecations, such as the common 
ending of statue inscriptions: 

3 E. A. Speiser, "In Search of Nimrod," in Oriental and Biblical Studies, Collected 
Writings of E. A. Sfeiser, J. J. Finkelstein and Mosh Greenberg, eds. (Philadelphia: 
University of Pennsylvania Press, 1967), pp. 41-52. 

4 H. Lewy, "Nitokoris-Naqi'a," Journal of Near Eastern Studies, 1952, 11, 264- 
286. 



A CHANGE OF MIND IN MESOPOTAMIA 


229 


Whoever this image shall deface may Enlil his name destroy and 
his weapon breaks 

