
or the kind of praising which Gudea bestows on his gods in the 
great cylinder inscriptions from Lagash. A notable exception, 
however, are the very real prayers of Gudea in Cylinder A to his 
divine mother, asking her to explain the meaning of a dream. 
But this, like so much else with the enigmatic Gudea, is excep¬ 
tional. Prayers as the central important act of divine worship 
only become prominent after the gods are no longer speaking to 
man “face to face” (as Deuteronomy 34:10 expresses it). What 
was new in the time of Tukulti becomes everyday during the first 
millennium B.C., all, I suggest, as a result of the breakdown of 
the bicameral mind. A typical prayer begins: 


O lord, the strong one, the famous one, the one who knows 
all, splendid one, self-renewing one, perfect one, first-begotten 
ofMarduk . . . 


and so on for many more lines of titles and attributes, 


the one who holds cult-centers firm, the one who gathers to 
himself all cults . . . 


perhaps indicating the chaos of the hierarchy of divinities when 
they could no longer be heard, 


you watch over all men, you accept their supplications 


The suppliant then introduces himself and his petition: 


I, Balasu, son of his god, whose god is Nabu, whose goddess is 
Tashmeturn ... I am one who is weary, disturbed, whose 
body is very sick, I bow before thee . . . O lord, Wise One 

5 George A. Barton, The Royal Inscriptions of Sumer and Akkad (New Haven: 
Yale University Press, 1924), p. 113. 



230 


The Witness of History 


of the gods, by thy mouth command good for me; O Nabu, 

Wise One of the gods, by thy mouth may I come forth alive. 6 

The general form of prayer, beginning with emphatic praise of 
the god and ending with a personal petition, has not really 
changed since Mesopotamian times. The very exaltation of the 
god, and indeed the very idea of divine worship, is in contrast to 
the more matter-of-fact everyday relationship of god and man a 
thousand years earlier. 

An Origin of Angels 

In the so-called Neo-Sumerian period, at the end of the third 
millennium B.C., graphics, particularly cylinder seals, are full of 
'presentation' scenes: a minor god, often female, introduces an 
individual, presumably the owner of the seal, to a major god. 
This is entirely consistent with what we have suggested was 
likely in a bicameral kingdom, namely that each individual had 
his personal god who seemed to intercede with higher gods on the 
person's behalf. And this type of presentation or intercession 
scene continues well into the second millennium B.C. 

But then a dramatic change occurs. First, the major gods 
disappear from such scenes, even as from the altar of Tukulti- 
Ninurta. There then occurs a period where the individual's per¬ 
sonal god is shown presenting him to the god's symbol only. And 
then, at the end of the second millennium B.C., we have the 
beginning of hybrid human-animal beings as the intermediaries 
and messengers between the vanished gods and their forlorn 
followers. Such messengers were always part bird and part hu¬ 
man, sometimes like a bearded man with two sets of wings, 
crowned like a god, and often holding a kind of purse supposedly 
containing ingredients for a purification ceremony. These sup¬ 
posed personnel of the celestial courts are found with increasing 

6 Translated by H. W. F. Saggs in his The Greatness That Was Babylon (New 
York: Mentor Books, 1962), p. 312. 



A CHANGE OF MIND IN MESOPOTAMIA 


231 


frequency in Assyrian cylinder seals and carvings. In early in¬ 
stances, such angels, or genii, as Assyriologists more often call 
them, are seen introducing an individual to the symbol of a god as 
in the old presentation scenes. But soon even this is abandoned. 
And by the beginning of the first millennium B.C., we find such 
angels in a countless diversity of scenes, sometimes with hu¬ 
mans, sometimes in various struggles with other hybrid beings. 
Sometimes they have the heads of birds. Or they are winged 
bulls or winged lions with human heads to act as wardens for 
such palaces as that at Nimrud in the ninth century or guarding 
the gates of Khorsabad in the eighth century B.C. Or, hawk¬ 
headed and broad-winged, they may be seen following around 
behind a king, with a cone which has been dipped in a small pail, 
as in a wall carving of Assurnasirpal in the ninth century B.C., a 
scene like the anointing of baptism. In none of these depictions 
does the angel seem to be speaking or the human listening. It is a 
silent visual scene in which the auditory actuality of the earlier 
bicameral act is becoming a supposed and assumed silent rela¬ 
tionship. It becomes what we would call mythological. 


Demons 

But angels were not enough to fill in the initiative vacuum left 
by the retreating gods. And besides, being messengers from the 
great gods, they were usually associated with the king and his 
lords. For the common people, whose personal gods no longer 
help them, a very different kind of semidivine being now casts a 
terrible shadow over everyday life. 

Why should malevolent demons have entered human history 
at this particular time? Speech, even if incomprehensible, is 
man’s chief way of greeting others. And if the other does not 
reply to an initiated greeting, a readiness for the other’s hostility 
will follow. Because the personal gods are silent, they must be 
angry and hostile. Such logic is the origin of the idea of evil 



232 


The Witness of History 


which first appears in the history of mankind during the break¬ 
down of the bicameral mind. Since there is no doubt whatever 
that the gods rule over us as they will, what can we do to appease 
their wishes to harm us, and propitiate them into friendship once 
again? Thus the prayer and sacrifice that we have referred to 
earlier in this chapter, and thus the virtue of humility before a 
god. 

As the gods recede into special people called prophets or ora¬ 
cles, or are reduced to darkly communicating with men in angels 
and omen, there whooshes into this power vacuum a belief in 
demons. The very air of Mesopotamia became darkened with 
them. Natural phenomena took on their characteristics of hostil¬ 
ity toward men, a raging demon in the sandstorm sweeping the 
desert, a demon of fire, scorpion-men guarding the rising sun 
beyond the mountains, Pazuzu the monstrous wind demon, the 
evil Croucher, plague demons, and the horrible Asapper demons 
that could be warded off by dogs. Demons stood ready to seize a 
man or woman in lonely places, while sleeping or eating or 
drinking, or particularly at childbirth. They attached themselves 
to men as all the illnesses of mankind. Even the gods could be 
attacked by demons, and this sometimes explained their absence 
from the control of human affairs. 

Protection against these evil divinities — something inconceiv¬ 
able in the bicameral age — took many forms. Dating from early 
in the first millennium B.C. are many thousands of prophylactic 
amulets, to be worn around the neck or wrist. They usually 
depict the particular demon whose power is to be inhibited, sur¬ 
mounted perhaps by gesticulating priests shooing the evil away, 
and often underwritten with an incantation invoking the great 
gods against the threatened horror, such as: 

Incantation. That one that has approached the house scares me 
from my bed, rends me, makes me see nightmares. To the 
god Bine, gatekeeper of the underworld, may they appoint him, 



A CHANGE OF MIND IN MESOPOTAMIA 


233 


by the decree of Ninurta prince of the underworld. By the de¬ 
cree of Marduk who dwells in Esagilia in Babylon. Let door 
and bolt know that I am under the protection of the two Lords. 
Incantation .7 

Innumerable rituals were devoutly mumbled and mimed all over 
Mesopotamia throughout the first millennium B.C. to counteract 
these malign forces. The higher gods were beseeched to inter¬ 
cede. All illnesses, aches, and pains were ascribed to malevolent 
demons until medicine became exorcism. Most of our knowledge 
of these antidemoniac practices and their extent comes from the 
huge collection made about 630 B.C. by Ashurbanipal at Nineveh. 
Literally thousands of extant tablets from this library describe 
such exorcisms, and thousands more list omen after omen, de¬ 
picting a decaying civilization as black with demons as a piece of 
rotting meat with flies. 


A New Heaven 

As we have seen in earlier chapters, the gods customarily had 
locations, even though their voices were ubiquitously heard by 
their servants. These were often dwellings such as ziggurats or 
household shrines. And while some gods could be associated with 
celestial bodies such as the sun, moon, or stars, and the greatest, 
such as Anu, lived in the sky, the majority of gods were earth- 
dwellers along with men. 

All this changes as we enter the first millennium B.C., when, as 
we are proposing, the gods’ voices are no longer heard. As the 
earth has been left to angels and demons, so it seems to be 
accepted that the dwelling place of the now absent gods is with 
