Anu in the sky. And this is why the forms of angels are always 
winged: they are messengers from the sky where the gods live. 7 8 

7 Translated by Saggs, p. 291. 

8 If later copies of the well-known Enuma Elish, the Neo-Babylonian name for 
the epic of creation, are to be taken on their face value, this celestialization of the 



234 


The Witness of History 


The use of the word for sky or heaven in conjunction with gods 
becomes more and more common in Assyrian-literature. And 
when the story of the great flood (the origin of the Biblical story) 
is added into the Gilgamesh stories in the seventh century B.C., it 
is used as a rationalization for the departure of the gods from 
earth: 


Even the gods were terror-stricken at the deluge. 
They fled and ascended to the heaven of Anu.’ 


This celestialization of the once-earthly gods is confirmed by 
an important change in the building of ziggurats. As we saw in 
11.2, the original ziggurats of Mesopotamian history were built 
around a central great hall called the gigunu where the statue of 
the god 'lived' in the rituals of his human slaves. But by the end 
of the second millennium B.C., the entire concept of the ziggurat 
seems to have become altered. It now has no central room what¬ 
ever and the statues of the major gods are less and less the 
centers of elaborate ritual. For the sacred tower of the ziggurat 
was now a landing stage to facilitate the gods' descent to earth 
from the heaven to which they had vanished. This is definitely 
known from texts of the first millennium B.C., which even make 
references to the "boat of heaven." The exact date at which this 
change took place is a difficult matter, for the extant ziggurats 
have been badly damaged and, even worse, sometimes ’restored’. 
But I suggest that all of the many ziggurats which the Assyrians 
built beginning with the reign of Tulkulti-Ninurta were of this 


major gods began as early as the latter half of the second millennium b.c. See the 
translation by E. A. Speiser in Near Eastern Texts Relating to the Old Testament, 
J. B. Pritchard, ed. (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1950). Its title is its 
first two words and means "When on high . . Like so much else, it was 
discovered in the great library of Ashurbanipal of the seventh century b.c. It is a 
copy, and the originals may have dated back to the second millennium b.c. 

9 Gilgamesh, Tablet II, lines 113-114, in Alexander Heidel, The Gilgamesh Efic 
and Old Testament Parallels, 2nd ed. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1949). 



A CHANGE OF MIND IN MESOPOTAMIA 235 

sort, huge pedestals for the return of the gods from heaven and 
not houses for earthly gods as before. 

The ziggurat built by Sargon in the eighth century B.C. for his 
huge new city of Khorsabad is calculated from recent excavations 
to have surged up in seven stages 140 feet above the surrounding 
city, its summit shining with a temple dedicated to Ashur, still the 
owning, if unheard, god of Assyria. There is no other temple to 
Ashur at Khorsabad. Descending from the temple was no ordi¬ 
nary stairway as in previous ziggurats, but a long spiral ramp 
winding around the core of the tower down which Ashur could 
walk, when or if he ever landed and did return to the city. 

Similarly, the Ziggurat of Neo-Babylon, the Biblical Tower of 
Babel, was no god’s house as in the truly bicameral age, but a 
heavenly landing for the now celestialized gods. Built in the 
seventh and sixth centuries B.C., it soared 300 feet high, again 
with seven stages, pinnacling in a brilliant blue-glazed temple for 
Marduk. Its very name indicates this use: E-temen-an-ki, temple 
(E) of the receiving platform ( temen ) between heaven (an) and 
earth ( ki ). 10 The otherwise senseless passage of Genesis (11:2- 
9) is certainly a rewrite of some Neo-Babylonian legend of just 
such a landing by Yahweh who in the company of other gods 
“come down to see the city and the tower,” and thereupon “con¬ 
found their language that they may not understand one another’s 
speech.” The latter may be a narratization of the garbling of hal¬ 
lucinated voices in their decline. 

The tirelessly curious Herodotus in the fifth century B.C. 
trudged up the steep stairs and spiraling ramps of Etemenanki to 
see if there was a god or idol at the top: as in the altar-face of 

Tukulti, there was nothing but an empty throne. 11 

* * * 


10 For my translation of temen and possible alternatives, see James B. Nies’ glos¬ 
sary in Ur Dynasty Tablets (Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1920), p. 171. 

11 Histories, 1: 181. Another empty throne scene is shown on Stela 91027 in the 
British Museum with Esarhaddon in a pose similar to Tukulti’s. 



236 


The Witness of History 
DIVINATION 


So far, we have just looked at the evidence for the breakdown of 
the bicameral mind. This evidence is, I feel, fairly substantial. 
The absence of gods in bas-reliefs and cylinder seals, the cries 
about lost gods that wail out of the silent cuneiforms, the empha¬ 
sis on prayer, the introduction of new kinds of silent divinities, 
angels and demons, the new idea of heaven, all strongly indicate 
that the hallucinated voices called gods are no longer the guiding 
companions of men. 

What then takes over their function? How is action initiated? 
If hallucinated voices are no longer adequate to the escalating 
complexities of behavior, how can decisions be made? 

Subjective consciousness, that is, the development on the basis 
of linguistic metaphors of an operation space in which an ‘I’ could 
narratize out alternative actions to their consequences, was of 
course the-great world result of this dilemma. But a more primi¬ 
tive solution, and one that antedates consciousness as well as 
paralleling it through history, is that complex of behaviors known 
as divination. 

These attempts to divine the speech of the now silent gods 
work out into an astonishing variety and complexity. But I sug¬ 
gest that this variety is best understood as four main types, which 
can be ordered in terms of their historical beginning and which 
can be interpreted as successive approaches toward conscious¬ 
ness. These four are omens, sortilege, augury, and spontaneous 
divination. 

Omen and Omen Texts 

The most primitive, clumsy, but enduring method of discover¬ 
ing the will of silent gods is the simple recording of sequences of 
unusual or important events. In contrast to all other types of 
divination, it is entirely passive. It is simply an extension of 



A CHANGE OF MIND IN MESOPOTAMIA 


237 


something common to all mammalian nervous systems, namely, 
that if an organism experiences B after A, he will have a ten¬ 
dency to expect B the next time that A occurs. Since omens are 
really a particular example of this when expressed in language, 
we can say that the origin of omens is simply in animal nature 
rather than in civilized culture per se. 

Omens or sequences of events that might be expected to recur 
were probably present in a trivial way throughout bicameral 
times. But they had little importance. Nor was there any neces¬ 
sity to study such sequences, since the hallucinated voices of gods 
made all the decisions in novel situations. There are, for ex¬ 
ample, no Sumerian omen texts whatever. While the first traces 
of omens occur among the Semitic Akkadians, it is really only 
after the loss of the bicameral mind toward the end of the second 
millennium B.C. that such omen texts proliferate everywhere and 
swell out to touch almost every aspect of life imaginable. By 
the first millennium B.C., huge collections of them are made. In 
the library of King Ashurbanipal at Nineveh about 650 B.C., at 
least 30 percent of the twenty to thirty thousand tablets come 
into the category of omen literature. Each entry in these tedious 
irrational collections consists of an if-clause or protasis followed 
by a then-clause or apodosis. And there were many classes of 
omens, terrestrial omens dealing with everyday life: 

If a town is set on a hill, it will not 
be good for the dweller within that town. 

If black ants are seen on the foundations 
which have been laid, that house will get 
built; the owner of that house will live to 
grow old. 

If a horse enters a man's house, and bites 
either an ass or a man, the owner of the 
house will die and his household will be 
scattered. 



238 


The Witness of History 


If a fox runs into the public square, 
that town will be devastated. 

If a man unwittingly treads on a lizard 
and kills it, he will prevail over his 
adversary. 12 

And so on endlessly, bearing on all those aspects of life that in a 
previous age would have been under the guidance of gods. They 
can be construed as a kind of first approach to narratization, 
doing by verbal formulae what consciousness does in a more 
complex way. Rarely are we able to see any logical dependency 
of prediction on portent, the connection often being as simple as 
word associations or connotations. 

There were also teratological omens beginning, "If a foetus, 
etc.," dealing with abnormal births both human and animal.^ 
