The science of medicine is actually founded in medical omens, a 
series of texts that begin, "When the conjuration priest comes to 
the house of a sick man," and follow with more or less reasonable 
prognoses correlated with various symptoms.^ And omens 
based on the appearance of facial and bodily characteristics in 
the client or in persons he encounters, which, incidentally, give 
us the best description we have of what these people looked 
likeds And omens in the time dimension: menologies which 
stated which months were favorable or unfavorable for given 
undertakings, and hemerologies that concerned themselves with 
propitious or unpropitious days of each month. And omens that 
are the beginning of meteorology and astronomy, whole series of 
tablets being devoted, to phenomena of the sun, the planets, the 
stars and the moon, their times and circumstances of disappear¬ 
ance, eclipses, omens connected with halos, strange cloud forma- 

12 These illustrations are all taken from Saggs, pp. 308-309. 

*3 Erie Leichty, "Teratological omens," La Divination en Mesopotamie Ancienne 
etdans les Regions Voisines, pp. 131-139. 

u J. V. Kinnier Wilson, "Two medical texts from Nimrud," Iraq, 1956, 18: 
1 30-46- 

*5 J. V. Kinnier Wilson, "The Nimrud catalog of medical and physiognomical 
omina," Iraq, 1962, 24: 52-62. 



A CHANGE OF MIND IN MESOPOTAMIA 


239 


tions, the divine meaning of thunder and rain, hail and earth¬ 
quakes as predictions of peace and war, harvest and flood, or the 
movement of planets, particularly Venus, among the fixed stars. 
By the fifth century B.C., this use of stars to obtain the intentions 
of the silent gods who now live among them has become our 
familiar horoscopes, in which the conjunction of the stars at birth 
results in predictions of the future and personality of the child. 
History also begins, if vaguely, in omen texts, the apodoses or 
"then-clauses" of some early texts perhaps preserving some faint 
historical information in a unique and characteristically Mesopo¬ 
tamian variety of historiography. 16 Mankind deprived of his 
gods, like a child separated from his mother, is having to learn 
about his world in fear and trembling. 

Dream omens became (as they still are) a major source of 
divination. 1 ? Particularly in the late Assyrian period during the 
first millennium B.C., dream omens were collected into dream 
books such as the Ziqiqu where some associative principle be¬ 
tween the dream event and its apodosis is apparent, e.g., a dream 
of the loss of one's cylinder seal portends the death of a son. But 
omens of whatever type can only decide so much. One has to 
wait for the portent to occur. N ovel situations do not wait. 

Sortilege 

Sortilege or the casting of lots differs from omens in that it is 
active and designed to provoke the gods' answers to specific ques¬ 
tions in novel situations. It consisted of throwing marked sticks, 
stones, bones, or beans upon the ground, or picking one out of a 
group held in a bowl, or tossing such markers in the lap of a tunic 
until one fell out. Sometimes it was to answer yes or no, at other 

16 See J. J. Finkelstein, “Mesopotamian historiography," Proceedings of the Ameri¬ 
can Philosophical Society, 1963, pp. 461-472. 

*7 See A. Leo Oppenheim, "Mantic dreams in the Ancient Near East," in G. E. 
von Grunbaum and Roger Caillois, eds., The Dream and Human Societies (Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 1966), pp. 341-350. 



240 


The Witness of History 


times to choose one out of a group of men, plots, or alternatives. 
But this simplicity — even triviality to us — should not blind us 
from seeing the profound psychological problem involved, as well 
as appreciating its remarkable historical importance. We are so 
used to the huge variety of games of chance, of throwing dice, 
roulette wheels, etc., all of them vestiges of this ancient practice 
of divination by lots, that we find it difficult to really appreciate 
the significance of this practice historically. It is a help here to 
realize that there was no concept of chance whatever until very 
recent times. Therefore, the discovery (how odd to think of it as 
a discovery!) of deciding an issue by throwing sticks or beans on 
the ground was an extremely momentous one for the future of 
mankind. For, because there was no chance, the result had to be 
caused by the gods whose intentions were being divined. 

As to the psychology of sortilege, I would call your attention to 
two points of interest. First, this practice is very specifically 
invented in culture to supplement right hemisphere function 
when that function, following the breakdown of the bicameral 
mind, is no longer as accessible as when it was coded linguisti¬ 
cally in the voices of gods. We know from laboratory studies that 
it is the right hemisphere that predominately processes spatial 
and pattern information. It is better at fitting parts of things into 
patterns as in Koh's Block Test, at perceiving the location and 
quantity of dots in a pattern or of patterns of sound such as 
melodies. 18 Now the problem that sortilege is trying to solve is 
something of the same kind, that of ordering parts of the pattern, 
of choosing who is to do what, or what piece of land goes to 
which person. Originally, I suggest, in simpler societies, such 
decisions were easily made by the hallucinated voices called gods, 
which were involved primarily with the right hemisphere. And 
when the gods no longer accomplished this function, perhaps 
because of the increasing complication of such decisions, sorti- 

18 D. Kimura, "Functional Asymmetry of the Brain in Dichotic Listening," Cortex, 
1967, 3: 163. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1971, 23: 46. 



A CHANGE OF MIND IN MESOPOTAMIA 


241 


lege came into history as a substitute for this right hemisphere 
function. 

The second point of psychological interest is that the throwing 
of lots, like consciousness itself, has metaphor as its basis. In the 
language of 1.2, the unexpressed commands of the gods compose 
the metaphrand which is to be lexically widened, and the meta- 
phier is the pair or assembly of lots, be they sticks, beans, or 
stones. The paraphiers are the distinguishing marks or words on 
the lots which then project back into the metaphrand as the 
command of the particular god invoked. What is important here 
is to understand provoked divination such as sortilege as involv¬ 
ing the same kind of generative processes that develop conscious¬ 
ness, but in an exopsychic nonsubjective manner. 

As with omen texts, the roots of sortilege go back into the 
bicameral age. The earliest mention of throwing lots appears to 
be in legal tablets dating from the middle of the second millen¬ 
nium B.C., but it is only toward its end that the practice becomes 
widespread in important decisions: to assign shares of an estate 
among the sons (as at Susa), or shares of temple income to 
certain officials of the sanctuary, to establish a sequence among 
persons of equal status for various purposes. This was not simply 
for practical purposes, as it would be with us, but always to find 
out the commands of a god. Around 833 B.C., the new year in 
Assyria was always named after some high official. The particu¬ 
lar official to be so honored was chosen by means of a clay die on 
the faces of which the names of the various high officials were 
inscribed, the various sides of the cube being inscribed with 
prayers to Ashur to make that particular side turn up. 1 ? While 
many Assyrian texts from this time on refer to various types of 
sortilege, it is difficult to estimate just how widespread the prac¬ 
tice was in decision-making, and whether it was used by the 

*9 An illustration of this may be found in W. W. Hallo and W. K. Simpson, 
Ancient Near East (New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1971), p, 150; see also 
Oppenheim, p. too. 



242 


The Witness of History 


ordinary people in more mundane decisions. We know that it 
became common among the Hittites, and its occurrence in the 
Old Testament will be referred to in a later chapter. 


Augury 

A third type of divination and one that is closer to the struc¬ 
ture of consciousness is what I shall call qualitative augury. Sor¬ 
tilege is ordinal, ordering by rank a set of given possibilities. But 
the many methods of qualitative augury are designed to divine a 
great deal more information from the unspeaking gods. It is the 
difference between a digital and an analog computer. Its first 
form, as described in three cuneiform texts dating from about the 
middle of the second millennium B.C., consisted of pouring oil 
into a bowl of water held in the lap, the movement of the oil in 
relation to the surface or to the rim of the bowl portending the 
gods' intentions concerning peace or prosperity, health or disease. 
Here the metaphrand is the intention or even action of a god, not 
just his words as in sortilege. The metaphier is the oil moving 
about the surface of the water, to which the movements and 
commands of the gods are similar. The paraphiers are the spe¬ 
cific shapes and proximities of the oil whose paraphrands are the 
contours of the gods' decisions and actions. 

Augury in Mesopotamia always has a cultic status. It was 
performed by a special priest called the baru, surrounded with 
ritual, and preceded by a prayer to the god to reveal his intentions 
through the oil or whatever medium. 20 And as we enter the first 
millennium B.C., the methods and techniques of the baru break 
out into an astonishing diversity of metaphiers for the gods' in¬ 
tentions: Not only oil but the movements of smoke rising from a 
censer of incense held in the lap of the diviner, 21 or the form of 

20 See Oppenheim, pp. 208, 212. 

21 A lack of later cuneiform tablets referring to oil on water suggests this practice 
went out of use fairly early. An exception is the reference of Joseph in Genesis-44:5 
to the precious silver cup which he uses for drinking and for private divining, the 
date of this being about 600 B.C. See my II.6, note 4. 



A CHANGE OF MIND IN MESOPOTAMIA 


243 
