

hot wax dropped into water, or the patterns of dots made at 
random, or the shapes and patterns of ashes, and then sacrificed 
animals. 

Extispicy, as divining from the exta of sacrificed animals is 
called, becomes the most important type of induced analog 
augury during the first millennium B.C. The idea of sacrifice 
itself, of course, originated in the feeding of the hallucinogenic 
idols as we saw in II.2. With the breakdown of the bicameral 
mind, the idols lost their hallucinogenic properties and became 
mere statues, but the feeding ceremonies now addressed to ab¬ 
sent gods remained in the various ceremonies as sacrifices. It is 
thus not surprising that animals rather than oil, wax, smoke, etc., 
became the more important media of communication with the 
gods. 

Extispicy differs from other methods in that the metaphrand is 
explicitly not the speech or actions of gods, but their writing. The 
baru first addressed the gods Shamash and Adad with requests 
that they "write" their message upon the entrails of the animal, 22 
or occasionally whispered this request into its ears before it was 
killed. He then investigated in traditional sequence the animal's 
organs — windpipe, lungs, liver, gall bladder, how the coils of 
the intestines were arranged — looking for deviations from the 
normal state, shape, and coloring. Any atrophy, hypertrophy, 
displacement, special markings, or other abnormalities, particu¬ 
larly of the liver, was a divine message metaphorically related to 
divine action. The corpus of texts dealing with extispicy outnum¬ 
bers all other kinds of augury texts and deserves much more 
careful study. From its earliest and very cursory mention in the 
second millennium, to the extensive collections of the Seleucid 
period around 250 B.C., the history and local development of 
extispicy as a means of exopsychic thought is an area where the 
tablets are simply awaiting the ordering of proper research. Of 
particular interest is that in the late period the markings and 

22 See J. Nougayrol "Presages medicaux de Tharuspicine babylonierine," Semittca, 
1956 , 6, 5-14. 



244 


The Witness of History 


discolorations are described in an arcane technical terminology 
similar to what occurred among medieval alchemists . 2 3 Parts of 
the exta of the sacrificed animal are referred to as "door of the 
palace," "path," "yoke,” and "embankment" and symbolize these 
locations and objects, creating a metaphor world from which to 
read out what to do. Some of the late tablets even have diagrams 
of the coils of the intestines and their meaning. Clay and bronze 
models of the liver and lungs, sometimes elaborate, sometimes 
crude, have been unearthed in various sites; some were probably 
used for instructional purposes. But since the raw organs them¬ 
selves were sometimes sent to the king as proof of a particular 
divine message, such models may also have served as a less 
redolent way of reporting an actual observation.^ 

Please remember the metaphorical nature of all such activity, 
for the actual functions here are similar to though on a different 
level from the very inner workings of consciousness. That the 
size and shape of the liver or other organ is a metaphier of the size 
and shape of the intentions of a god is, on an ultrasimple level, 
similar to what we do in consciousness in making metaphor spaces 
Containing' metaphor obj ects and actions. 

Spontaneous Divination 

Spontaneous divination differs from the three preceding types 
only by being unconstrained and free from any particular 
medium. It is really a generalization of all types. As before, the 
gods’ commands, intentions, or purposes are the metaphrand 
while the metaphier is anything that might be seen at the mo¬ 
ment and related to the concern of the diviner. The outcomes of 
undertakings or the intentions of a god are thus read out from 
whatever object the diviner happens to see or hear. 

2 3 See Mary I. Hussey, "Anatomical nomenclature in an Akaadian omen text,” 
Journal of Cuneiform Studies, 1948, 2: 21-32, as mentioned by Oppenheim on p. 216. 

2 4 Robert H. Pfeiffer, State Letters of Assyria (New Haven: American Oriental 
Society, 1935), Letter 335. 



A CHANGE OF MIND IN MESOPOTAMIA 


245 


The reader may try it for himself. Think of some problem or 
concern in a vague kind of way. Then look out the window 
suddenly or around where you are and take the first thing your 
eye lights upon, and try to 'read' out of it something about your 
problem. Sometimes nothing will happen. But at other times the 
message will simply flash into your mind. I have just done this as 
I write and from my north window see a television aerial against 
a twilight sky. I may divine this as meaning I am being much too 
speculative, picking up fleeting suggestions from flimsy air — an 
unfortunate truth if I am to face these matters at all. I again 
think vaguely of my concerns and, walking about, suddenly cast 
my eyes on the floor of an adjoining room where an assistant has 
been building an apparatus, and see a frayed wire with several 
strands at the end. I divine that my problem in this chapter is to 
tie together several different strands and loose ends of evidence. 
And so on. 

I have not come upon this type of divining in a Mesopotamian 
text. Yet I feel sure that it must have become a common practice, 
if only because spontaneous divination is both common and im¬ 
portant in the Old Testament, as we shall see in a future chapter. 
And it remains a common method among many types of seers 
well into the Middle Ages. 2 s 

These then are the four main types of divination, omens, sorti¬ 
lege, augury, and spontaneous divination. And I would draw to 
your attention that they can be considered as exopsychic methods 
of thought or decision-making, and that they are successively 
closer and closer proximations to the structure of consciousness. 
The fact that all of them have roots that go back far into the 
bicameral period should not detract from the force of the general- 

“5 Spontaneous divination was commonly used by Bedouin prognosticators around 
AD. 1000, for example. See Alfred Guillaume, Prophecy and Divination Among the 
Hebrews and Other Semites (New York: Harper, 1938), p. 127. It is indeed an 
ingredient of everyday thought processes as well as prominent in intellectual dis¬ 
covery. 



246 


The Witness of History 


ization that they became the important media of decision only 
after the breakdown of the bicameral mind as described in the 
first part of this chapter. 


THE EDGE OF SUBJECTIVITY 

So far in this heterogeneous chapter, we have been dealing with 
the breakdown of the bicameral mind in Mesopotamia, and 
the responses to this alteration in human mentality, the effort to 
find out what to do by other means when voices are no longer 
heard in hallucination. That a further method for finding out 
what to do was consciousness, and that it first occurs in the 
history of this planet here in Mesopotamia toward the end of the 
second millennium B.C. is a much more difficult proposition. The 
reasons are chiefly in our inability to translate cuneiform with the 
same exactness with which we can translate Greek or Hebrew, 
and to proceed with the kind of analysis which I attempt in the 
next chapter. The very words in cuneiform that might be rele¬ 
vant to tracing the metaphorical buildup of consciousness and 
mind-space are precisely those that are extremely difficult to 
translate with precision. Let me state categorically that a truly 
definitive study of changes in Mesopotamian mentality over this 
second millenium B.C. will have to wait for another level of 
scholarship in cuneiform studies. Such a task will include trac¬ 
ing out the changes in referent and frequency of words that later 
come to describe events which we call conscious. One, for ex¬ 
ample, is Sha (also transliterated as Shah or Shag), a word in 
Akkadian, whose basic meaning seems to be "in" or "inside." Pre¬ 
fixed to the name of a city, it means "in the city." Prefixed to the 
name of a man, it means "in the man," possibly a beginning of 
the interiorization of attribution. 

I hope to be forgiven for saying rather tritely that these ques¬ 
tions and so many others must remain for further research. So 



A CHANGE OF MIND IN MESOPOTAMIA 


247 


swiftly are new sites being discovered and new texts translated, 
that even ten years frarn now we shall have a much clearer 
picture, particularly if the data are looked at from the point of view 
of this chapter. The most I feel I can establish here at this time is 
simply a few comparisons of a literary kind which suggest that 
such a psychological change as consciousness actually took place. 
These comparisons will be among letters, building inscriptions, 
and versions of Gilgamesh. 


Assyrian and Old Babylonian betters Compared 

My first comparison to suggest this change from bicamerality 
to subjectivity is between the cuneiform tablet letters of the sev¬ 
enth century B.C., Assyria, and those of the old Babylonian kings 
a millennium earlier. The letters of Hammurabi and his era are 
factual, concrete, behavioristic, formalistic, commanding, and 
without greeting. They are not addressed to the recipient, but 
actually to the tablet itself, and always begin: unto A say, thus 
says B. And then follows what B has to say to A. We should 
remember here what I have suggested elsewhere, that reading, 
having developed from hallucinating from idols and then from 
pictographs, had become during later bicameral times a matter of 
hearing the cuneiform. And hence the addressee of the tablets. 

The subjects of Old Babylonian letters are always objective. 
Hammurabi's letters, for example (all possibly written by Ham¬ 
murabi himself since they are cut by the same hand), are written 
for vassal kings and officers in his hegemony about sending such 
a person to him, or directing so much lumber to Babylon, specify¬ 
ing in one instance, "only vigorous trunks shall they cut down," or 
regulating the exchanges of corn for cattle, or where workmen 
should be sent. Rarely are reasons given. Purposes never. 

