
Unto Sin-idinnam say: thus says Hammurabi. I wrote you 
telling you to send Enubi-Marduk to me. Why, then, haven't 



248 The Witness of History 

you sent him? When you see this tablet, send Enubi-Marduk 
into my presence. See that he travels night and day, that he 
may arrive swiftly. 26 

And the letters rarely go beyond this in complication of 'thought' 
or relationship. 

A more interesting letter is a command to bring several con¬ 
quered idols to Babylon: 

Unto Sin-idinnam say: thus says Hammurabi. I am sending 
now Zikir-ilisu the officer, and Hammarabi-bani the Dugab- 
officer to bring the goddesses of Emutbalum. Let the goddesses 
travel in a processional boat as in a shrine as they come to Baby¬ 
lon. And the temple-women shall follow after them. For the 
food of the goddesses, you shall provide sheep . . . Let them 
not delay, but swiftly reach Babylon. 2 ? 

This letter is interesting in showing the everyday nature of the 
relationship of god and man in Old Babylon, as well as the fact 
that the deities are somehow expected to eat on their trip. 

Going from Hammurabi's letters to the state letters of Assyria 
of the seventh century B.C. is like leaving a thoughtless tedium of 
undisobeyable directives and entering a rich sensitive frightened 
grasping recalcitrant aware world not all that different from our 
own. The letters are addressed to people, not tablets, and prob¬ 
ably were not heard, but had to be read aloud. The subjects 
discussed have changed in a thousand years to a far more exten¬ 
sive list of human activities. But they are also imbedded in a 
texture of deceit and divination, speaking of police investigations, 
complaints of lapsing ritual, paranoid fears, bribery, and pathetic 
appeals of imprisoned officers, all things unknown, unmentioned, 
and impossible in the world of Hammurabi. Even sarcasm, as in 

26 Transliterated and translated by L. W. King in Letters and Inscriptions of 
Hammurabi (London: Luzac, 1900), Vol. 3, Letter 46, p. 9+f. 

2 ? Ibid., Vol. 3, Letter 2 p. 6f. 



A CHANGE OF MIND IN MESOPOTAMIA 


249 


a letter from an Assyrian king to his restive acculturated deputies 
in conquered Babylon about 670 B.C.: 

Word of the king to the pseudo-Babylonians. I am well . . . 

So you, so help you heaven, have turned yourselves into Baby¬ 
lonians! And you keep bringing up against my servants charges 
— false charges, — which you and your master have concocted 
. . . The document (nothing but windy words and impor¬ 
tunities! ) which you have sent me, I am returning to you, after 
replacing it into its seals. Of course you will say, "What is he 
sending back to us?" From the Babylonians, my servants and 
my friends are writing me: When I open and read, behold, 
the goodness of the shrines, birds of sin . . , 28 

And then the tablet is broken off. 

A further interesting difference is their depiction of an Assyr¬ 
ian king. The Babylonian kings of the early second millennium 
were confident and fearless, and probably did not have to be too 
militaristic. The cruel Assyrian kings, whose palaces are virile 
with muscular depictions of lion hunts and grappling with claw¬ 
ing beasts, are in their letters indecisive frightened creatures 
appealing to their astrologers and diviners to contact the gods and 
tell them what to do and when to do it. These kings are told by 
their diviners that they are beggars or that their sins are making 
a god angry; they are told what to wear, or what to eat, or not to 
eat until further notice: 2 ? "Something is happening in the skies $ 
have you noticed? As far as I am concerned, my eyes are fixed. I 
say, 'What phenomenon have I failed to see, or failed to report to 
the king? Have I failed to observe something that does not 
pertain to his lot?' ... As to that eclipse of the sun of which 
the king spoke, the eclipse did not take place. On the 27th I shall 
look again and send in a report. From whom does the lord my 
king fear misfortune? I have no information whatsoever.'^ 0 

28 Pfeiffer, Letter 80. 

2 9 Pfeiffer, Letters 265, 439, and 553. 

80 Pfeiffer, Letter 315. 



250 


The Witness of History 


Does a comparison of these letters, a thousand years apart, 
demonstrate the alteration of mentality with which we are here 
concerned? Of course, a great deal of discussion could follow 
such a question. And research: content analyses, comparisons of 
syntax, uses of pronouns, questions, and future tenses, as well as 
specific words which appear to indicate subjectivity in the Assyr¬ 
ian letters and which are absent in the Old Babylonian. But 
such is our knowledge of cuneiform at present that a thorough 
analysis is not possible at this time. Even the translations I have 
used are hedged in favor of smooth English and familiar syntax 
and so are not to be completely trusted. Only an impressionist 
comparison is possible, and the result, I think, is clear: that the 
letters of the seventh century B.C. are far more similar to our own 
consciousness than those of Hammurabi a thousand years earlier. 


The Serialization of Time 

A second literary comparison can be made about the sense of 
time as shown in building inscriptions. In 1.2, I suggested that 
one of the essential properties of consciousness was the metaphor 
of time as a space that could be regionized such that events and 
persons can be located therein, giving that sense of past, present, 
and future in which narratization is possible. 

The beginning of this characteristic of consciousness can be 
dated with at least a modicum of conviction at about 1300 B.C. 
We have just seen how the development of omens and augury 
suggests this inferentially. But more exact evidence is found in 
the inscriptions on buildings. In the typical inscription previous 
to this date, the king gave his name and titles, lavished praise on 
his particular god or gods, mentioned briefly the season and 
circumstances when the building was started, and then described 
something of the building operation itself. After 1300 B.C., there 
is not only a mention of the event immediately preceding the 
building, but also a summary of all the king's past military ex- 



A CHANGE OF MIND IN MESOPOTAMIA 251 

ploits to date. And in the next centuries, this information comes 
to be arranged systematically according to the yearly campaigns, 
and ultimately bursts out into the elaborate annal form that is 
almost universal in the records of the Assyrian rulers of the first 
millennium B.C. Such annals continue to swell beyond the re- 
countal of raw fact into statements of motive, criticisms of 
courses of action, appraisals of character. And then further to 
include political changes, campaign strategies, historical notes on 
particular regions — all evidence, I insist, of the invention of 
consciousness. None of these characteristics is seen in the earlier 
inscriptions. 

This is, of course, the invention of history as well, commencing 
exactly in the development of these royal inscriptions. 3 1 How 
strange it seems to think of the idea of history having to be 
invented! Herodotus, usually famed as "the father of history," 
wrote his history only after a visit through Mesopotamia in the 
fifth century B.C., and may have picked up the very idea of 
history from these Assyrian sources. What is interesting to me in 
this speculation is the possibility that as consciousness develops, it 
can develop in slightly different ways, and the importance of the 
writing of Herodotus to the later development of Greek con¬ 
sciousness would make an interesting project. My essential point 
here, however, is that history is impossible without the spatializa- 
tion of time that is characteristic of consciousness. 


Gilgamesh 

And finally a comparison from this best-known example of 
Assyrian literature. The Epic of Gilgamesh proper is a series of 
twelve numbered tablets found in Nineveh among the ruins of 
the temple library of the god Nabu and the palace library of the 
Assyrian king, Ashurbanipal. It was written for the king out of 
previous stories in about 650 B.C., and its hero is a demi-god, 


3 1 See Saggs, p. 47 2 f. 



252 


The Witness of History 


Gilgamesh, whom his father, Esarhaddon, had worshiped. Cer¬ 
tainly the name Gilgamesh goes far back into Mesopotamian 
history. And numerous other tablets have been found which 
relate to him and to this series in some way. 

Prominent among them are three apparently older tablets 
which parallel some of the Assyrian tablets. Where they were 
found and their archaeological contexts are not at all clear. They 
were not found by archaeologists, but were bought by private 
buyers from a dealer in Baghdad. Their dating and provenance 
therefore are a questionable matter. From internal evidence I 
would place them at about the same time as some Hittite and 
Hurrian fragments about Gilgamesh, perhaps 1200 B.C. The more 
usual date given them is 1700 B.C. But whatever their date, there 
is certainly no warrant to suppose, as have some popularizers of 
the epic, that the seventh century B.C. rendering of the story of 
Gilgamesh goes back to the Old Babylonian era. 

What we are interested in are the changes which have been 
made between the few older tablets and their Assyrian versions of 
650 B.C.32 The most interesting comparison is in Tablet X. In 
the older version (called the Yale Tablet because of its present 
location), the divine Gilgamesh, mourning the death of his 
mortal friend Enkidu, has a dialogue with the god Shamash, and 
then with the goddess Siduri. The latter, called the divine bar¬ 
maid, tells Gilgamesh that death for mortals is inevitable. These 
