dialogues are nonsubjective. But in the later Assyrian version, 
the dialogue with Shamash is not even included, and the barmaid 
is described in very human earthly terms, even as self-consciously 
wearing a veil. To our conscious minds, the story has become 
humanized. At one point in the later Assyrian tablet, the barmaid 
sees Gilgamesh approaching. She is described as looking out into 
the distance and speaking to her own heart, saying to herself, 
"Surely this man is a murderer! Whither is he bound?" This is 
subjective thinking. And it is not in the older tablet at all. 

3 2 All references here are to the translation by Alexander Heidel. 



A CHANGE OF MIND IN MESOPOTAMIA 


253 


The Assyrian tablet goes on with great elaboration (as well as 
with great beauty) to bring out the subjective sadness in the 
heart of Gilgamesh at the loss of his friend. One of the literary 
devices here (at least as translators have restored a damaged 
part) is repeated questions that describe the outward demeanor 
of Gilgamesh rhetorically, asking why his appearance and behav¬ 
ior are thus and so, so that the reader is constantly imagining the 
interior 'space' and analog T of the hero. 

Why is thy heart so sad, and why are thy features so distorted? 

Why is there woe in thy heart? 

And why is thy face like unto one who has made a far journey? 

None of this psalmlike concern is in the old version of Tablet X. 
Another character is the god Utnapishtim, the Distant, who is 
mentioned only briefly in the old version of Tablet X. But, in the 
650 B.C. version, he is looking into the distance and speaking 
words to his hearty asking it questions and coming to his own 
conclusions. 


Conclusion 

The evidence we have just examined is strong in some areas 
and weak in others. The literature on the loss of the gods is an 
unquestionable change in the history of Mesopotamia, unlike 
anything that preceded it. It is indeed the birth of modern reli¬ 
gious attitudes and we can discover ourselves in the very psalm¬ 
like yearnings for religious certainty that are expressed in the 
literature from the time of Tukulti up into the first millennium 
B.C. 

The sudden flourishing of all kinds of divination and its huge 
importance in both political and private life is also an unquestion¬ 
able historical fact. And while these practices date back to earlier 
time, perhaps even suggesting that as civilization became more 



254 


The Witness of History 


complicated toward the end of the third millennium B.C., the bi¬ 
cameral gods needed some auxiliary method of decision-making, 
they only achieve their dominance and universal position in civi¬ 
lized life after the breakdown of the gods. 

It is also unquestionable that the very nature of divinities was 
altered in these times, and that the belief in a world darkened 
with hostile demons, causing disease and misfortune, can only be 
understood as an expression of the deep and irreversible uncer¬ 
tainty which followed the loss of the hallucinated decisions of the 
bicameral mind. 

What is weak in our survey is indeed the evidence of con¬ 
sciousness itself. There is something unsatisfying in my saltatory 
comparisons among questionable translations of cuneiform tab¬ 
lets of various ages. What we would like is to see in front of us a 
continuous literature wherein we could watch more carefully the 
unfolding of subjective mind-space and its operator function in 
initiating decision. This is indeed what occurs in Greece a few 
centuries later, and it is to that analysis that we now turn. 



CHAPTER 5 


The Intellectual Consciousness 
of Greece 


T hey have called it the Dorian invasions. And classicists 
will tell you that indeed they could have called it anything 
or everything, so groping our knowledge, and so dark these par¬ 
ticular profundities of past time. But continuities in pottery de¬ 
signs from one archaeological site to another do fetch a few 
candles into this vast and silent darkness, and they reveal, albeit 
in flickering fashion, the huge jagged outlines of complex succes¬ 
sions of migrations and displacements that lasted from 1200 to 
1000 B.C. 1 That much is fact. 

The rest is inference. Even who the so-called Dorians were is 
unclear. In an earlier chapter, I have suggested that the begin¬ 
ning of all this chaos may have been the Thera eruption and its 
consequences. As Thucydides at the last edge of a verbal tradi¬ 
tion describes it, "migrations were a frequent occurrence, the 
several tribes readily abandoning their homes under the pressure 
of superior numbers." Palaces and villages that once held 
fealty to Agamemnon and his gods were looted and burned by 
other bicameral peoples who, following their own admonitory 
visions, probably could not communicate with nor have pity on 
the natives. Survivors were slaves or refugees, and refugees 
conquered or died. Our greatest certainties are negative. For all 
that the Mycaenaean world had produced with such remarkable 

1 V. R. d'A. Desborough, The Last Mycenaeans and Their Successors: An Archaeo¬ 
logical Survey, c 1200-c IOOO b.c. (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1964). 



256 


The Witness of History 


uniformity everywhere — the massive stone architecture of its 
god-ordered palaces and fortifications, its undulant frescoes of 
delicate clarity, its shaft-graves with their elaborate contents, the 
megaron plan of its houses, the terra-cotta idols and figurines, the 
death masks of beaten gold, the bronze and ivory work and 
distinctive pottery — all stopped and was never known there¬ 
after. 

This ruin is the bitter soil for the growth of subjective con¬ 
sciousness in Greece. And the difference here from the huge 
Assyrian cities stumbling on into a fumbling demon-ridden con¬ 
sciousness out of their own momentum is important. In contrast, 
Mycaenae had been a loose and spread-out system of divinely 
commanded cities of smaller size. The breakdown of the bicam¬ 
eral mind resulted in an even greater dispersion as all society 
broke down. 

It is even plausible that all this political havoc was the very 
challenge to which the great epics were a defiant response, and 
that the long narrative chants of the aoidoi from refugee camp to 
camp worked out into an eager unity with the cohesive past on 
the part of a newly nomadic people reaching at lost certainties. 
Poems are rafts clutched at by men drowning in inadequate 
minds. Arid this unique factor, this importance of poetry in a 
devastating social chaos, is the reason why Greek consciousness 
specifically fluoresces into that brilliant intellectual light which is 
still illuminating our world. 

What I shall do in this chapter is to conduct you on a tour 
through all the early extant literature of Greece. It is unfortu¬ 
nately a short list of texts. Beginning with the Iliad, we shall 
travel consecutively up through the Odyssey and the Boeotian 
poems ascribed to Hesiod, and then into the fragments of the 
lyric and elegiac poets of the seventh century B.C. and a little 
beyond. In doing so, I shall not be giving you any running 
description of the scenery we are passing through. The several 



INTELLECTUAL CONSCIOUSNESS OF GREECE 


257 


good histories of early Greek poetry can do that better than I. 
Instead I shall be directing your attention to selected things as 
we pass by that are of particular interest from the point of view 
of our theory of consciousness. 

But before we do so, we must make a few preliminary excur¬ 
sions, particularly into a more thorough analysis of mindlike 
terms in the Iliad. 


LOOKING FORWARD THROUGH 
THE ILIAD 


In an earlier chapter, I made the statement that the Iliad was our 
window upon the immediate bicameral past. Here, I propose that 
we stand on the other side of that window and peer forward into 
the distant conscious future, regarding this great mysterious 
paean to anger, not so much as the end point of the verbal 
tradition that preceded it, but rather as the very beginning of the 
new mentality to come. 

In I.3, we saw that the words which in later Greek indicate 
aspects of conscious functioning have in the Iliad more concrete 
and bodily referents. But the very fact that these words come to 
have mental meanings later suggests that they may be some kind 
of key to understanding the manner in which Greek conscious¬ 
ness is developed. 

The words we shall look at here are seven: thumos, phrenes, 
noos, and psyche, all of them variously translated as mind, spirit, 
or soul, and kradie, ker, and etor, often translated as heart or 
sometimes as mind or spirit. The translation of any of these 
seven as mind or anything similar is entirely mistaken and with¬ 
out any warrant whatever in the Iliad. Simply, and without 
equivocation, they are to be thought of as objective parts of the 
environment or of the body. We shall discuss these terms fully in 
a moment. 



258 

