
The Witness of History 


Now the first question to ask is why these entities are in the 
poem at all. I have earlier stressed the fact that the major 
instigations to action here are in the voices of the gods, not in the 
thumo, phrenes, etor, et al. The latter are entirely redundant. In 
fact they often seem to get in the way of the simple command-obedi¬ 
ence relation between god and man, like a wedge between the two 
sides of the bicameral mind. Why then are they there? 

Let us examine more closely what would have happened at the 
beginning of the breakdown of the bicameral mind. In 1 .4, we 
found that the physiological cuing of an hallucinated voice, 
whether in a bicameral man or in a contemporary schizophrenic, 
is the stress of some decision or conflict. Now, as the voices of 
gods become more inadequate and suppressed during this social 
chaos, we may suppose that the amount of that stress necessary 
to occasion an hallucinated voice would be raised. 

It is quite likely, then, that as the bicameral organization of 
mind began to diminish, the decision-stress in novel situations 
would be much greater than previously, and both the degree and 
duration of that stress would have to become progressively more 
intense before the hallucination of a god would occur. And such 
increased stress would be accompanied by a variety of physiologi¬ 
cal concomitants, vascular changes resulting in burning sensa¬ 
tions, abrupt changes in breathing, a pounding or fluttering 
heart, etc., responses which in the Iliad are called thumos, 
phrenes and kradie respectively. And this is what these words 
mean, not mind or anything like it. As the gods are heard pro¬ 
gressively less and less, these internal response-stimuli of pro¬ 
gressively greater stress are associated more and more with men's 
subsequent actions, whatever they may be, even coming to take 
on the godlike function of seeming to initiate action themselves. 

The evidence that we are on the right track in these supposi¬ 
tions can be found in the Iliad itself. At the very beginning, 
Agamemnon, king of men but slave of gods, is told by his voices 
to take the fair-cheeked Briseis away from Achilles, who had 



INTELLECTUAL CONSCIOUSNESS OF GREECE 


259 


captured her. As he does so, the response of Achilles begins in 
his etor, or what I suggest is a cramp in his guts, where he is in 
conflict or put into two parts ( mermerizo ) whether to obey his 
thumosy the immediate internal sensations of anger, and kill the 
pre-emptory king or not. It is only after this vacillating interval 
of increasing belly sensations and surges of blood, as Achilles is 
drawing his mighty sword, that the stress has become sufficient to 
hallucinate the dreadfully gleaming goddess Athene who then 
takes over control of the action (i:i88ff.) and tells Achilles 
what to do. 

I mean to suggest here that the degree and extent of these 
internal sensations were neither so evident nor so named in the 
true bicameral period. If we may propose that there was an Ur- 
Iliad, or the verbal epic as it came from the lips of the first several 
generations of aoidoi, then we can expect that it had no such 
interval, no etor or thumos preceding the voice of the god, and 
that the use and, as we shall see, the increasing use of these 
words in this way reflects the alteration of mentality, the wedge 
between god and man which results in consciousness. 

Preconscious Hypostases 

We may call these mind-words that later come to mean some¬ 
thing like conscious functioning, the preconscious hypostases. 
The latter term means in Greek what is caused to stand under 
something. The preconscious hypostases are the assumed causes 
of action when other causes are no longer apparent. In any novel 
situation, when there are no gods, it is not a man who acts, but 
one of the preconscious hypostases which causes him to act. They 
are thus seats of reaction and responsibility which occur in the 
transition from the bicameral mind to subjective consciousness. 
What we shall see is that the frequency and the meaning of 
these terms gradually change as we go from text to text from 
about 850 to 600 B.C., and how in the sixth century B.C. their 



260 


The Witness of History 

referents join together in what we would call the subjective con¬ 
scious mind. 2 

1 would like here to translate and expand what I have just said 
into a clearer statement by suggesting that this temporal develop¬ 
ment of the preconscious hypostases can be roughly divided into 
four phases: 

Phase I: Objective: Occurred in the bicameral age when 

these terms referred to simple external observa¬ 
tions. 

Phase II: Internal: Occurred when these terms have come 
to mean things inside the body, particularly certain 
internal sensations. 

Phase III: Subjective: When these terms refer to processes 
that we would call mental; they have moved 
from internal stimuli supposedly causing actions 
to internal spaces where metaphored actions may 
occur. 

Phase IV: Synthetic: When the various hypostases unite into 
one conscious self capable of introspection. 

The reason I am setting these out, perhaps pretentiously, as four 
separate phases is to call your attention to the important psycho¬ 
logical differences of transition between these phases. 

The transition from Phase I to Phase II occurred at the begin¬ 
ning of the breakdown period. It comes from the absence or the 
inappropriateness of gods and their hallucinated directions. The 
buildup of stress for want of adequate divine decisions increases 
the psychological concomitants of such stress until they are 
labeled with terms that previously applied to only external per¬ 
ception. 

The transition from Phase II to Phase III is a much more 

2 Professor A. D. H. Adkins has made this drawing-together of the various mind- 
words into one the theme of his book From the Many to the One (Ithaca: Cornell 
University Press, 1970). 



INTELLECTUAL CONSCIOUSNESS OF GREECE 26 l 


complicated matter. And much more interesting. It is due to the 
paraphrand generator of metaphor described in 1.2. In that chap¬ 
ter, I outlined the four-part process of metaphor, how we begin 
with a less-known term called a metaphrand which is to be 
described, and then describe it by applying to it a better-known 
metaphier which is similar to it in some way. Usually there are 
simple associations of the metaphier which I have called para- 
phiers, which then project back as associates of the original 
metaphrand, these new associates being called paraphrands. 
Such paraphrands are generative in a sense that they are new in 
their association with the metaphrand. And this is how we are 
able to generate the kind of 'space' which we introspect upon and 
which is the necessary substrate of consciousness. This is really 
quite simple as we shall see shortly. 

And, finally, the synthesis of the separate hypostases into the 
unitary consciousness of Phase IV is a different process also. I 
suggest that as the subjective Phase III meanings of thumos, 

phrenes, et al. become established, their original anatomical 
bases in different internal sensations wither away, leaving them 
to become confused and to join together on the basis of their 
shared metaphiers, e.g., as 'containers’ or 'persons.' But this 
synthetic unity of consciousness may also have been helped by 
what can be called the laicization of attention and its consequent 
recognition of individual differences in the seventh century B.C., a 
process which resulted in a new concept of self. 

Before looking at the evidence for these matters, let us first 
investigate the preconscious hypostases and their Iliadic mean¬ 
ings in these phases with more detail. In the general order of 
their importance in the Iliad, they are: 


Thumos 

This is by far the most common and important hypostatic word 
in the whole poem. It occurs three times as often as any other. 



262 


The Witness of History 


Originally, in the Objective Phase, I suggest, it meant simply 
activity as externally perceived. And nothing internal about it. 
This Mycaenaean usage is found frequently in the Iliad, particu¬ 
larly in the battle scenes, where a warrior aiming a spear in the 
right place causes the thumos or activity of another to cease. 

The internal Phase II, as we have seen in Achilles' wrath 
occurs in a novel stressful situation during the breakdown pe¬ 
riod when the stress threshold for the hallucinated voice was 
higher. Thumos then refers to a mass of internal sensations in 
response to environmental crises. It was, I suggest, a pattern of 
stimulation familiar to modern physiology, the so-called stress or 
emergency response of the sympathetic nervous system and its 
liberation of adrenalin and noradrenalin from the adrenal glands. 
This includes the dilation of the blood vessels in striate muscles 
and in the heart, an increase in tremor of striate muscles, a burst 
of blood pressure, the constriction of blood vessels in the abdomi¬ 
nal viscera and in the skin, the relaxing of smooth muscles, and 
the sudden increased energy from the sugar released into the 
blood from the liver, and possible perceptual changes with the 
dilation of the pupil of the eye. This complex was, then, the 
internal pattern of sensation that preceded particularly violent 
activity in a critical situation. And by doing so repeatedly, the 
pattern of sensation begins to take on the term for the activity 
itself. Thereafter, it is the thumos which gives strength to a 
warrior in battle, etc. All the references to thumos in the Iliad as 
an internal sensation are consistent with this interpretation. 

Now the important transition to the subjective Phase III is 
already beginning even in the Iliad, although not in a very con¬ 
spicuous way. We see it in the unvoiced metaphor of the thumos 
