as like a container: in several passages, menos or vigor is 'put' in 
someone's thumos (i6: 5-8; 17: 451; 22: 312). The thumos is 
also implicitly compared to a person: it is not Ajax who is zealous 
to fight but his thumos (13: 73); nor is it Aeneas who rejoices 
but his thumos (13: 494; see also 14: 156). If not a god, it is the 



INTELLECTUAL CONSCIOUSNESS OF GREECE 263 


thumos that most often 'urges' a man into action. And as if it were 
another person, a man may speak to his thumos (u: 403), and 
may hear from it what he is to say (7: 68), or have it reply to 
him even as a god (9: 702). 

All these metaphors are extremely important. Saying that the 
internal sensations of large circulatory and muscular changes are 
a thing into which strength can be put is to generate an imagined 
'space,s here located always in the chest, which is the forerunner 
of the mind-space of contemporary consciousness. And to com¬ 
pare the function of that sensation to that of another person or 
even to the less-frequent gods is to begin those metaphor proc¬ 
esses that will later become the analog 'Is. 


Phrenes 

The second most common hypostasis in the Iliad is the 
phrenes. Its Objective Phase origin is more questionable. But the 
fact that it is almost always plural may indicate that the phrenes 
objectively referred to the lungs and perhaps were associated with 
phrasis or speech. 

In the Internal Phase, phrenes become the temporal pattern 
of sensations associated with respiratory changes. These come 
from the diaphragm, the intercostal muscles of the rib-cage, and 
the smooth muscles surrounding the bronchial tubes which regu¬ 
late their bore and so the resistance of them to the passage of air, 
this mechanism being controlled by the sympathetic nervous sys¬ 
tem. We should remember here how extremely responsive our 
breathing is to various types of environmental stimulation. A 
sudden stimulus, and we 'catch our breath'. Sobbing and laugh¬ 
ing have obvious distinct internal stimulation from the dia¬ 
phragm and intercostals. In great activity or excitement, there is 
an increase in both the rate and depth of breathing with the 
resulting internal stimulation. Either pleasantness or unpleas¬ 
antness usually shows increased breathing. Momentary attention 



264 


The Witness of History 


is clearly correlated with partial or complete inhibition of breath¬ 
ing. A surprise, and our rate of breathing increases and becomes 
irregular. 

Apart from rate, there are also unique changes in the propor¬ 
tion of time occupied by inspiration and by expiration in a single 
breath cycle. This is best measured by determining the percent 
of the duration of the breath cycle taken up by inspiration. This 
is about 16 percent in speech, 23 percent in laughter, 30 percent 
in attentive mental work, 43 percent when at rest, 60 percent or 
more in excitement, 71 percent in subjects imagining a wonder¬ 
ful or surprising situation, and 75 percent in sudden fright.3 

The point I am trying to make here is that our phrenes or 
respiratory apparatus can almost be looked at as recording every¬ 
thing we do in quite distinct and distinguishable ways. It is at 
least possible that this internal mirror of behavior loomed much 
larger in the total stimulus world of the preconscious mind than 
it does in ourselves. And certainly its changing pattern of inter¬ 
nal stimulation makes us understand why the phrenes are so 
important during the transition to consciousness, and why the 
term is used in so many functionally different ways in the poetry 
we are examining in this chapter. 

In the Iliad, it can often be translated simply as lungs. Aga¬ 
memnon's black phrenes fill with anger (1:103) and we can 
visualize the king's deep breathing as his fury mounts. Auto- 
medon fills his dark phrenes with valor and strength, or takes 
deep breaths (17:499). Frightened fawns have no strength in 
their phrenes after running} they are out of breath (4:245). In 
weeping, grief 'comes to' the phrenes (1:362; 8:124) or the 
respiratory phrenes can 'hold' fear (10:10), or joy (9:186). Even 
these statements are partly metaphoric, and thus associate a kind of 
container space in the phrenes. 

A very few instances are more clearly in Phase III in the sense 

3 By inspiration here I mean from the beginning of taking a breath to the beginning 
of exhaling. The measure thus includes holding one's breath. These determinations 
collected from various sources. See Robert S. Woodworth, Experimental Psychology 
(New York: Holt, 1938), p. 264. 



INTELLECTUAL CONSCIOUSNESS OF GREECE 265 


of inner mind-space. These are where the phrenes are said to 
'contain' and perhaps 'retain' information. Sometimes this infor¬ 
mation comes from a god (1:55) or at other times from another 
human (1:297). 

Laboratory studies have demonstrated that even simple sen¬ 
sory experience of an object, its recognition, and the recall of the 
name associated with it, all can be observed in recordings of 
respiration taken simultaneously^ It is thus not surprising that 
when some internal sensation is first connected to such functions 
as recognition and recall, it is located in the phrenes. Once it is 
said that the phrenes can recognize events (22:296), it is mak¬ 
ing a metaphor of the phrenes with a person, and the para- 
phrands of ’person,’ that is, something that can act in a space 
projects back into the phrenes to make it metaphorically spatial 
and capable of other human activities metaphorically. Similarly 
we find that like a person the phrenes of a man can occasionally 
’be persuaded’ by another man (7:120), or even by a god 
(4:104). The phrenes can perhaps even ’speak’ like a god, as 
when Agamemnon says he obeyed his baneful phrenes (9:119). 
These instances are quite rare in the Iliad, but they do point 
toward what will develop into consciousness over the next two 
centuries. 


Kradie 

This term, which later comes to be spelled kardia, and results 
in our familiar adjective ’cardiac,’ is not quite so important or 
mysterious as other hypostases. It refers to the heart. In fact, it 
is the most common hypostasis still in use. When we in the 
twentieth century wish to be sincere, we still speak out of our 
hearts, not out of our consciousness. It is in our hearts that we 
have our most profound thoughts and cherish our closest beliefs. 
And we love with our hearts. It is curious that the lungs or 

4 Mario Ponzo, "La misura del decorso di processi psichici esequita per mezzo delle 
grafiche del respiro," Archives Italiennes de Psicologia, 1920-21, 1: 214.-238. 



266 The Witness of History 

phreneshave never maintained their hypostatic role as has the 
kradie. 

Originally, I suggest, it simply meant quivering, coming from 
the verb kroteo, to beat. Kradie even means in some passages of 
early Greek a quivering branch. Then, in the internalization of 
Phase II that went on during the Dorian invasions, the quivering 
that was seen with the eye and felt with the hand externally 
becomes the name of the internal sensation of the heartbeat in 
response to external situations. With few exceptions, this is its 
referent in the Iliad. No one believes anything in his heart as 
yet. 

Again I would remind you of the extensive modern literature 
on the responsiveness of our hearts to how we perceive the world. 
Like respiration or the action of the sympathetic nervous system, 
the cardiac system is extremely sensitive to particular aspects of 
the environment. At least one recent commentator has intro¬ 
duced the concept of the cardiac mind, calling the heart a specific 
sense organ for anxiety, as the eyes are the sense organ for 
sight.s Anxiety in this view is not any of the poetic homologues 
which we in our consciousness might use to describe it. Rather it 
is an inner tactile sensation in the sensory nerve endings of 
cardiac tissue which reads the environment for its anxiety po¬ 
tential. 

While this notion is doubtful as it stands, it is good Homeric 
psychology. A coward in the Iliad is not someone who is afraid, 
but someone whose h'adie beats loudly (13:282). The only 
remedy is for Athene to ‘put’ strength in the kradie (2:452), or 
for Apollo to ‘put’ boldness in it (21:547). The metaphier of a 
container here is building a ‘space’ into the heart in which later 
men may believe, feel, and ponder things deeply. 

Etor 

Philologists usually translate both kradie and etor as heart. 

5 Ludwig Braun, Herz und Angst (Vienna: Deuticke, 1932), p. 38. 



INTELLECTUAL CONSCIOUSNESS OF GREECE 267 


And certainly a word can have synonyms. But in instances so 
important as the assigning of particular locations of sensations 
and forces of action, I would demur on a priori grounds, and 
insist that to the ancient Greek these terms had to represent 
different locations and sensations. Sometimes they are even 
clearly distinct in the text (20:169). I have thus the temerity to 
suggest that etor in Phase I came from the noun etron — belly, 
and that in Phase II, it becomes internalized into sensations of 
the gastro-intestinal tract, particularly the stomach. Indeed, there 
is even evidence for this in the Iliad, where it is precisely stated 
that food and drink are taken to satisfy the etor (19:307). 6 This 
translation is also more apt in other situations, as when a warrior 
loses his etor or guts in the front ranks of the battle by being dis¬ 
emboweled (5:215). 

But more important is the stimulus field it provides for mental 
functioning. We know that the gastro-intestinal tract has a wide 
repertoire of responses to human situations. Everyone knows the 
sinking feeling on receiving bad news, or the epigastric cramp 
before a near automobile accident. The intestine is equally re¬ 
sponsive to emotional stimuli of lesser degree, and these re¬ 
sponses can be easily seen on the fluoroscopic screen. 7 Stomach 
contractions and peristalsis stop at an unpleasant stimulus, and 
may even be reversed if the unpleasantness is increased. The 
secretory activity of the stomach is also extremely susceptible to 
emotional experience. The stomach is indeed one of the most 
responsive organs in the body, reacting in its spasms and empty¬ 
ing and contractions and secretory activity to almost every emo¬ 
