tion and sensation. And this is the reason why illnesses of the 
gastro-intestinal system were the first to be thought of as psycho¬ 
somatic. 

It is therefore plausible that this spectrum of gastro-intestinal 
sensations was what was being referred to by the etor. When 


6 See also Hesiod: Works and Days, 593. 

^ Howard E. Ruggles, “Emotional influence on the gastro-intestinal tract,” Cali¬ 
fornia and Western Medicine} 1928, 29: 221-223. 



268 


The Witness of History 


Andromache hears the groaning Hecuba, her etor heaves up in 
her throatj she is close to vomiting (22:452).® When Lycaon's 
plea to live is mocked by Achilles, it is Lycaon's etor along with 
his knees that are 'loosened' and made weak (21:114). We 
would say he has a sinking feeling in the pit of his stomach. And 
when the gods themselves join in the battle, it is the etor of Zeus 
that laughs with joy, or what we would call a belly-laugh 

(21:389), 

The container metaphor is not used as with the other hypos¬ 
tases, probably because the stomach already contains food. For 
this very reason we will see that it does not grow into an impor¬ 
tant part of any conscious mentality in the literature to follow. 

I think it is obvious to the medical reader that these matters we 
are discussing under the topic of the preconscious hypostases 
have a considerable bearing on any theory of psychosomatic dis¬ 
ease. In the thumos, phrenes, kradie, and etor, we have covered 
the four major target systems of such illness. And that they 
compose the very groundwork of consciousness, a primitive par¬ 
tial type of consciousizing, has important consequences in medi¬ 
cal theory. 

I shall only indicate the ker in passing, partly because it plays a 
diminishing role in this story of consciousness, but also because 
its derivation and significance is somewhat cloudy. While it is 
possible that it could have come from cheir and then become 
somatized into trembling hands and limbs, it is more probably 
from the same root as kardia in a different dialect. Certainly the 
passage in the Odyssey which states that a warrior is wounded 
where the phrenes or lungs are set close about the throbbing ker 
(16:481) leaves little doubt. It is almost always referred to as 
the organ of grief and is of limited importance. 

But of utmost importance is the next hypostasis. Let it be 
immediately stated that it is an uncommon term in the Iliad — so 

8 And just as the stomach pulsates like the heart, so they sometimes become con¬ 
fused, as when in the wounded lion's kradie his valiant etor groans (20:169). 



INTELLECTUAL CONSCIOUSNESS OF GREECE 269 

uncommon as to make us suspect that it could have been added 
by the later generations of aoidoi. But starting from such small 
beginnings in the Iliad, it soon comes into the very center of our 
topic. And this is 

Noos 

Up to now, we have been dealing with large, ummistakable 
internal sensations that only needed to be named in times of 
turmoil and crisis, and which then took their names from objec¬ 
tive external perception. Noos, deriving from noeo = to see, is 
perception itself. And in coming to it we are in a much more 
powerful region in our intellectual travels. 

For, as we saw in an earlier chapter, the great majority of the 
terms we use to describe our conscious lives are visual. We 'see' 
with the mind's 'eye' solutions which may be 'brilliant' or 'ob¬ 
scure,' and so on. Vision is our distance receptor far excellence. 
It is our sense of space in a way that no other modality can even 
approach. And it is that spatial quality, as we have seen, that is 
the very ground and fabric of consciousness. 

It is interesting to note parenthetically that there is no hypos¬ 
tasis for hearing as there is for sight. Even today, we do not 
hear with the mind's ear as we see with the mind's eye. Nor do 
we refer to intelligent minds as loud, in the same way we say they 
are bright. This is probably because hearing was the very essence 
of the bicameral mind, and as such has those differences from 
vision which I discussed in 1.4. The coming of consciousness can 
in a certain vague sense be construed as a shift from an auditory 
mind to a visual mind. 

This shift is first seen somewhat fitfully in the Iliad. The 
Mycenaean objective origin of the term is present in objective 
statements about seeing, or in noos as a sight or show. In urging 
his men into battle, a warrior may say there is no better noos 
than a hand-to-hand battle with the enemy (15:510). And Zeus 
keeps Hector in his noos (151461). 



270 


The Witness of History 


But the second phase of internalization of noos is also evident 
in the Iliad. It is located in the chest (3:63). How curious to us 
that it was not placed in the eyes! Perhaps this is because in its 
new role it was becoming melded with the thumos. Indeed, noos 
takes on adjectives more suitable to the thumos, such as fearless 
(3:63) and strong (16:688). And Odysseus dissuades the 
Achaeans from putting their ships to sea by telling them that they 
do not yet know what sort of noos is in Agamemnon (2:192). 
And one of the most modern-sounding instances occurs in the 
very first episode, when Thetis, consoling the sobbing Achilles, 
asks him, "Why has grief come upon your phrenes? Speak, 
conceal not in noos, so that we both may know" (1:363).? Apart 
from this, there is no other subjectification in the Iliad. No one 
makes any decisions in his noos. Thinking does not go on in the 
noos, or even memory. These are still in the voices of those 
organizations of the right temporal lobe that are called gods. 

The precise causes of this internalization of sight into a con¬ 
tainer in which the seeing can be 'held' will require a much more 
careful study than we can go into here. Perhaps it was simply 
the generalization of internalization which I suggest had occurred 
earlier in those internalizations correlated with large internal 
sensations. Or it may have been that the observation of external 
difference in the mingling of refugees, as mentioned in II.3, 
demanded the positing of this visual hypostasis, which could be 
different in different men, making them see different things. 

Psyche 

And so finally to the word that gives psychology its name. 
Probably coming from the term psychein = to breathe, it has 
become internalized into life substances in its main usage in the 

9 A further exception to what I am saying can be found in the comparison of the 
swiftness of Hera with the swiftness of a man's nous wishing in his phrenes to be in 
distant places he has once visited (15 : 8of.). On the peculiarity of such an expression 
in Homer, see Walter Leaf, A Companion to the Iliad (London: Macmillan, 1892), 
p. 257. This is obviously a late incursion. 



INTELLECTUAL CONSCIOUSNESS OF GREECE 271 


Iliad. Most often, psyche seems to be used in just the way we 
would use life. But this can be very misleading. For 'life' to us 
means something about a period of time, a span between birth and 
death, full of events and developments of a certain character. 
There is absolutely nothing of this sort in the Iliad. When a 
spear strikes the heart of a warrior, and his psyche dissolves 
(5:296), is destroyed (22:325), or simply leaves him (16:453), 
or is coughed out through the mouth (9:409), or bled out 
through a wound (14:518; 16:505), there is nothing whatever 
about time or about the end of anything. There is in one part of 
Book 23 a different meaning of psyche, a discussion of which is 
deferred to the end of this chapter. But generally, it is very 
simply a property that can be taken away, and is similar to the 
taking away, under the same conditions, of thumos or activity, a 
word with which psyche is often coupled. 

In trying to understand these terms, we must refrain from our 
conscious habit of building space into them before this has hap¬ 
pened historically. In a sense, psyche is the most primitive of 
these preconscious hypostases; it is simply the property of 
breathing or bleeding or what not in that physical object over 
there called a man or an animal, a property which can be taken 
from him like a prize (22:161) by a spear in the right place. 
And in general, that is, with the exceptions I discuss at the end 
of this chapter, the main use of psyche in the Iliad does not 
progress beyond that. No one in any way ever sees, decides, 
thinks, knows, fears, or remembers anything in his psyche. 

These then are the supposed substantives inside the body that 
by literary metaphor, by being compared to containers and per¬ 
sons, accrue to themselves spatial and behavioral qualities which 
in later literature develop into the unified mind-space with its 
analog C P that we have come to call consciousness. But in point¬ 
ing out these beginnings in the Iliad, let me remind you that the 
contours of the main actions of the poem are as divinely dictated 
and as nonconscious as I have insisted in 1.3. These precon- 



272 


The Witness of History 


scious hypostases do not enter into any major decisions. But they 
are definitely there playing a subsidiary role. It is indeed as if the 
unitary conscious mind of the later age is here in the Iliad begin¬ 
ning as seven different entities, each with a slightly different 
function and a distinction from the others which is almost impos¬ 
sible for us to appreciate today. 


THE WILES OF THE ODYSSEY 


After the Iliad, the Odyssey. And anyone reading these poems 
freshly and consecutively sees what a gigantic vault in mentality 
it is! There are of course some scholars who still like to think of 
these two huge epics as being written down and even composed 
by one man named Homer, the first in his youth and the second 
in his maturity. The more reasonable view, I think, is that the 
Odyssey followed the Iliad by at least a century or more, and, like 
