its predecessor, was the work of a succession of aoidoi rather than 
any one man. 

But, unlike its predecessor, the Odyssey is not one epic but 
a series of them. The originals were probably about different 
heroes, and brought together around Odysseus at a later time. 
Why this happened is not hard to unravel. Odysseus, at least in 
some parts of Greece, had become the center of a cult that 
enabled conquered peoples to survive. He becomes "wily Odys¬ 
seus" and later aoidoi perhaps inserted this epithet into the Iliad 
to remind their listeners of the Odyssey. Archaeological evidence 
indicates important dedications made to Odysseus some time 
after iooo b.c. and definitely before 800 b.c.‘» These were 
sometimes of bronze tripod caldrons curiously connected with the 
cult. They were such dedications as formerly would have been 
to a god. Contests in worship of him were held in Ithaca at least 

10 S. Benton, as cited in T. B. L. Webster, From Mycenae to Homer (London: 
Methuen, 1958), p. 138. 



INTELLECTUAL CONSCIOUSNESS OF GREECE 


273 


from the ninth century B.C., even as that island was about to be 
overrun again by new invasions from Corinth. In a word, Odysseus 
of the many devices is the hero of the new mentality of how to get 
along in a ruined and god-weakened world. 

The Odyssey announces this in its very fifth word, polutropon 
= much turning. It is a journey of deviousness. It is the very 
discovery of guile, its invention and celebration. It sings of indi¬ 
rections and disguises and subterfuges, transformations and 
recognitions, drugs and forgetfulness, of people in other people's 
places, of stories within stories, and men within men. 

The contrast with the Iliad is astonishing. Both in word and 
deed and character, the Odyssey describes a new and different 
world inhabited by new and different beings. The bicameral gods 
of the Iliad, in crossing over to the Odyssey, have become defen¬ 
sive and feeble. They disguise themselves more and even indulge 
in magic wands. The bicameral mind by its very definition di¬ 
rects much less of the action. The gods have less to do, and like 
receding ghosts talk more to each other — and that so tediously! 
The initiatives move from them, even against them, toward the 
work of the more conscious human characters, though overseen 
by a Zeus who in losing his absolute power has acquired a Lear- 
like interest in justice. Seers and omens, these hallmarks of the 
breakdown of bicamerality, are more common. Semi-gods, de¬ 
humanizing witches, one-eyed giants, and sirens, reminiscent of 
the genii that we saw marked the breakdown of bicamerality in 
Assyrian bas-reliefs a few centuries earlier, are evidence of a 
profound alteration in mentality. And the huge Odysseyan 
themes of homeless wanderings, of kidnapings and enslave¬ 
ments, of things hidden, things regained, are surely echoes of the 
social breakdown following the Dorian invasions when subjec¬ 
tive consciousness in Greece first took its mark. 

Technically, the first thing to note is the change in the fre¬ 
quency with which the preconscious hypostases are used. Such 
data can be compiled easily from concordances of the Iliad and 



274 


The Witness of History 


Odyssey, and the results are dramatic in showing a very definite 
rise in frequency for phrenes, noos, and psyche, and a striking 
drop in the use of the word thumos. Of course we can say that the 
decrease for thumos from the Iliad to the Odyssey is due to what 
the poem is about. But that is begging the question. For the very 
change in theme is indeed a part of this whole transition in the 
very nature of man. The other hypostases are passive. Thumos y 
the adrenalin-produced emergency reaction of the sympathetic 
nervous system to novel situations, is the antithesis of anything 
passive. The kind of metaphors that can be built up around this 
metaphrand of a sudden surge of energy are not the passive 
visual ones that are more conducive to solving problems. 

In contrast, over this period, phrenes doubles in frequency, 
while both noos and psyche triple in frequency. Again, the point 
could be made that the increase in the use of these words is 
simply an echo of the change in topics. And again that is pre¬ 
cisely the point. Poetry, from describing external events objec¬ 
tively, is becoming subjectified into a poetry of personal conscious 
expression. 

But it is not just their frequency that we are interested in. It is 
also the change in their inherent meanings and the metaphiers 
used for them. As the gods decrease in their direction of human 
affairs, the preconscious hypostases take over some of their 
divine function, moving them closer to consciousness. Thumos, 
though decreased, is still the most common hypostatic word. And 
its function is different. It has reached the subjective phase and 
is like another person. It is the thumos of the swineherd that 
'commands' him to return to Telemachus (16:466). In the Iliad, 
it would have been a god speaking. In the earlier epic, a god can 
'place' menos or vigor into the 'container' of the thumos; but in 
the Odyssey, it is an entire recognition that can be 'placed' 
therein. Eurycleia recognizes Odysseus under his disguise by his 
scar because a god has 'put' that recognition in her thumos 



INTELLECTUAL CONSCIOUSNESS OF GREECE 275 


(19:485)- (Note that she has recognition but not recall.) And 
the servants of Penelope have knowledge of her son's departure 
in their thumos (4:730). 

Phrenestoo has acquired the spatial qualities of Phase III. 
Even the description of a possible future event can be put in the 
phrenes, as when Telemachus, as a pretext for depriving the 
suitors of weapons, is asked to claim that a daimon (it would 
have at least been a god in the Iliad) has put fears of quarrels 
among them into his phrenes (19:10). There are no secrets in 
the Iliad. But the Odyssey has many of them, and they are 'held' 
in the phrenes (16:459). Whereas in the Iliad the preconscious 
hypostases were almost always clearly located, their increasingly 
metaphorical nature is muddling up their anatomical distinction 
in the Odyssey. Even the thumos is at one point located inside the 
lungs or phrenes (22:38). 

But there is another and even more important use of fhrenes, 
this word that originally referred to the lungs and then to the 
complex sensations in breathing. And this is in the first begin¬ 
nings of morality. No one is moral among the god-controlled 
puppets of the Iliad. Good and evil do not exist. But in the 
Odyssey, Clytaemnestra is able to resist Aegisthus because her 

phrenes are agathai, which may have been derived from roots 
that would make it mean 'very like a god'. And in another place, 
it is thf agathai. godly, or good phrenes of Eumaeus which has 
him remember to make offerings to the gods (14:421). And 
similarly it is the agathai or good phrenes that are responsible for 
Penelope's chastity and loyalty to the absent Odysseus (12:194). 
It is not yet Penelope who is agathe, only the metaphor-space in 
her lungs. 

And similarly with the other preconscious hypostases. Warn¬ 
ings of destruction are 'heard' from the kradie or pounding heart 
of Odysseus when he is wrecked and thrown into tempestuous 
seas (5:389). And it is his ker, again his trembling heart or 
perhaps his trembling hands, that makes plans for the suitors' 



276 


The Witness of History 


downfall (18:344). In the Iliad, these would have been gods 
speaking. Noos, while being referred to more frequently, is some¬ 
times not changed. But more often it is also in Phase III of 
subjectification. At one point, Odysseus is deceiving Athene (un¬ 
thinkable in the Iliad!) and looks at her ever revolving in his noos 
thoughts of great cunning (13:255). Or noos can be like a 
person who is glad (8:78) or cruel (18:381) or not to be fooled 
(10:329) or learned about (1:3). Psyche again usually means 
life, but perhaps with more sense of a time span. Some very im¬ 
portant exceptions to this will be referred to later. 

Not only is the growth toward subjective consciousness in the 
Odyssey seen in the increasing use and spatial interiority and 
personification of its preconscious hypostases, but even more 
clearly in its incidents and social interrelationships. These in¬ 
clude the emphasis on deceit and guile which I have already 
referred to. In the Iliad, time is referred to sloppily and inaccu¬ 
rately, if at all. But the Odyssey shows an increased spatializa- 
tion of time in its use of time words, such as begin, hesitate, 
quickly, endure, etc., and the more frequent reference to the 
future. There is also an increased ratio of abstract terms to 
concrete, particularly of what in English would be nouns ending 
in ‘ness’. And with this, as might be expected, a marked drop in 
similes: there is less need for them. Both the frequency and the 
manner with which Odysseus refers to himself is on a different 
level altogether from instances of self-reference in the Iliad. All 
this is relevant to the growth of a new mentality. 

Let me close this necessarily short entry on a toweringly im¬ 
portant poem by calling your attention to a mystery. This is that 
the overall contour of the story itself is a myth of the very matter 
with which we are concerned. It is a story of identity, of a voyage 
to the self that is being created in the breakdown of the bicameral 
mind. I am not pretending here to be answering the profound 
question of why this should be so, of why the muses, those 
patternings of the right temporal lobe, who are singing this epic 



INTELLECTUAL CONSCIOUSNESS OF GREECE 2 77 

through the aoidoi, should be narratizing their own downfall, 
their own fading away into subjective thought, and celebrating 
the rise of a new mentality that will overwhelm the very act of 
their song. For this seems to be what is happening. 

I am saying — and finding it work to believe myself — that all 
this highly patterned legend, which so clearly can be taken as a 
metaphor of the huge transilience toward consciousness, was not 
composed, planned, and put together by poets conscious of what 
they were doing. It is as if the god-side of the bicameral man was 
approaching consciousness before the man-side, the right hemi¬ 
sphere before the left. And if belief does stick here, and we are 
inclined to ask scoffingly and rhetorically, how could an epic that 
may itself be a kind of drive toward consciousness be composed 
by nonconscious men? We can also ask with the same rhetorical 
fervor, how could it have been composed by conscious men? And 
have the same silence follow. We do not know the answer to 
