either question. 

But so it is. And as this series of stories sweeps from its lost 
hero sobbing on an alien shore in bicameral thrall to his beautiful 
goddess Calypso, winding through its world of demigods, testings, 
and deceits, to his defiant war whoops in a rival-routed home, 
from trance through disguise to recognition, from sea to land, 
east to west, defeat to prerogative, the whole long song is an 
odyssey toward subjective identity and its triumphant acknowl¬ 
edgment out of the hallucinatory enslavements of the past. From 
a will-less gigolo of a divinity to the gore-spattered lion on his 
own hearth, Odysseus becomes 'Odysseus'. 


FOOLISH PERSES 


Some of the chronologically next group of poems I shall merely 
gloss over. Among these are the so-called Homeric Hymns, most 
of which have turned out to be of a much later date. There are 



278 


The Witness of History 


also the poems that originated in Boeotia northeast of Athens in 
the eighth century B.C., many of which were once ascribed to a 
cult figure named Hesiod. Unfortunately, their extant texts are 
often mixtures of parts of poems from obviously different 
sources, badly emended. Most of them contribute little to our 
present concern. The often tedious recital of the relationships of 
gods in the Theogony is usually dated shortly after the Odyssey, 
but its hypostatic words are fewer and without development. Its 
chief interest is that its concern with the intimate lives of gods is 
perhaps a result of their silence, another expression of the nostal¬ 
gia for the Golden Age before the Dorian invasions. 

But of much greater interest is the fascinating problem pre¬ 
sented by the text ascribed to Hesiod known as the Works and 
Days. 11 It is obviously a hodgepodge of various things, a kind of 
Shepherd's Calendar for a Boeotian farmer, and a very poor and 
scrubbing farmer at that. Its world is worlds away from the 
world of the great Homeric epics. Instead of a hero at the com¬ 
mand of his gods working through a narrative of grandeur, we 
have instruction to the countryman, who may or may not obey his 
gods, on ways of work, which days are lucky, and a very interest¬ 
ing new sense of justice. 

On the surface, this medley of scruffy detail of farm life and 
nostalgia for the Golden Age that is no more seems to be written 
by a farmer whom scholars take to be Hesiod. He is supposedly 
railing at his brother, Perses, over the unfairness of a judgment 
dividing their father's farm, curiously giving Perses advice on 
everything from morality to marriage, on how to treat slaves to 
the problems of planting and sewage disposal. It is full of such 
things as: 

Foolish Perses! Work the work which the gods ordained for 
men, lest in bitter anguish of thumos y you with your wife and 
children seek your livelihood amongst your neighbors. (397ff.) 

11 I have used throughout the Loeb edition of Hesiod (London: Heinemann, 
1936 ). 



INTELLECTUAL CONSCIOUSNESS OF GREECE 279 


At least this is what most scholars take the poem to be. But 
another interpretation is at least possible. This is that the older 
portions of the poem may actually have been written not by 
Hesiod, who is never mentioned in the poem, but by none other 
than the hand of foolish Perses himself, and that these main 
parts of the poem are the admonitions of his divine bicameral 
voice advising him what to do. If this jolts your sense of possibil¬ 
ity, I would remind you of the schizophrenic patients who all day 
may hear similarly authoritative critical voices constantly admon¬ 
ishing them in a similar vein. 

Perhaps I should not say written. More probably the poem was 
dictated to a scribe, even as were the bicameral admonitions of 
Perses’ contemporary, Amos, the herdsman of Israel. And I 
should also have said a previous recension of the main poem, and 
that the protest lodged in the crucial lines 37-39 were added later 
(even as everyone since Plutarch has agreed that 654-662 were). 
It is also possible that these lines originally referred to some kind 
of bicameral struggle for the control of Perses’ too subjective and 
therefore (at this time) unprofitable behavior. 

The preconscious hypostases in the Works and Days occur in 
approximately the same frequencies as in the Odyssey. Thumos 
is the most common and in about half of its eighteen occurrences 
it is a simple Phase II internal impulse to some activity or locus of 
joy or sorrow. But the rest of the time, it is a Phase III space in 
which information (27), advice (297, 491), sights (296), or 
mischief (499) can be ‘put’, ‘kept’, or ‘held’. Thephrenes also are 
like a cupboard, where the advice that is constantly given in the 
poem (107, 274) is to be laid up, and where foolish Perses is to 
‘look’ at it carefully (688). The kradie has the metaphier of a 
person more than a container, and can be gracious (340), vexed 
(451), or can like and dislike things (681). But psyche (686) and 
etor (360, 593) are undeveloped and are simply life and belly 
respectively. 

Noos in the Works and Days is interesting because, in all four 



280 


The Witness of History 


of its instances, it is like a person relating to moral conduct. In 
two instances (67, 714) it has shame or not, and in another, it is 
adikon, without good direction (260). A proper study of the 
matter would point out in detail the particular development of the 
term dike. Its original meaning was to point (from which comes 
the original meaning of digit, as a finger), and in the Iliad its 
most parsimonious translation is as “direction,” in the sense of 
pointing out what to do. Sarpedon guarded Lycia by his dike 
(Iliad 16:542). But in the Works and Days, it has come to mean 
god-given right directions or justice, perhaps as a replacement for 
the god's voice. 12 It is a silent Zeus, son of a now spatialized 
time, who here for the first time dispenses dike or justice more or 
less as we know it in later Greek literature. (See for example 
267ff.). How absolutely alien to the amoral world of the Iliad, 
that a whole city can suffer for one evil man (240)! 

Our sense of justice depends on our sense of time. Justice is a 
phenomenon only of consciousness, because time spread out in a 
spatial succession is its very essence. And this is possible only in 
a spatial metaphor of time. Instances of this increased spatializa- 
tion are common. Committing violence at one time begets a 
punishment at some time to follow (245f.). Long and steep is 
the path to goodness (290). A good man is he who sees what 
will be better afterward (294). Add little to little and it will 
become great (362). Work with work upon work to gain wealth 
(382). These notions are impossible unless the before and after 
of time are metaphored into a spatial succession. This basic 
ingredient of consciousness, which began in Assyrian building 
inscriptions in 1300 B.C. (see the previous chapter), has indeed 
come a long way. 

It is important here to understand how closely coupled this 

12 But that the origin of this new sense of god-sent justice is possibly in an hallu¬ 
cinated messenger from Zeus is suggested where Dike is said to moan and weep 
when men take bribes and do evil (22of). My derivation here of dike is not the 
usual one. 



INTELLECTUAL CONSCIOUSNESS OF GREECE 


28l 


new sense of time and justice is to what can be called the secular¬ 
ization of attention. By this I mean the shift in attention toward 
the everyday problems of making a living, something that is 
totally foreign to the mighty god-devised epics which preceded it. 
Whether the poem itself is divinely inspired, or, as the majority 
of scholars think, the sulky exhortations of Perses' brother 
Hesiod, it is a dramatic turning point in the direction of human 
concern. Instead of grand impersonal narrative, we have a de¬ 
tailed personal expression. Instead of an ageless past, we have a 
vivid expression of a present wedged in between a past and a 
future. And it is a present of grim harshness that described the 
post-Dorian rural reality, full of petty strife and the struggle of 
wresting a living from the land, while around its edges hovers the 
nostalgia for the mighty golden world of bicameral Mycaenae, 
whose people were a race 

. . . which was more lawful and more righteous, a god-like 
race of hero-men who are called half-gods, the race before our 
own, throughout the boundless earth. (1585.). 


LYRIC 


AND ELEGY FROM 
TO 600 B . C . 


700 


I was about to write that Greek consciousness is nearing comple¬ 
tion in the Works and Days. But that is a very misleading meta¬ 
phor, that consciousness is a thing that is built, formed, shaped 
into something that has a completion. There is no such thing as 
a complete consciousness. 

What I would have been indicating was that the basic meta¬ 
phors of time with space, of internal hypostases as persons in a 
mental space have begun to work themselves into the guides and 
guardians of everyday life. 



282 


The Witness of History 


Against this development, the Greek poetry of the seventh 
century B.C., which follows chronologically, is something of an 
anticlimax. But this is because so little of these elegiac and lyric 
poets has escaped the eager ravages of time. If we take only those 
who have at least a dozen lines extant, there are only seven poets 
