to be considered. 

The first thing to say about them is that they are not simply 
poets, as we regard the term. As a group, they are something like 
their contemporaries, the prophets of Israel, holy teachers of men, 
called by kings to settle disputes and to lead armies, resembling 
in some of their functions the shamans of contemporary tribal 
cultures. At the beginning of the century, they were probably 
still associated with holy dancing. But gradually the dance and 
its religious aura are lost in a secularity that is chanted to the lyre 
or the sounds of flutes. These artistic changes, however, are 
merely coincident to changes of a much more important kind. 

The Works and Days expressed the present. The new poetry 
expresses the person in that present, the particular individual 
and how he is different from others. And celebrates that differ¬ 
ence. And as it does so, we can trace a progressive filling out and 
stretching of the earlier preconscious hypostases into the mind- 
space of consciousness. 

In the first part of the century is Terpander, the inventor of 
drinking songs, according to Pindar, one of whose thirteen extant 
lines cries out over the centuries: 

Of the Far-flinging Lord come sing to me, O Phrenes!‘3 

This is interesting. The Lord here is Apollo. But note that while 
the poem itself is to be a nostalgic poem to a lost god, it is not a 

'3 Fragment 2 in the Loeb edition, Lyra Graeca, edited by J. M. Edmonds (Lon¬ 
don: Heinemann, 1928). All references in this section are to this volume or to the 
companion Loeb volumes, Elegy and Iambus, Vols. 1 and 2, also edited by Ed¬ 
monds (London: Heinemann, 1931). 



INTELLECTUAL CONSCIOUSNESS OF GREECE 283 


god or a muse who is invoked to compose it. In the Odyssey, a 
god puts songs into the phrenes which the minstrel then sings as 
if he were reading the music (22:347). But for Terpander, who 
hears no gods, it is his own phrenes that are begged to compose a 
song just as if they were a god. And this implicit comparison, I 
suggest, with its associated paraphrands of a space in which the 
deiform phrenes could exist, is well on the way to creating the 
mind-space with its Analog T of consciousness. 

It is not just in such word usages that this transition in the 
seventh century is apparent, but also in the subject matter. For 
the secularization and personalization of content begun in the 
Works and Days fairly explodes in midcentury in the angry iam¬ 
bics of Archilochus, the wandering soldier-poet of Paros. Accord¬ 
ing to the inscription of his tomb, it was he who "first dipt a bitter 
Muse in snake-venom and stained gentle Helicon with blood," a 
reference to the story that he could provoke suicides with the 
power of his iambic abuse. 1 "* Even using poetry this way, to 
engage in personal vendettas and state personal preferences, is a 
new thing to the world. And so close to modern reflective con¬ 
sciousness do some of these fragments come, that the loss of 
most of Archilochus' work opens one of the greatest gaps in 
ancient literature. 

But the gods, though never heard by Archilochus, still control 
the world. "The ends of victory are among the gods" (Fragment 
55). And the hypostases remain. The bad effects of drink 
(Fragment 77) or of old age (Fragment 94) occur in the 
phrenes; and when he is troubled, it is his thumos which is 
thrown down like a weak warrior and is told to "look up and 
defend yourself against your enemies" (Fragment 66). Archi¬ 
lochus talks to his thumos as to another person, the implicit 
comparison and its paraphrands of space and self-'observed' 'self 

u According to the Palatine Anthology collected about a.d. 920 from previous 
sources. See Edmonds, Elegy and Iambus, 2:97. 



284 

The Witness of History 

being a further step toward the consciousness of the next cen¬ 
tury. 

Chronologically next come two other soldier-poets, Tyrtaeus 
and Callinus, whose remaining fragments are of little interest. 
Their most common hypostasis is thumos, and they do little 
more than urge us to keep an unfaltering thumos in battle. 

And then, about 630 B.C., two poets of a different kind, Aleman 
and Mimnermus. They urge nothing, but celebrate their own 
subjective feelings in a way that had never been done before. 
"Who may report the noos of another?" (Fragment 55) asks the 
former, making the metaphor of noos as a happening with its 
obvious paraphrand consequences. And Mimnermus complains 
of the ill cares that wear and wear his phrenes (Fragment 1) and 
of the "sorrows that rise in the thumos" (Fragment 2). This is a 
long way from the simple hypostases of the Homeric epics. 

At the end of this presageful century come the poems of 
Alcaeus and, particularly, the empty-armed passions of virile 
Sappho, the tenth muse as Plato calls her. Both these poets of 
Lesbos say the usual things about their thumos and phrenes> 
using both about equally. Sappho even sings about the theloi or 
arrangements of her thumos which become our desires and voli¬ 
tions (Fragment 36:3). And she practically invents love in its 
romantic modern sense. Love wrings her thumos with anguish 
(Fragment 43) and shakes her phrenes as a hurricane shakes an 
oak tree (Fragment 54). 

But more important is the development of the term noema. 
By the late seventh century, it is clear that noema has come to 
mean a composite of what we mean by thoughts, wishes, intents, 
etc., and joining up with the theloi of the thumos. Alcaeus says, 
"If Zeus will accomplish what is our noema" (Fragment 43). He 
describes a speaker as not "prevaricating (or excusing) his 
noema at all" (Fragment 144). In those shards of Sappho that 



INTELLECTUAL CONSCIOUSNESS OF GREECE 


285 


remain, the word is used three times: toward those she loves, 
"my noema can never change" (Fragment 14); her "noema is not 
so softly disposed to the anger of a child" (Fragment 35) ; and in 
her complaint, "I know not what to do; my noemata are in two 
parts . . (Fragment 52). This puts the emphasis on the 
imagined internal metaphor-thing that is hypostasized into a 
thought. It is love that is teaching mankind to introspect. And 
there is even another word in Sappho, sunoida y whose roots would 
indicate that it means to know together, which, when Latinized, 
becomes the word 'conscious' (Fragment 15). 

In these seven poets of the seventh century, then, we find a 
remarkable development, that, as the subject matter changed 
from martial exhortations to personal expressions of love, the 
manner in which the mental hypostases are used and their con¬ 
texts become much more what we think of as subjective con¬ 
sciousness. 

These are murky historical waters, and we may be sure that 
these seven poets, with their few fragments bobbing in the extant 
surface of the seventh century B.C., are but an indication of the 
many that probably then existed and helped develop the new 
mentality we are calling consciousness. 


SOLON’S MIND 


I particularly feel that these seven cannot be representative of 
the time, for the very next poet chronologically that we know of is 
dramatically different from any of them. He is the morning star 
of the Greek intellect, the man who alone, so far as we know, 
really filled out the idea of human justice. This is Solon of 
Athens, who stands at the beginning of the great sixth century 
B.C., the century of Thales, Anaximander, and Pythagoras. It is 
the century where, for the first time, we can feel mentally at 



286 


The Witness of History 


home among persons who think in somewhat the way we do. 

The swiftness of the unfolding of these greatnesses of Greek 
culture is astonishing. And if for no other reason, Solon, at the 
beginning of all this, is astonishing for his use of the word noos. 
The word is rarely used by any of the poets we have previously 
looked at. But in the mere 280 (approximately) lines that have 
come down to us, he uses noos eight times. This is an extremely 
high frequency of 44 per 10,000) words. It indicates Phase IV, in 
which the several hypostases are joining into one. Thumos is 
used only twice, and phrenes and etor once each. 

But it is also the way he speaks about the noos that is the first 
real statement of the subjective conscious mind. He speaks of 
those whose noos is not artios, which means intact or whole 
(Fragment 6). How impossible to say of a recognition! It is the 
noos that is wrong in a bad leader (Fragment 4). The Homeric 
meaning of noos could not take moral epithets. At about age 
forty-two, "a man's noos is trained in all things." Certainly this is 
not his visual perception. And in his fifties, he is "at his best in 
noos and tongue" (Fragment 27). 

Another fragment describes the true beginning of personal 
responsibility, where he warns his fellow Athenians not to blame 
the gods for their misfortunes, but themselves. How contrary to 
the mind of the Iliad! And then adds, 

Each one of you walks with the steps of a fox; the noos of 
all of you is chaunos [porous, spongy, or loose-grained as in 
wood] : for you look to a man's tongue and rapidly shifting 
speech, and never to the deed he does. (Fragment 10). 

Not Achilles nor artful Odysseus nor even foolish Perses (or his 
brother) could have 'understood' this admonition. 

Consciousness and morality are a single development. For 
without gods, morality based on a consciousness of the conse¬ 
quences of action must tell men what to do. The dike or justice 



INTELLECTUAL CONSCIOUSNESS OF GREECE 


287 


of the Works and Days is developed even further in Solon. It is 
