now moral right that must be fitted together with might in gov¬ 
ernment (Fragment 36) and which is the basis of law and lawful 
action. 

Sometimes attributed to Solon are certain other injunctions, 
such as his exhortation to "moderation in all things." But more 
germane to the present topic is the famous "Know thyself," which 
is often ascribed to him but may have come from one of his 
contemporaries. This again was something inconceivable to the 
Homeric heroes. How can one know oneself? By initiating by 
oneself memories of one's actions and feelings and looking at 
them together with an analog T, conceptualizing them, sorting 
them out into characteristics, and narratizing so as to know what 
one is likely to do. One must 'see' 'oneself' as in an imaginary 
'space,' indeed what we were calling autoscopic illusions back in 
an early chapter. 

Suddenly, then, we are in the modern subjective age. We can 
only regret that the literature of the seventh century B.C. is so 
shredded and scant as to make this almost full appearance of 
subjective consciousness in Solon almost implausible, if we re¬ 
gard him as simply a part of the Greek tradition. But the legends 
about Solon are many. And several of them insist that he was 
widely traveled, having visited countries of Asia Minor before 
returning to Athens to live out his life and write most of his 
poems. It is thus certainly a suggestion that his particular use of 
the word noos and his reification of the term into the imaginary 
mind-space of consciousness was due to the influence of these 
more developed nations. 

With Solon, partly because he was the political leader of his 
time, the operator of consciousness is firmly established in 
Greece. He has a mind-space called a noos in which an analog of 
himself can narratize out what is dike or right for his people to 
do. Once established, once a man can 'know himself,' as Solon 



288 


The Witness of History 


advised, can place 'times' together in the side-by-sideness of mind- 
space, can ’see’ into himself and his world with the ’eye’ of his 
noos, the divine voices are unnecessary, at least to everyday life. 
They have been pushed aside into special places called temples 
or special persons called oracles. And that the new unitary nous 
(as it came to be spelled), absorbing the functions of the other 
hypostases, was successful is attested by all the literature that 
followed, as well as the reorganization of behavior and society. 

But we are somewhat ahead of our story. For there is another 
development in this important sixth century B.C., and one which 
is a huge complication for the future. It is an old term, psyche y 
used in an unpredictably new way. In time it comes to parallel and 
then to become interchangeable with nous, while at the same 
time it engenders that consciousness of consciousness which was 
held up as false at the beginning of Book I. Moreover, I shall 
suggest that this new concept is an almost artifactual result of a 
meeting between Greek and Egyptian cultures. 


THE INVENTION OF THE SOUL 


Psyche is the last of these words to come to have ’space’ inside it. 
This is due, I think, to the fact that psyche or livingness did not 
lend itself to a container-type metaphor until the conscious spa- 
tialization of time had so far developed that a man had a life in 
the sense of a time span, rather than just in the sense of breath 
and blood. But the progress of psyche toward the concept of soul 
is not that clear at all. 

For, more than the other hypostases, psyche is sometimes used 
in confusing ways that seem on the surface to defy a chronological 
ordering. Its primary use is always for life, as I have stated. 
After the Homeric poems, Tyrtaeus, for example, uses psyche in 
that sense (Fragments to and n), as does Alcaeus (Fragment 
77B). And even as late as the fifth century B.C., Euripides uses 



INTELLECTUAL CONSCIOUSNESS OF GREECE 


289 


the phrase "to be fond of one's psyche" in the sense of clinging to 
life ( Iphigenia at Aulis, 1385). Some of the Aristotelian writings 
also use psyche as life, and this usage even extends into much of 
the New Testament. "I am the good shepherd: the good shep¬ 
herd giveth his psyche for his sheep" (John, 10:11). Jesus did not 
mean his mind or soul. 

But in Achilles' dream at the beginning of Book 23 of the Iliad, 
the psyche of the dead Patroclus visits him, and when he tries to 
hug it in his arms, it sinks gibbering into the earth. The grizzly 
scenes in Hades in Books 11 and 24 of the Odyssey use psyche in a 
similar way. The term in these instances has an almost opposite 
sense from its meaning in the rest of both Iliad and Odyssey. Not 
life, but that which exists after life has ceased. Not what is bled 
out of one's veins in battle, but the soul or ghost that goes to 
Hades, a concept that is otherwise unheard of in Greek literature 
until Pindar, around 500 B.C. In all the intervening writers we 
have been looking at through the eighth and seventh centuries 
B.C., psyche is never the ghost-soul, but always has its original 
meaning of life or livingness. 

Now, no amount of twisting about in semantic origins can 
reconcile these two gratingly different significations for psyche} 
one relating to life and the other to death. The obvious sugges¬ 
tion here is that these alien incongruities in Homer are interpola¬ 
tions of a period much later than the ostensible period of the 
poems. And indeed this is what the majority of scholars are sure 
of on much more ample grounds than we can go into here. Since 
this meaning of psyche does not appear until Pindar, we may be 
fairly confident that these passages about Hades and the souls of 
the dead abiding there in its shades were added into the Homeric 
poems shortly before Pindar, sometime in the sixth century B.C. 

The problem then is how and why did this dramatically differ¬ 
ent concept of psyche come about? And let us be clear here that 
the only thing we are talking about is the application of the old 
word for life to what survives after death and its separability 
from the body. The actual survival, as we have seen in previous 



290 


The Witness of History 


chapters, is not in doubt. According to the theory of the bicam¬ 
eral mind, hallucinations of a person in some authority could 
continue after death as an everyday matter. And hence the al¬ 
most universal custom of feeding the corpses after death, and 
burying them with the appurtenances of life. 

I am unable to suggest a truly satisfactory solution. But cer¬ 
tainly a part of it is the influence of that towering legend-laden 
figure of antiquity, Pythagoras. Flourishing around the middle of 
the sixth century B.C., he is thought to have traveled, as did 
Solon, to several countries of Asia Minor, particularly Egypt. He 
then returned and established a kind of mystical secret society in 
Crotona in southern Italy. They practiced mathematics, vegetar¬ 
ianism, and a firm illiteracy — to write things down was a source 
of error. Among these teachings, as we have them at least at 
third hand from later writers, was the doctrine of the transmigra¬ 
tion of souls. After death, a man's soul enters the body of a 
newborn infant or animal and so lives another life. 

Herodotus has been flouted for saying Pythagoras learned this 
in Egypt. But if one agrees with the theory of the bicameral 
mind, the origin of soul transmigration in Egyptian ideas is not 
difficult to trace. I suggest it was a Greek misunderstanding of 
the functions of the ba, which, as we saw in IE2, was often the 
seeming physical embodiment of the ka, or hallucinated voice 
after death. Often the ba had the form of a bird. Greek, how¬ 
ever, had no word for ka (other than a god — clearly inappropri¬ 
ate), or for ba, indeed no word for a 'life' which could be 
transferred from one material body to another. Hence psyche 
was pressed into this service. All references to this Pythagorean 
teaching use psyche in this new sense, as a clearly separable soul 
that can migrate from one body to another as could an halluci¬ 
nated voice in Egypt. 

Now this does not really solve our problem. For there is noth¬ 
ing here of dead strengthless souls wailing about in a nether¬ 
world, guzzling hot blood to get their strength back — which is 



2Q1 

INTELLECTUAL CONSCIOUSNESS OF GREECE 

the lively scene added into the Odyssey as Rook u. But the 
psyche here is somewhat the same, a something of a man which 
leaves the body at death. And what the Hades view of psyche 
may be is a composite of the Pythagorean teaching with the older 
view of the buried dead in Greek antiquity. 

All this curious development of the sixth century B.C. is ex¬ 
tremely important for psychology. For with this wrenching of 
psyche = life over to psyche = soul, there came other changes to 
balance it as the enormous inner tensions of a lexicon always do. 
The word soma had meant corpse or deadness, the opposite of 
psyche as livingness. So now, as psyche becomes soul, so soma 
remains as its opposite, becoming body. And dualism, the sup¬ 
posed separation of soul and body, has begun. 

But the matter does not stop there. In Pindar, Heraclitus, and 
others around 500 B.C., psyche and nous begin to coalesce. It is 
now the conscious subjective mind-space and its self that is op¬ 
posed to the material body. Cults spring up about this new 
wonder-provoking division between psyche and soma. It both 
excites and seems to explain the new conscious experience, thus 
reinforcing its very existence. The conscious psyche is impris¬ 
oned in the body as in a tomb. It becomes an object of wide-eyed 
controversy. Where is it? And the locations in the body or out¬ 
side it vary. What is it made of? Water (Thales), blood, air 
(Anaximenes), breath (Xenophanes), fire (Heraclitus), and so 
on, as the science of it all begins in a morass of pseudoquestions. 

So dualism, that central difficulty in this problem of conscious¬ 
ness, begins its huge haunted career through history, to be firmly 
set in the firmament of thought by Plato, moving through Gnos¬ 
ticism into the great religions, up through the arrogant assur¬ 
ances of Descartes to become one of the great spurious 
quandaries of modern psychology. 


This has been a long and technical chapter that can be briefly 
summarized in a metaphor. At the beginning, we noted that 
archaeologists, by brushing the dust of the ages from around the 
