


292 


The Witness of History 


broken shards of pottery from the period of the Dorian invasions, 
have been able to reveal continuities and changes from site to 
site, and so to prove that a complex series of migrations was 
occurring. In a sense, we have been doing the same thing with 
language throughout this chapter. We have taken broken-off bits 
of vocabulary, those that came to refer to some kind of mental 
function, and by their contexts from text to text, attempted to 
demonstrate that a huge complex series of changes in mentality 
was going on during these obscure periods that followed the 
Dorian invasions in Greece. 

Let no one think these ar e just word changes. Word changes 
are concept changes and concept changes are behavioral changes. 
The entire history of religions and of politics and even of 
science stands shrill witness to that. Without words like soul, 
liberty, or truth, the pageant of this human condition would have 
been filled with different roles, different climaxes. And so with 
the words we have designated as preconscious hypostases, which 
by the generating process of metaphor through these few cen¬ 
turies unite into the operator of consciousness. 

I have now completed that part of the story of Greek con¬ 
sciousness that I intended to tell. More of it could be told, how 
the two nonstimulus-bound hypostases come to overshadow the 
rest, how nous and psyche come to be almost interchangeable in 
later writers, such as Parmenides and Democritus, and take on 
even new metaphor depths with the invention of logos y and of the 
forms of truth, virtue, and beauty. 

But that is another task. The Greek subjective conscious mind, 
quite apart from its pseudostructure of soul, has been born out of 
song and poetry. From here it moves out into its own history, into 
the narratizing introspections of a Socrates and the spatialized 
classifications and analyses of an Aristotle, and from there into 
Hebrew, Alexandrian, and Roman thought. And then into the 
history of a world which, because of it, will never be the same 
again. 



CHAPTER 6 


The Moral Consciousness 
of the Khabiru 


r l he third great area where we can look at the development 
M of consciousness is certainly the most interesting and pro¬ 
found. All through the Middle East toward the end of the second 
millennium B.C., there were large amorphous masses of half- 
nomadic peoples with no fixed dira or grazing ground. Some 
were the refugees from the Thera destruction and the terrible 
Dorian invasions which followed. One cuneiform tablet specifi¬ 
cally speaks of migrations pouring down through the Lebanon. 
Others were probably refugees from the Assyrian invasions and 
were joined by the Hittite refugees when that empire fell to a 
further invasion from the north. And still others may have been 
the resistant bicameral individuals of the cities who could not 
silence the gods so easily, and who, if not killed, would be pro¬ 
gressively sifted out into the desert wilderness. 

A mixture of men, then, coming together precariously for a 
time, and then separating out, some perishing, others organizing 
into unstable tribes; some raiding more settled lands, or fighting 
over water holes 3 or sometimes, perhaps, caught like exhausted 
animals and made to do their captor's will, or, in the desperation 
of hunger, bartering control over their lives for bread and seed, as 
described on some fifteenth-century B.C. tablets unearthed at 
Nuzi, as well as in Genesis 47:18-26. Some perhaps were still 
trying to follow inadequate bicameral voices, or clinging to the 
edge of settled land, fearing to launch out, becoming breeders of 
sheep and camels, while others, having struggled unsuccessfully 



294 


The Witness of History 


to mingle with more settled peoples, then pushed out into the 
open desert where only the ruthless survive, perhaps in precari¬ 
ous pursuit of some hallucinated vision, some back parts of a god, 
some new city or promised land. 

To the established city-states, these refugees were the desper¬ 
ate outcasts of the desert wilderness. The city people thought of 
them collectively as robbers and vagrants. And so they often 
were, either singly, as miserable homeless wretches stealing by 
night the grapes which the vine-dressers scorned to pick, or as 
whole tribes raiding the city peripheries for their cattle and pro¬ 
duce, even as nomadic Bedouins occasionally do today. The word 
for vagrants in Akkad, the language of Babylon, is khabiru and 
so these desert refugees are referred to on cuneiform tablets. 1 
And khabiru softened in the desert air, becomes Hebrew. 

The story or imagined story of the later Khabiru or Hebrews is 
told in what has come down to us as the Old Testament. The 
thesis to which we shall give our concern in this chapter is that 
this magnificent collection of history and harangue, of song, 
sermon, and story is in its grand overall contour the description 
of the loss of the bicameral mind, and its replacement by subjec¬ 
tivity over the first millennium B.C. 

We are immediately, however, presented with an orthological 
problem of immense proportions. For much of the Old Testa¬ 
ment, particularly the first books, so important to our thesis, are, 
as is well known, forgeries of the seventh, sixth, and fifth cen¬ 
turies B.C., brilliant workings of brightly colored strands gathered 
from a scatter of places and periods. 2 In Genesis, for example, 
the first and second chapters tell different creation stories; the 

1 Much of this information may be found in the Bampton Lectures of Alfred 
Guillaume, Prophecy and Divination among the Hebrews and Other Semites (New 
York: Harper, 1938). This chapter owes a particular debt to Guillaume's richness 
of discussion of these matters. 

2 In matters of dating, authorship, and other exegetical material on the Old 
Testament here and elsewhere in this chapter, I have relied on several authorities but 
primarily the respective articles in the Encyclopaedia Britannica. 



MORAL CONSCIOUSNESS OF THE KHABIRU 


295 


story of the flood is a monotheistic rewrite of old Sumerian in¬ 
scriptions; 3 the story of Jacob may well date to before 1000 B.C., 
but that of Joseph, his supposed son, on the very next pages 
comes from at least 500 years later. 4 It had all begun with the 
discovery of the manuscript of Deuteronomy in Jerusalem in 621 
B.C. by King Josiah, after he ordered the temple cleaned and 
cleared of its remaining bicameral rites. And Khabiru history, 
like a nomad staggering into a huge inheritance, put on these rich 
clothes, some not its own, and belted it all together with some 
imaginative ancestry. It is thus a question whether the use of 
this variegated material as evidence for any theory of mind what¬ 
ever is even permissible. 


Amos and Ecclesiastes Compared 

Let me first address such skeptics. As I have said, most of the 
books of the Old Testament were woven together from various 
sources from various centuries. But some of the books are con¬ 
sidered pure in the sense of not being compilations, but being 
pretty much all of one piece, mostly what they say they are, and 
to these a thoroughly accurate date can be attached. If we con¬ 
fine ourselves for the moment to these books, and compare the 
oldest of them with the most recent, we have a fairly authentic 
comparison which should give us evidence one way or another. 
Among these pure books, the oldest is Amos, dating from the 
eighth century B.C., and the most recent is Ecclesiastes, from the 
second century B.C. They are both short books, and I hope that 
you will turn to them before reading on, that you may for your¬ 
self sense authentically this difference between an almost bicam¬ 
eral man and a subjective conscious man. 

For this evidence is dramatically in agreement with the hy- 

3 Alexander Heidel, The Gilgamesh Efic and Old Testament Parallels, 2nd ed. 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1949), p. 224$. 

4 Donald B. Redford, A Study of the Biblical Story of Joseph, Genesis 37-50 
(Leiden: Brill, 1970). The original maybe a secular story from Mesopotamia on the 
art of divination. 



296 


The Witness of History 


pothesis. Amos is almost pure bicameral speech, heard by an 
illiterate desert herdsman, and dictated to a scribe. In Ecclesi¬ 
astes, in contrast, god is rarely mentioned, let alone ever speaking 
to its educated author. And even these mentions are considered 
by some scholars to be later interpolations, to allow this magnifi¬ 
cent writing into the canon. 

In Amos there are no words for mind or think or feel or 
understand or anything similar whatever 3 Amos never ponders 
anything in his heart; he can't; he would not know what it meant. 
In the few times he refers to himself, he is abrupt and informa¬ 
tive without qualification; he is no prophet, but a mere "gatherer 
of sycamore fruit"; he does not consciously think before he 
speaks; in fact, he does not think as we do at all: his thought is 
done for him. He feels his bicameral voice about to speak and 
shushes those about him with a "Thus speaks the Lord!" and 
follows with an angry forceful speech which he probably does not 
understand himself. 

Ecclesiastes is the opposite on all these points. He ponders 
things as deep in the paraphrands of his hypostatic heart as is 
possible. And who but a very subjective man could say, "Vanity 
of vanities, all is vanity," (1:2), or say that he sees that wisdom 
excels folly (2:13). One has to have an analog ‘I’ surveying a 
mind-space to so see. And the famous third chapter, "To every¬ 
thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under heaven 
. . ."is precisely the spatialization of time, its spreading out in 
mind-space, so characteristic of consciousness as we saw in 1.2. 
Ecclesiastes thinks, considers, is constantly comparing one thing 
and another, and making brilliant metaphors as he does so. 
Amos uses external divination, Ecclesiastes never. Amos is fiercely 
