righteous, absolutely assured, nobly rude, speaking a blustering 
god-speech with the unconscious rhetoric of an Achilles or a 
Hammurabi. Ecclesiastes would be an excellent fireside friend, 
mellow, kindly, concerned, hesitant, surveying all of life in a way 
that would have been impossible for Amos. 

These then are the extremes in the Old Testament. Similar 



MORAL CONSCIOUSNESS OF THE KHABIRU 


297 


comparisons can be made with other early and late books, or 
early and late parts of the same book, all revealing the same 
pattern, which is difficult to account for apart from the theory of 
the bicameral mind. 


Some Observations on the Pentateuch 

We are so used to the wonderful stories of the first five books 
specifically that it is almost impossible for us to see them freshly 
for what they are. Indeed, in trying to do so, whatever our 
religious backgrounds, we feel, if not blasphemous, at least disre¬ 
spectful to the profoundest meanings of others. Such disrespect 
is certainly not my intention, but it is only by a cold unworshipful 
reading of these powerful pages that we can appreciate the mag¬ 
nitude of the mental struggle that followed the breakdown of the 
bicameral mind. 

Why were these books put together? The first thing to realize 
is that the very motive behind their composition around Deuter¬ 
onomy at this time was the nostalgic anguish for the lost bicam- 
erality of a subjectively conscious people. This is what religion is. 
And it was done just as the voice of Yahweh in particular was 
not being heard with any great clarity or frequency. Whatever 
their sources, the stories themselves, as they have been arranged, 
reflect human psychologies from the ninth century up to the fifth 
century B.C., the period during which there is progressively less 
and less bicamerality. 

The Elohim. Another observation I would like to make con¬ 
cerns that very important word which governs the whole first 
chapter of Genesis, elohim. It is usually incorrectly translated in 
the singular as God. 'Elohim' is a plural form; it can be used 
collectively taking a, singular verb, or as a regular plural taking a 
plural verb. It comes from the root of 'to be powerful', and better 
translations of ‘elohim’ might be the great ones, the prominent 
ones, the majesties, the judges, the mighty ones, etc. 

From the point of view of the present theory, it is clear that 



298 


The Witness of History 


elohim is a general term referring to the voice-visions of the 
bicameral mind. The creation story of the first chapter of Gene¬ 
sis is thus a rationalization of the bicameral voices at the edge of 
subjectivity. "In the beginning the voices created heaven and 
earth." Taken as such, it becomes a more general myth that 
could have been indigenous to all of the ancient bicameral civili¬ 
zations. 

He-who-is, At the particular time in history that we pick up 
the story as the Pentateuch has put it together, there are only a 
few remaining elohim in contrast to the large number that prob¬ 
ably previously existed. The most important is one recognized as 
Yahweh, which among several possibilities is most often trans¬ 
lated as He-who-is.s Evidently one particular group of the 
Khabiru, as the prophetic subjective age was approaching, was 
following only the voice of He-who-is, and rewrote the elohim 
creation story in a much warmer and more human way, making 
He-who-is the only real elohah. And this becomes the creation 
story as told from Genesis 2:4 et seq. And these two stories then 
interweave with other elements from other sources to form the 
first books of the Bible. 

Other elohim are occasionally mentioned throughout the older 
parts of the Old Testament. The most important of them is Ba'al, 
usually translated as the Owner. In the Canaan of the times, 
there were many Owners, one to each village, in the same way 
that many Catholic cities today have their own Virgin Marys, and 
yet they are all the same one. 

5 The derivation of Exodus 3: 14, that Yahweh means I AM THAT I AM, is 
regarded by most scholars as folk etymology, as if somebody should claim that the 
derivation of Manhattan came from a man on the island with a hat on. More seri¬ 
ous scholarship traces the name back to an epithet, such as he who casts down or 
the Downcaster. But the sense of the majority, including- the Septuagint and Latin 
Vulgate, seems to be more in line with He-who-is. Cf. William Gesenius, Hebrew 
and English Lexicon of the Old Testament, E. Robinson, trans., F. Brown, ed. (Ox¬ 
ford: Clarendon Press, 1952), p. 218. I must ask the forbearance of professional' 
scholars for my inconsistency in straining for the English here while keeping other 
terms such as elohim and nabi in the Hebrew. My purpose is the defamiliarization 
which I feel is essential for my main point. 



MORAL CONSCIOUSNESS OF THE KHABIRU 


299 


Paradise Lost. A further observation could be made upon the 
story of the Fall and how it is possible to look upon it as a myth of 
the breakdown of the bicameral mind. The Hebrew arum> mean¬ 
ing crafty or deceitful, surely a conscious subjective word, is only 
used three or four times throughout the entire Old Testament. It 
is here used to describe the source of the temptation. The ability 
to deceive, we remember, is one of the hallmarks of conscious¬ 
ness. The serpent promises that "you shall be like the elohim 
themselves, knowing good and evil" (Genesis 3:5), qualities that 
only subjective conscious man is capable of. And when these first 
humans had eaten of the tree of knowledge, suddenly "the eyes of 
them both were opened," their analog eyes in their metaphored 
mind-space, "and they knew that they were naked" (Genesis 
3:7), or had autoscopic visions and were narratizing, seeing 
themselves as others see them. 6 And so is their sorrow "greatly 
multipled" (Genesis 3:16) and they are cast out from the garden 
where He-who-is could be seen and talked with like another 
man. 

As a narratization of the breakdown of the bicameral mind and 
the coming of consciousness, the story should be rationalistically 
contrasted with the Odyssey as discussed in the previous chapter. 
But the problems are similar, as is the awe we should feel toward 
its unknown composition. 

The Nabiim who naba. The Hebrew word nabi / which has 
been misleadingly translated by the Greek designation of 
'prophet', presents an extremely interesting difficulty. To proph¬ 
esy in its modern connotations is to foretell the future, but this is 
not what is indicated by the verb naba, whose practitioners were 
the nabiim (plural of nabi). These terms come from a group of 
cognate words which have nothing to do with time, but rather 

6 It is interesting in this connection to read Maimonides, Guide of the Perplexed, 1:2. 

7 Transliteration from Hebrew into English is always misleading. Perhaps a better 
case here might be made for nbi or nvi. That its meaning was ambiguous even at the 
time seems to be indicated in I Samuel 9:9. See also John L. McKenzie, A Theology 
of the Old Testament (New York: Doubleday, 1974), p. 85. 



300 


The Witness of History 


with flowing and becoming bright. Thus we may think of a nabi 
as one who metaphorically was flowing forth or welling up with 
speech and visions. They were transitional men, partly subjec¬ 
tive and partly bicameral. And once the bright torrent was re¬ 
leased and the call came, the nabi must deliver his bicameral 
message, however unsuspecting (Amos 7:14-15), however un¬ 
worthy the nabi felt (Exodus 3:113 Isaiah 6; Jeremiah 1:6), 
however distrustful at times of his own hearing (Jeremiah 20:7- 
10). What does it feel like to be a nabi at the beginning of one of 
his bicameral periods? Like a red hot coal in one's mouth (Isaiah 
6:7) or a raging fire shut up in one's bones that cannot be 
contained (Jeremiah 20:9) and that only the flowing forth of 
divine speech can quench. 

The story of the nabiim can be told in two ways. One is 
external, tracing out their early role and the acceptance of their 
leadership to their massacre and total suppression in about the 
fourth century B.C. But as evidence for the theory in this book, it 
is more instructive to look at the matter from the internal point of 
view, the changes in the bicameral experience itself. These 
changes are: the gradual loss of the visual component, the grow¬ 
ing inconsistency of the voices in different persons, and the in¬ 
creasing inconsistency within the same person, until the voices of 
the elohim vanish from history. I shall take each of these up in 
turn. 

The Loss of the Visual Component 

In the true bicameral period, there was usually a visual compo¬ 
nent to the hallucinated voice, either itself hallucinated or as the 
statue in front of which one listened. The quality and frequency 
of the visual component certainly varied from one culture to 
another, as can be indicated by the presence of hallucinogenic 
statuary in some cultures and not in others. 

If only because its sources are so chronologically diverse, it is 



MORAL CONSCIOUSNESS OF THE KHABIRU 301 

somewhat astonishing to find the Pentateuch consistently and 
successively describing the loss of this visual component. In the 
beginning, He-who-is is a visual physical presence, the duplicate 
of his creation. He walks in his garden at the cool of the day, 
talking to his recent creation, Adam. He is present and visible at 
the sacrifice of Cain and Abel, shuts the door of Noah's Ark with 
his own hand, speaks with Abraham at Sichem, Bethel, and 
Hebron, and scuffles all night with Jacob like a hoodlum. 

But by the time of Moses, the visual component is very differ¬ 
ent. Only in a single instance does Moses speak with He-who-is 
"face to face, as a man speaketh to his friend” (Exodus 33:11). 
And another time, there is a group hallucination when Moses 
and the seventy elders all see He-who-is at a distance standing on 
sapphire pavement (Exodus 24:9-10). But in all the other in¬ 
stances, the hallucinated meetings are less intimate. Visually, He- 
who-is is a burning bush, or a cloud, or a huge pillar of fire. And 
as visually the bicameral experience recedes into the thick dark¬ 
