ness, where thunders and lightnings and driving clouds of dense 
blackness crowd in on the inaccessible heights of Sinai, we are 
approaching the greatest teaching of the entire Old Testament, 
that, as this last of the elohim loses his hallucinatory properties, 
and is no longer an inaccessible voice in the nervous system of a 
few semi-bicameral men, and becomes something written upon 
tablets, he becomes law, something unchanging, approachable by 
all, something relating to all men equally, king and shepherd, 
universal and transcendent. 

Moses himself reacts to this loss of the visual quality by hiding 
his face from a supposed brilliance. At other times, his bicameral 
voice itself rationalizes the loss of its visual hallucinatory compo¬ 
nents by saying to Moses, "No man shall see me and live ... I 
will put thee in a cleft of rock, and will cover thee with my hand 
while I pass by: and I will take away mine hand, and thou shalt 
see my back parts, but my face shall not be seen" (Exodus 33:20- 


23)- 



302 


The Witness of History 


The very conception of a cupboard called the ark, for some 
tablets of written word as a replacement for an hallucinogenic 
image of a more usual kind, like a golden calf, is illustrative of 
the same point. The importance of writing in the breakdown of 
the bicameral voices is tremendously important. What had to be 
spoken is now silent and carved upon a stone to be taken in 
visually. 

After the Pentateuch, the bicameral voice retreats even fur¬ 
ther. When the writer of Deuteronomy (34:10) says that no 
nabi has been like Moses "whom He-who-is knew face to face," he 
is indicating the loss of the bicameral mind. The voices are heard 
less frequently and less conversationally. Joshua is more spoken 
to by his voice than speaking with it; and, halfway between 
bicamerality and subjectivity, he has to draw lots to make de¬ 
cisions. 


Inconsistency Between Persons 

In the bicameral period, the strict hierarchy of society, the 
settled geography of its limits, its ziggurats, temples, and statu¬ 
ary, and the common upbringing of its citizens, all co-operated in 
the organization of different men's bicameral voices into a stable 
hierarchy. Whose bicameral voice was the correct one was im¬ 
mediately decided by that hierarchy, and the recognition signals 
as to which god was speaking were known by everyone and 
reinforced by priests. 

But with the breakdown of bicamerality, particularly when a 
previously bicameral people has become nomadic as in the Exo¬ 
dus, the voices will begin to say different things to different 
people and the problem of authority becomes a considerable diffi¬ 
culty. Something of the sort might be referred to in Numbers 
12:1-2, where Miriam, Aaron, and Moses, who all hear the voice 
of He-who-is, are not sure which is the most authentic. 

But the problem is much more acute in the later books, particu- 



MORAL CONSCIOUSNESS OF THE K H A 13 I R U 


303 


larly in the competition between the remaining bicameral voices. 
Joash has a bicameral voice that he recognizes as the Owner to 
whom he builds an altar; but his son Gideon hears a voice he 
recognizes as He-who-is which tells him to tear down his father's 
altar to the Owner and build another to himself (Judges 6:25- 
26). The jealousy of the remaining elohim is the direct and 
necessary result of social disorganization. 

Such a dissonance of bicameral voices in this unorganized 
breakdown period inaugurates the importance of signs or magical 
proofs as to which voice is valid. Thus Moses is constantly com¬ 
pelled to produce magical proofs of his mission. Such signs, of 
course, continue all through the first millennium even into pres¬ 
ent times. The miracles that today are required as criteria of 
sainthood are of precisely the same order as when Moses halluci¬ 
nates his rod into a serpent and back again, or his healthy hand 
into a leprous one and back (Exodus 4:1-7). 

Some of our present-day enjoyment of magic and prestidigita¬ 
tion is possibly a holdover from this desire for signs, in which in 
some part of ourselves we are enjoying the thrill of recognizing 
the magician as a possible bicameral authority. 

And if there are no signs, what then? In the seventh century 
B.C., this is particularly the problem of Jeremiah, the illiterate 
wailer at the wall of Israel's iniquity. Even though he has had the 
sign of the hand of He-who-is upon him (1: 9; 25:17) has heard 
the word of He-who-is continually like a fire in his bones, and has 
been sent (23:21, 32, etc.), yet still he is unsure: whose voice is 
the right one? "Wilt thou be altogether unto me as a liar?" 
Jeremiah mistrustfully jabs back at his bicameral voice (15:19). 
But on this point, it is sure in its answering. It breaks down what 
authority Jeremiah's rational consciousness may have had, and 
commands him to denounce all other voices. Chapter 28 is a 
particular example, with the somewhat ridiculous competition 
between Hananiah and Jeremiah as to whose bicameral voice is 
the right one. And it was only the death of Hananiah two months 



304 


The Witness of History 


later that was the sign of which to choose. Had Jeremiah died, 
we would probably have had the Book of Hananiah instead of his 
competitor's. 


Inconsistency Within Persons 

In the absence of a social hierarchy that provides stability and 
recognitions, the bicameral voices not only become inconsistent 
among persons, but inconsistent within the same person as well. 
Particularly in the Pentateuch, the bicameral voice is often as 
petty and foot-stampingly petulant as any human tyrant under 
questioning. "I will be gracious to whom I will be gracious, and 
will show mercy on whom I will show mercy.” (Exodus 33:19). 
There is no question of virtue or of justice. So He-who-is prefers 
Abel to Cain, slays Er, the first-born of Judah, having taken a 
dislike to him, first tells Abraham to beget a son, and then later 
orders him to kill the son, even as criminal psychotics might be 
directed today. Similarly, the bicameral voice of Moses possibly 
has a sudden impulse to kill him (Exodus 4:24) for no reason at 
all. 

This same inconsistency is found in the non-Israelite prophet, 
Balaam. His bicameral voice first tells him not to go with the 
princes of Moab (Numbers 22:12), then reverses itself (22:20). 
Then when Balaam obeys, it is furious. Then a visual-auditory 
hallucination out to kill Balaam blocks his way, but then this too 
reverses its commands (Numbers 22:35). Also in the self- 
recriminating category is the self-punishing voice of the ash¬ 
faced nabi who tries to get passersby to punch him because his 
voice commands him to (I Kings 20:35-38). And also, the "nabi 
from Judah" whose bicameral voice drives him out of the city and 
tries to starve him (1 Kings 13, 9-17). All of these inconsistent 
voices are coming close to the voices heard by schizophrenics 
which we noted in Chapter 4 of Book I. 



MORAL CONSCIOUSNESS OF THE KHABIRU 


305 


Divination by Gods 

The deciding things by casting gorals or lots, probably throw¬ 
ing dice, bones, or beans, runs through much of the Old Testa¬ 
ment. As we saw in II.4 of this essay, it is the making of an 
analog god. The goral by metaphor becomes the word of god 
deciding lands and tribes, what to do or whom to destroy, taking 
the place of the older bicameral authority. As mentioned earlier, 
it is a help in appreciating how authoritative such practices could 
be when we realize that there was no concept of chance until well 
into the subjective eras. 

But of much greater interest is the occurrence of the spontane¬ 
ous divination from immediate sensory experience that in the end 
becomes the subjective conscious mind. Its interest here is be¬ 
cause it begins not in the man-side of the bicameral mind but in 
the bicameral voices themselves. 

It is, then, another way that the bicameral voices show their 
uncertainty when they too, like men, turn to divination, and need 
to be primed or instigated. In the ninth century B.C., the voice of 
one of the nabiim before Ahab divines by metaphor from a pair of 
horns how an army may be defeated (I Kings 22:11). The 
bicameral voice of Jeremiah several times takes what he, Jere¬ 
miah, is looking at and divines from it what to say. When he sees 
a boiling wind-blown pot facing north, He-who-is metaphorizes it 
into an evil invasion blowing down from the north, consuming all 
before it like a fire driven by the wind (Jeremiah 1:13-15). 
When he sees two baskets of figs, one good and one bad, his right 
hemisphere has He-who-is speaking about picking good and bad 
people (Jeremiah 24:1-10). And when Amos sees a builder 
judging the straightness of a wall by holding a plumb line to it, 
his mind hallucinates the builder into He-who-is, who then meta¬ 
phorizes the act into judging people by their righteousness 
(Amos 7:8). 

Particularly when spontaneous divinations are being made by 



306 


The Witness of History 


gods (who after all cannot perform other types of divination), 
puns may 'seed' the analogy. Thus, when Amos stands looking at 
a basket of summer fruit, his bicameral voice puns over on the 
Hebrew qayits (summer fruit) to gets (end) and starts talking 
about the end of Israel (Amos 8:1-2). Or when Jeremiah sees 
an almond branch ( shaqed ), his bicameral voice says it will 
watch over him ( shaqad ) because the Hebrew words for the two 
are similar (Jeremiah 1:11-12). 
