

The Book of I Samuel 

The Book of I Samuel is an instructive register of all this, and a 
reading of it gives one the feeling of what it was like in this partly 
bicameral, partly subjective world as the first millennium B.G 
moved into consciousness. Represented across its intriguing 
chapters is almost the entire spectrum of transition mentalities in 
what is perhaps the first written tragedy in literature. Bicameral- 
ity in a rather decadent form is represented in the wild gangs of 
nabiim, the winnowed-out bicameral chaff of the Khabiru that we 
spoke of earlier in this chapter, roaming outside the cities in the 
hills, speaking the voices they hear within themselves but believe 
to come from outside them, answering the voices, using music and 
drums to increase their excitement. 

Partly bicameral is the boy Samuel, prodded from sleep by a 
voice he is taught is the voice of He-who-is, encouraged at the 
critical age and trained into the bicameral mode by the old priest 
Eli, and then acknowledged from Dan to Beersheba as the 
medium of He-who-is. Though even Samuel must at times stoop 
to divining, as he does from his own torn garment (15:27-29). 

Next in bicamerality is David, whom Samuel chooses from all 
the sons of Jesse in a bicameral manner, and who is only so 
bicameral as to obtain short sharp "Go up"s from He-who-is. His 
subjective consciousness is demonstrated in his ability to deceive 
Achish (I Samuel 21:13). And then Jonathan, subjectively able 



MORAL CONSCIOUSNESS OF THE KHABIRU 


307 


to deceive his father, but having to rely on cledonomancy, or 
divining by first words spoken by someone, for military decisions 
(14:8-13). That idols were common in the period is shown by 
the casual reference to what must have been a life-sized "image" 
that, with the help of some goat hair, is made to resemble David in 
bed (19:13). The casual presence of such an idol in David's house 
may point to some common hallucinogenic practice of the time 
that has been suppressed from the text. 

And finally, the subjective Saul, the gaunt bewildered country 
boy whisked into politics at the irrational behest of Samuel’s 
bicameral voice, trying to be bicameral himself by joining a band 
of the wild nabiim until he, too, to the throbbing of drums and 
strumming zithers, feels he hears the divine voices (10:5). But 
so unconvincing are these to his consciousness that, even with the 
three confirmed signs, he tries to hide from his destiny. Subjec¬ 
tive Saul seeks wildly about him for what to do. A new situation, 
as when the irresponsible Samuel does not keep an appointment, 
with the Israelites hoveled up in caves, the Philistines knotting 
together against him, and he tries to force a voice with burnt 
offerings (13:12), only to be called foolish by the tardy Samuel. 
And Saul building an altar to He-who-is, whom he has never 
heard, to ask it questions in vain (14:37). Why doesn't the god 
speak to him? Saul, divining by lot the supposed culprit that 
must be the cause of the divine silence, and, obedient to his 
divination, even though it is his own son, condemning him to 
death. But even that must be wrong, because his people rebel 
and refuse to carry out the execution — a behavior impossible in 
bicameral times. And Saul, too consciously kind to his enemies 
for Samuel's archaic hallucination. And when Saul's jealousy of 
David and of his son's love for David reaches its extremity, sud¬ 
denly losing his conscious mind, becoming bicameral, stripping 
off his clothes, naba-ing with the bicameral men of the hills 
(19:23-24). But then when such nabiim cannot tell him what to 
do, driving them along with other bicameral wizards out of the 



308 


The Witness of History 


city (28:3), seeking some divine certainty in dreams or in gazing 
into crystal (if we may translate urim as such) (28:6). And 
despairing Saul, at the end of his consciousness, disguising him¬ 
self, something only a subjective man could do, and consulting at 
night that last resort, the Witch of Endor, or rather the bicameral 
voice that takes possession of her, as confounded conscious Saul 
grovels before it, crying that he knows not what to do, and then 
hears from the weird woman's lips what he takes to be the dead 
Samuel's words, that he will die and Israel will fall (28:19). 
And then, when the Philistines have all but captured the rem¬ 
nant of Israel's army, his sons and hopes all slain, the committing 
of that most terrible subjective act, the first in history — suicide, 
to be followed immediately by the second, that of his armor 
bearer. 

The date of the story is the eleventh century B.C.; of the 
writing of it, the sixth century B.C.; of the psychology of it, there¬ 
fore, perhaps the eighth century B.C. 

The Idols of the Khabiru 

As holdovers from the bicameral period are the hallucinogenic 
statuary that are mentioned throughout the Old Testament. As 
might be expected in this late stage of civilization, there are many 
kinds. While there are some general terms for idols, such as the 
elily which is Isaiah's word for them, or matstsebah for anything 
set up on a pillar or altar, it is the more specific words which are 
of greater interest. 

The most important type of idol was the tselem, a cast or 
molten statue usually fashioned with a graving tool, often of gold 
or silver, made by a founder from melted money (Judges 17:4) 
or melted jewelry (Exodus 32:4), and sometimes expensively 
dressed (Ezekiel 16:17). Isaiah scoffingly describes their con¬ 
struction in Judah around 700 B.C. (44:12). They could be 
images either of animals or of men. Sometimes the tselem may 



MORAL CONSCIOUSNESS OF THE KHABIRU 


309 


have been just a head placed high on a pedestal or high altar (II 
Chronicles 14:3) or even the huge golden tselem which Nebu¬ 
chadnezzar placed upon a pillar 90 feet high (Daniel 3:1). More 
often, they seemed to have been placed in an asherah, probably 
one of the wooden shrines hung with rich fabric that the King 
James scholars translated as "groves." 

Next in importance seems to be the carved statue or pesel, of 
which very little is known. It was probably chiseled out of wood 
and was the same as the atsab, which is what the Philistines, who 
destroyed Saul's army, worshiped. After Saul's death and the 
defeat of Israel, the Philistines run to tell their atsabim first of their 
victory and then their people (I Samuel 31:95 I Chronicles 
10:9). That they were painted gold or silver is indicated by 
several references in the Psalms, and that they were of wood by 
the fact that David in wreaking his revenge on the Philistines 
makes a bonfire out of them (II Samuel 5:21). There were also 
some kind of sun idols of unknown shape called chammanim, 
which seem also to have been set up on pedestals, since they are 
ordered cut down by Leviticus (26:30), Isaiah (27:9), and Eze¬ 
kiel (6:6). 

If not the most important, perhaps the most common halluci¬ 
nogenic idol was the terap. We are told directly that a terap 
could seem to speak, since the king of Babylon at one point 
consults with several of them (Ezekiel 21:21). Sometimes they 
were probably small figurines, since Rachel can steal a group of 
prized terafhim (to use the Hebrew plural) from her furious 
father and hide them (Genesis 31:19). They also could be life- 
sized, since it is a terap that is substituted for the sleeping David 
(I Samuel 19:13). As we have already seen, the very casual¬ 
ness of this last reference seems to indicate that such teraphim 
were common enough around the houses of leaders. But in the 
hills, such idols must have been rare and highly prized. In 
Judges we are told of Micah, who builds a house of elohim 
containing a tselem, a pesel, a terap, and an ephod, the latter 



3io 


The Witness of History 


being usually an ornate ritual robe which, perhaps put over a 
frame, could be made into an idol. And these he calls his elohim, 
which are then stolen by the children of Dan (Judges: 17 and 
18 passim). We would probably have more archaeological evi¬ 
dence of these hallucinogenic idols of the Hebrews today had not 
King Josiah had them all destroyed in 641 B.C. (II Chronicles 34: 
3 - 7 - 

A further vestige from the bicameral era is the word oh, often 
translated as a "familiar spirit." "A man also or woman that 
have a n oh .. . shall surely be put to death," says Leviticus 
(20:27). And similarly Saul drives out from Israel all those that 
had an ob (I Samuel 28:3). Even though an ob is something 
that one consults with (Deuteronomy, 18:11), it probably had no 
physical embodiment. It is always bracketed with wizards or 
witches, and thus probably refers to some bicameral voice that 
was not recognized by the Old Testament writers as religious. 
This word has so puzzled translators that when they found it in 
Job 32:19, they translated it absurdly as "bottle," when clearly 
the context is that of the young frustrated Elihu, who feels as if 
he had a bicameral voice about to burst forth into impatient 
speech like an overfull wineskin. 

The Last of the Nabiim 

We began this chapter with a consideration of the refugee 
situation in the Near East around the latter part of the second 
millennium B.C., and of the roving tribes uprooted from their 
lands by various catastrophes, some of them certainly bicameral 
and unable to move toward subjective consciousness. Probably 
in the editing of the historical books of the Old Testament, and 
the fitting of it together into one story in the sixth or fifth century 
B.C., a great deal has been suppressed. And among such items of 
information that we would like is a clear account of what hap¬ 
pened to these last communities of bicameral men. Here and 



MORAL CONSCIOUSNESS OF THE KHABIRU 


311 


there through the Old Testament, they appear like sudden 
glimpses of a strange other world during these periods which 
historians have paid too little attention to. 

