Groups of bicameral men certainly persisted until the downfall 
of the Judean monarchy, but whether in association with other 
tribes or with any organization to their hallucinated voices in the 
form of gods, we don't know. They are often referred to as the 
"sons of nabiim," indicating that there was probably a strong 
genetic basis for this type of remaining bicamerality. It is, I 
think, the same genetic basis that remains with us as part of the 
etiology of schizophrenia. 

Edgy kings consulted them. Ahab, king of Israel in 835 B.C., 
rounded up 400 of them like cattle to listen to their hue and 
clamor (I Kings 22:6). Later, in all his robes, he and the king of 
Judah sit on thrones just outside the gates of Samaria, and have 
hundreds of these poor bicameral men herded up to them, raving 
and copying each other even as schizophrenics in a back ward (I 
Kings 22:10). 

What happened to them? From time to time, they were 
hunted down and exterminated like unwanted animals. Such a 
massacre in the ninth century B.C. seems to be referred to in 
I Kings 18:4, where out of some unknown, much larger number, 
Obadiah took a hundred nabiim and hid them in caves, and 
brought them bread and water until the massacre was over. 
Another such massacre is organized by Elijah a few years later 
(I Kings 18:40). 

We hear no more of these bicameral groups thereafter. What 
remained for a few centuries more are the individual nabiim, 
men whose voices do not need the group support of other halluci¬ 
nating men, men who can be partly subjective and yet still hear 
the bicameral voice. These are the famous nabiim whose bicam¬ 
eral messages we have already selectively touched upon: Amos, 
the gatherer of sycamore fruit, Jeremiah, staggering under his 
yoke from village to village, Ezekiel with his visions of lofty 



312 


The Witness of History 


thrones on wheels moving through the clouds, the several nabiim 
whose religious agonies are ascribed to Isaiah. These of course 
merely represent the handful of that much larger number whose 
bicameral voices seemed to be most consistent with Deuteron¬ 
omy. And then the voices are as a rule no longer actually heard. 

In their place is the considered subjective thought of moral 
teachers. Men still dreamed visions and heard dark speech per¬ 
haps. But Ecclesiastes and Ezra seek wisdom, not a god. They 
study the law. They do not roam out into the wilderness "inquir¬ 
ing of Yahweh." By 400 B.C., bicameral prophecy is dead. "The 
nabiim shall be ashamed everyone of his visions." If parents 
catch their children naba-ing or in dialogue with bicameral 
voices, they are to kill them on the spot (Zechariah 13, 3-4). 8 
That is a severe injunction. If it was carried out, it is an evolu¬ 
tionary selection which helped move the gene pool of humanity 
toward subjectivity. 

Scholars have long debated the reason for the decline and fall 
of prophecy in the post-exilic period of Judaism. They have 
suggested that the nabiim had done their work, and there was no 
more need of them. Or they have said that there was a danger 
that it would sink into a cult. Others that it was the corruption of 
the Israelites by the Babylonians, who were by this time as omen- 
ridden from the cradle to the grave as any nation could be. All of 
these are partly true, but the plainer fact to me is that the decline 
of prophecy is part of that much larger phenomenon going on 
elsewhere in the world, the loss of the bicameral mind. 

Once one has read through the Old Testament from this point 
of view, the entire succession of works becomes majestically and 
wonderfully the birth pangs of our subjective consciousness. No 
other literature has recorded this absolutely important event at 

8 The date of Zechariah is around 520 b.C., but scholars are agreed that the final 
chapters of the book ascribed to him are later additions from some other source. The 
date of this injunction is probably the fourth or third century B.C. 



MORAL CONSCIOUSNESS OF THE KHABIRU 


313 


such length or with such fullness. Chinese literature jumps into 
subjectivity in the teaching of Confucius with little before it. 
Indian hurtles from the bicameral Veda into the ultra subjective 
Upanishads, neither of which are as authentic to their times. 
Greek literature, like a series of steppingstones from the Iliad to 
the Odyssey and across the broken fragments of Sappho and 
Solon toward Plato, is the next best record, but is still too incom¬ 
plete. And Egypt is relatively silent. While the Old Testament, 
even as it is hedged with great historical problems of accuracy, 
still remains the richest source for our knowledge of what the 
transition period was like. It is essentially the story of the loss of 
the bicameral mind, the slow retreat into silence of the remaining 
elohim, the confusion and tragic violence which ensue, and the 
search for them again in vain among its prophets until a substi¬ 
tute is found in right action. 

But the mind is still haunted with its old unconscious waysj it 
broods on lost authorities; and the yearning, the deep and hollow¬ 
ing yearning for divine volition and service is with us still. 


As the stag pants after the waterbrooks, 

So pants my mind after you, O gods! 

My mind thirsts for gods! for living gods! 
When shall I come face to face with gods? 

— Psalm 42 





BOOK THREE 

Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind 
in the Modern World 



CHAPTER 1 


The Quest for Authorization 


W E ARE NCW at last in a position where we can look back and 
see the history of mankind on this planet in its proper values 
for the first time and understand some of the chief features of the 
last three millennia as vestiges of a previous mentality. Our view 
of human history here must be that of a furthest grandeur. We 
must try to see man against his entire evolutionary background, 
where his civilizations, including our own, are but as mountain 
peaks in a particular range against the sky, and from which we 
must force ourselves into an intellectual distance so that we see 
its contours aright. And from this prospect, a millennium is an 
exceedingly short period of time for so fundamental a change as 
from bicamerality to consciousness. 

We, at the end of the second millennium A.D., are still in a 
sense deep in this transition to a new mentality. And all about us 
lie the remnants of our recent bicameral past. We have our 
houses of gods which record our births, define us, marry us, and 
bury us, receive our confessions and intercede with the gods to 
forgive us our trespasses. Our laws are based upon values which 
without their divine pendancy would be empty and unenforce¬ 
able. Our national mottoes and hymns of state are usually divine 
invocations. Our kings, presidents, judges, and officers begin 
their tenures with oaths to the now silent deities taken upon the 
writings of those who have last heard them. 

The most obvious and important carry-over from the previous 



318 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 

mentality is thus our religious heritage in all its labyrinthine 
beauty and variety of forms. The overwhelming importance of 
religion both in general world history and in the history of the 
average world individual is of course very clear from any ob¬ 
jective standpoint, even though a scientific view of man often 
seems embarrassed at acknowledging this most obvious fact. For 
in spite of all that rationalist materialist science has implied since 
the Scientific Revolution, mankind as a whole has not, does not, 
and perhaps cannot relinquish his fascination with some human 
type of relationship to a greater and wholly other, some mys- 
terium tr'emendum with powers and intelligences beyond all left 
hemispheric categories, something necessarily indefinite and un¬ 
clear, to be approached and felt in awe and wonder and almost 
speechless worship, rather than in clear conception, something 
that for modern religious people communicates in truths of feel¬ 
ing, rather than in what can be verbalized by the left hemisphere, 
and so what in our time can be more truly felt when least named, 
a patterning of self and numinous other from which, in times of 
our darkest distress, none of us can escape — even as the infinitely 
milder distress of decision-making brought out that relationship 
three millennia ago. 

There are many things that could be said at this point — many. 
A full discussion here would specify how the attempted reforma¬ 
tion of Judaism by Jesus can be construed as a necessarily new 
religion for conscious men rather than bicameral men. Behavior 
now must be changed from within the new consciousness rather 
than from Mosaic laws carving behavior from without. Sin and 
penance are now within conscious desire and conscious contrition, 
rather than in the external behaviors of the decalogue and the 
penances of temple sacrifice and community punishment. The 
divine kingdom to be regained is psychological not physical. It is 
metaphorical not literal. It is 'within' not in extenso. 

But even the history of Christianity does not and cannot re¬ 
main true to its originator. The development of the Christian 
Church returns again and again to this same longing for bicam- 



THE QUEST FOR AUTHORIZATION 


319 


eral absolutes, away from the difficult inner kingdoms of agape to 
an external hierarchy reaching through a cloud of miracle and 
infallibility to an archaic authorization in an extended heaven. In 
previous chapters I have often paused to point out various paral¬ 
lels between ancient bicameral practices and modern religious 
ones, and I shall not labor such comparisons here. 

