Also beyond the purview of the present book is a full explora¬ 
tion of the way that the more secular developments of the last 
three millennia are related to their emergence from a different 
mentality. I am thinking here of the history of logic and con¬ 
scious reasoning from the Greek development of Logos to modern 
computers, and of the spectacular historical pageant of philos¬ 
ophy, with its efforts to find a metaphor of all existence in which 
we may find some conscious familiarity and so feel at home in 
the universe. I am thinking too of our struggles toward systems 
of ethics, of attempting with rational consciousness to find substi¬ 
tutes for our previous divine volition which could carry with them 
that obligation which at least could simulate our earlier obedience 
to hallucinated voices. And too of the cyclic history of politics, 
the gyres of our wavering attempts to make governments out of 
men instead of gods, secular systems of laws to perform that 
formerly divine function of binding us together into an order, a 
stability, and a commonweal. 

These larger questions are the important ones. But here, in 
this chapter, I wish to introduce the issues of Book III by con¬ 
sidering a handful of more ancient topics of lesser importance 
that are precise and clear carry-overs from the earlier mentality. 
My reason for doing so here is that these historical phenomena 
shed a needed and clarifying light back into some of the darker 
problems of Books I and II. 

One distinguishing characteristic of such vestiges is that they 
are more obvious against the complexity of history the closer we 
are to the breakdown of the bicameral mind. The reason for this 



320 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 

is quite clear. While the universal characteristics of the new 
consciousness, such as self-reference, mind-space, and narratiza- 
tion, can develop swiftly on the heels of new language construc¬ 
tion, the larger contours of civilization, the huge landscape of 
culture against which this happens, can only change with geo¬ 
logical slowness. The matter and technic of earlier ages of civili¬ 
zations survive into the new eras uneroded, dragging with them 
the older outworn forms in which the new mentality must live. 

But living also in these forms is a fervent search for what I 
shall call archaic authorization. After the collapse of the bicam¬ 
eral mind, the world is still in a sense governed by gods, by 
statements and laws and prescriptions carved on stelae or written 
on papyrus or remembered by old men, and dating back to bi¬ 
cameral times. But the dissonance is there. Why are the gods no 
longer heard and seen? The Psalms cry out for answers. And 
more assurances are needed than the relics of history or the paid 
insistences of priests. Something palpable, something direct, 
something immediate! Some sensible assurance that we are not 
alone, that the gods are just silent, not dead, that behind all this 
hesitant subjective groping about for signs of certainty, there is a 
certainty to be had. 

Thus, as the slow withdrawing tide of divine voices and pres¬ 
ences strands more and more of each population on the sands of 
subjective uncertainties, the variety of technique by which man 
attempts to make contact with his lost ocean of authority 
becomes extended. Prophets, poets, oracles, diviners, statue 
cults, mediums, astrologers, inspired saints, demon possession, 
tarot cards, Ouija boards, popes, and peyote all are the residue of 
bicamerality that was progressively narrowed down as uncertain¬ 
ties piled upon uncertainties. In this chapter and the next we 
shall examine some of these more archaic vestiges of the bicam¬ 
eral mind. 



THE QUEST FOR AUTHORIZATION 


321 


ORACLES 


The most immediate carry-over of bicamerality is simply its per¬ 
petuation in certain persons, particularly itinerant prophets, 
which I have discussed in 11.6, or those institutionalized as 
oracles, which I shall describe here. While there is a series of 
cuneiform tablets describing Assyrian oracles 1 dating from the 
seventh century B.C., and the even earlier oracle of Amon of 
Thebes in Egypt, it is really in Greece that we know this institu¬ 
tion best. Greek oracles were the central method of making 
important decisions for over a thousand years after the break¬ 
down of the bicameral mind. This fact is usually obscured by the 
strident rationalism of modern historians. Oracles were subjec¬ 
tivity's umbilical cord reaching back into the sustaining unsubjec- 
tive past. 


The Oracle at Delphi 

Coincidental with my metaphor is the fact that at the most 
famous oracle, that of Apollo at Delphi, there was a queer cone¬ 
like stone structure called the omphalos or navel. It stood at the 
reputed center of the earth. Here presided on certain days, or in 
some centuries every day throughout the year, a supreme priest¬ 
ess, or sometimes two or three in rotation, selected so far as we 
know on no particular basis (in Plutarch's day, in the first cen¬ 
tury B.C., she was the daughter of a poor farmer). 2 She first 
bathed and drank from a sacred brook, and then established 
contact with the god through his sacred tree, the laurel, much as 
conscious Assyrian kings are depicted being smeared by tree- 
cones in the hands of genii. She did this either by holding a 


1 Alfred Guillaume, Prophecy and Divination among the Hebrews and Other 
Semites (NewYork, Harper, 1938), p. 42ff. 

2 Plutarch, Pyth. rac. 22, 405C. 



322 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 

laurel branch, or by inhaling and fumigating herself with burnt 
laurel leaves (as Plutarch said), or perhaps by chewing the 
leaves (as Lucian insisted). 

The replies to questions were given at once, without any reflec¬ 
tion, and uninterruptedly. The exact manner of her announce¬ 
ments is still debated ,3 whether she was seated on a tripod, 
regarded as Apollo's ritual seat, or simply stood at an entrance to 
a cave. But the archaic references to her, from the fifth century 
on, all agree with the statement of Heraclitus that she spoke 
"from her frenzied mouth and with various contortions of her 
body." She was entheos, plena deo. Speaking through his priest¬ 
ess, but always in the first person, answering king or freeman, 
'Apollo' commanded sites for new colonies (as he did for present- 
day Istanbul), decreed which nations were friends, which rulers 
best, which laws to enact, the causes of plagues or famines, the 
best trade routes, which of the proliferation of new cults, or 
music, or art should be recognized as agreeable to Apollo — all 
decided by these girls with their frenzied mouths. 

Truly, this is astonishing! We have known of the Delphic 
Oracle so long from school texts that we coat it over with a 
shrugging usualness when we should not. How is it conceivable 
that simple rural girls could be trained to put themselves into a 
psychological state such that they could make decisions at once 
that ruled the world? 

The obdurate rationalist simply scoffs plena deo indeed! Just 
as the mediums of our own times have always been exposed as 
frauds, so these so-called oracles were really performances 
manipulated by others in front of an illiterate peasantry for 
political or monetary ends. 

But such a realpolitik attitude is doctrinaire at best. Possibly 
there was some chicanery in the oracle's last days, perhaps some 
bribery of the prophetes, those subsidiary priests or priestesses 

3 See E. R. Dodds, The Greeks and, the Irrational (Berkeley: University of Cali¬ 
fornia Press, 1968), which I have used as a handbook in these matters. 



THE QUEST FOR AUTHORIZATION 


323 


who interpreted what the oracle meant. But earlier, to sustain so 
massive a fraud for an entire millennium through the most bril¬ 
liant intellectual civilization the world had yet known is impos¬ 
sible, just impossible. Nor can it gibe with the complete absence 
of criticism of the oracle until the Roman period. Nor with the 
politically wise and often cynical Plato reverently calling Delphi 
"the interpreter of religion to all mankind .”4 

Another kind of explanation, really a quasi-explanation, still 
busied about with in the popular and sometimes professional 
literature, is biochemical. The trances were real, it says, but 
caused by vapors of some sort rising from a casium beneath the 
floor of the cave. But the French excavations of 1903 and more 
recent ones have shown distinctly that no such casium existed. 5 

Or else there might be a drug in the laurel that could have 
produced such an Apollonian effect. To test this, I have crushed 
laurel leaves and smoked quantities of them in a pipe and felt 
somewhat sick but no more inspired than usual. And chewed 
them as well for over an hour, and very distinctly felt more and 
more Jaynesian, alas, than Apollonian. 6 The glee with which 
external explanations are sought out for such phenomena simply 
indicates the resistance in some quarters to admitting that psycho¬ 
logical phenomena of this type exist at all. 

Rather, I suggest a quite different explanation. And for that 
purpose, I shall introduce here the notion of 


The General Bicameral Paradigm 

By this phrase, I mean an hypothesized structure behind a 

4 Plato, Republic, 4, 427B. We should also remember that Socrates derived some 
of what I am about to call his 'archaic authorization* from the oracle. See Apology, 
20E. 

s A. P. Oppe, "The Chasm at Delphi," Journal of Historical Studies, 1904, 24: 
214b 

6 I am grateful to EveLynn McGuinness for much in my life and here for acting 
as an observer, although her role was somewhat compromised both by her partici¬ 
pation and a certain minimal reverence. Our negative result agrees with T. K. 
Oesterreich. See his Possession, Demoniacal and Other, English translation, 1930, 
p. 319, note 3. 



324 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 

large class of phenomena of diminished consciousness which I 
am interpreting as partial holdovers from our earlier mentality. 
