The paradigm has four aspects: 

the collective cognitive imperative, or belief system, a cul¬ 
turally agreed-on expectancy or prescription which defines the 
particular form of a phenomenon and the roles to be acted out 
within that form; 

an induction or formally ritualized procedure whose function 
is the narrowing of consciousness by focusing attention on a 
small range of preoccupations; 

the trance itself, a response to both the preceding, character¬ 
ized by a lessening of consciousness or its loss, the diminishing 
of the analog or its loss, resulting in a role that is accepted, 
tolerated, or encouraged by the group; and 

the archaic authorization to which the trance is directed or re¬ 
lated to, usually a god, but sometimes a person who is accepted 
by the individual and his culture as an authority over the indi¬ 
vidual, and who by the collective cognitive imperative is pre¬ 
scribed to be responsible for controlling the trance state. 

Now, I do not mean these four aspects of the general bicam¬ 
eral paradigm to be considered as a temporal succession neces¬ 
sarily, although the induction and trance usually do follow each 
other. But the cognitive imperative and the archaic authorization 
pervade the whole thing. Moreover, there is a kind of balance or 
summation among these elements, such that when one of them is 
weak the others must be strong for the phenomena to occur. 
Thus, as through time, particularly in the millennium following 
the beginning of consciousness, the collective cognitive impera¬ 
tive becomes weaker (that is, the general population tends 
toward skepticism about the archaic authorization), we find a 
rising emphasis on and complication of the induction procedures, 
as well as the trance state itself becoming more profound. 

By calling the general bicameral paradigm a structure, I not 



THE QUEST FOR AUTHORIZATION 


325 


only mean a logical structure into which these phenomena can be 
analyzed, but also some presently unspecified neurological struc¬ 
ture or relationships between areas of the brain, perhaps some¬ 
thing like the model for the bicameral mind presented in 1.5. We 
might thus expect that all of the phenomena mentioned in Book 
III in some way involve right hemispheric function in a way that 
is different from ordinary conscious life. It is even possible that 
in some of these phenomena we have a partial periodic right 
hemisphere dominance that can be considered as the neurologi¬ 
cal residue of nine millennia of selection for the bicameral mind. 

The application of this general bicameral paradigm to the 
oracle at Delphi is obvious: the elaborate induction procedures, 
the trance in which consciousness is lost, the ardently pursued 
authorization of Apollo. But it is the collective cognitive" impera¬ 
tive or group belief or cultural prescription or expectancy (all of 
these terms indicating my meaning) which I wish to emphasize. 
The immensity of the cultural demand upon the entranced priest¬ 
ess cannot be overemphasized. The whole Greek world believed, 
and had for almost a millennium. As many as thirty-five thou¬ 
sand people a day from every part of the Mediterranean world 
might struggle by sea through the tiny port of Itea that snuggles 
the receptive coast just below Delphi. And they, too, went through 
induction procedures, purifying themselves in the Castalian 
spring, making offerings to Apollo and other gods as they persisted 
up the Sacred Way. In the latter centuries of the oracle, more 
than four thousand votive statues crowded this 220-yard-long 
climb up the side of Mount Parnassus to the temple of the oracle. 
It was, I suggest, this confluence of huge social prescription and 
expectancy, closer to definition than mere belief, which can ac¬ 
count for the psychology of the oracle, for the at-once-ness of her 
answers. It was something before which any skepticism would be 
as impossible as for us to doubt that the speech of a radio origi¬ 
nates in a studio that we cannot see. And it is something before 
which modern psychology must stand in awe. 



326 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 

To this causative expectancy should be added something about 
the natural scene itself. Oracles begin in localities with a specific 
awesomeness, natural formations of mountain or gorge, of hal¬ 
lucinogenic wind or waves, of symbolic gleamings and vistas, 
which I suggest are more conducive to occasioning right hemi¬ 
sphere activity than the analytic planes of everyday life. Perhaps 
we can say that the geography of the bicameral mind in the first 
part of the first millennium B.C. was shrinking down into sites of 
awe and beauty where the voices of gods could still be heard. 

Certainly the vast cliffs of Delphi move into such a suggestion 
and fill it fully: a towering caldron of blasted rock over which 
the sea winds howl and the salt mists cling, as if dreaming nature 
were twisting herself awake at awkward angles, falling away into 
a blue surf of shimmering olive leaves and the gray immortal 
sea. 

(It is, however, difficult for us to appreciate such scenic awe 
today, so clouded is the purity of our response to landscape with 
our conscious 'inner' worlds and our experience with swift geo¬ 
graphical change. Moreover, Delphi today is not quite as it was. 
Its five acres of broken columns, cheerful graffiti, camera-click¬ 
ing tourists, and stumps of white marble over which heedless 
ants crawl indecisively, are not exactly the stuff of divine inspi¬ 
ration.) 

Other Oracles 

Particularly recommending such a cultural explanation of 
Delphi is the fact that there were similar if less important oracles 
throughout the civilized world at the time. Apollo had others: at 
Ptoa in Boeotia and at Branchidae and Patara in Asia Minor. At 
the latter, the Prophetess, as part of the induction, was locked 
into the temple at night for connubial union with her halluci¬ 
nated god that she might better be his medium. 7 The great 


7 Herodotus, l :I82. 



THE QUEST FOR AUTHORIZATION 


327 


oracle at Claros had priests as mediums whose frenzies were 
visited by Tacitus in the first century AD. 8 Pan had an oracle at 
Acacesium, but it became defunct early.? The golden oracle at 
Ephesus, famous for its enormous wealth, had tranced eunuchs 
as the mouthpieces of the goddess Artemis. 10 (The style of their 
vestments, incidentally, is still used today by the Greek Orthodox 
Church.) And the abnormal dancing on the tips of the toes of 
modern ballerinas is thought to derive from the dances before the 
altar of the goddess. 11 Anything opposite to the everyday can 
serve as a cue for the engagement of the general bicameral 
paradigm. 

The voice of Zeus at Dodona must have been one of the oldest 
oracles, since Odysseus visited it to hear whether to return to 
Ithaca openly or by stealth. 12 It was at that time probably just a 
huge sacred oak tree and the Olympian voice was hallucinated 
from the wind trembling in its leaves, making one wonder if 
something similar took place among the Druids who held the oak 
holy. It is only in the fifth century B.C. that Zeus is no longer 
heard directly, and Dodona has a temple and a priestess who 
speaks for him in unconscious trances, 13 again conforming to 
the temporal sequence the bicameral theory would predict. 

Not only the voices of gods, but also of dead kings, could still 
be heard bicamerally, as we have earlier suggested was the origin 
of gods themselves. Amphiaraus had been the heroic prince of 
Argos who had plunged to his death in a chasm in Boeotia, 
supposedly at the nudge of an angry Zeus. His voice was 'heard' 
from the chasm for centuries after, answering the problems of 

8 Tacitus, Annates, 2154. 

9 Pausanias, Description of Greece, J. E. Fraser, trans. (London: Macmillan, 1898), 
37 : 8 . 

10 Charles Picard, Ephese et Claros (Paris: de Bocard, 1922). 

11 Louis Sechan, La Dance Greque Antique (Paris: de Bocard, 1930)} and also 
Lincoln Kirstein, The Book of the Dance (Garden City: Garden City Publishing Co., 
1942). 

12 Odyssey, 14:327 09:296. 

18 Aelius Aristides, Orationes, 45 :n. 



328 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 

his petitioners. But again as centuries passed, the Voice' came to 
be hallucinated only by certain entranced priestesses who lived 
there. At that later time they did not so much answer questions 
as interpret the dreams of those who consulted the voice .*4 

In some ways the most interesting, however, from the hypoth¬ 
esis of the bicameral mind is the hallucinated voice of Tropho- 
nius at Lebadea, twenty miles east of Delphi. For it is the longest 
lasting of the direct Voices' without intermediary priests or priest¬ 
esses. The locale of the oracle even today bears some remnants 
of its ancient awesomeness, a meeting of three soaring preci¬ 
pices, of murmuring springs easing strongly out of the solemn 
ground and crawling submissively away into stony ravines. And 
up a little, where one ravine begins to wind into the heart of the 
mountain, there was once a carved-out cell-like pit in the rock 
that squeezed down into an ovenlike shrine over an underground 
flume. 

When the collective imperative of the general bicameral para¬ 
digm is less, when belief and trust in such phenomena are 
waning with rationalism, and particularly when it is being ap¬ 
plied not to a trained priestess but to any suppliant, the induction 
is longer and more intricate to compensate. And this is what 
occurred at Lebadea. Pausanias, the Roman traveler, described 
the elaborate induction procedure that he found there in AD. 

150. 15 After days of waiting and purification and omens and 
expectancy, he tells us how he was abruptly taken one night and 
bathed and anointed by two holy boys, then drank from Lethe's 
spring to forget who he was (the loss of the analog 'I'), then 
made to sip at the spring of Mnemosyne so as to remember later 
what was to be revealed (like a post-hypnotic suggestion). Then 
he was made to worship a secret image, then was dressed in holy 
linen, girded with sacred ribbons, and shod with special boots, 
and then only after more omens, if favorable, was finally inserted 

u Pausanias , Description of Greece, 1, 34:5. 

