’5 Ibid., 9, 39:11. 



THE QUEST FOR AUTHORIZATION 


334 


down an impassive ladder into the devout pit with its dark torrent 
where the divine message grew swiftly articulate. 


The Six Oracular Terms 

As the Greek mind moves from the universally bicameral to 
the universally conscious, these oracular vestiges of the bicam¬ 
eral world and their authority change until they become more 
and more precarious and difficult to obtain. There is, I suggest, a 
loose pattern in all this, and that over the thousand years of their 
existence, oracles were in a continuing decadence which can be 
understood as six terms. These can be regarded as six steps 
down from the bicameral mind as its collective cognitive impera¬ 
tive grew weaker and weaker. 

1. The locality oracle. Oracles began simply as specific lo¬ 
cations where, because of some awesomeness of the surround¬ 
ings, or some important incident or some hallucinogenic sound, 
waves, waters, or wind, suppliants, any suppliants, could still 
'hear' a bicameral voice directly. Lebadea remained at this 
term, probably because of its remarkable induction. 

2. The prophet oracle. Usually there then occurred a term 
where only certain persons, priests, or priestesses, could 'hear' 
the voice of the god at the locality. 

3. The trained prophet oracle, when such persons, priests, 
or priestesses, could 'hear' only after long training and elabo¬ 
rate inductions. Up to this term, the person was still himself 
and relayed the god's voice to others. 

4. The possessed oracle. Then, from at least the fifth cen¬ 
tury B.C., came the term of possession, of the frenzied mouth 
and contorted body after even more training and more elaborate 
inductions. 



330 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 

5. The interpreted possessed oracle. As the cognitive impera¬ 
tive weakened, the words became garbled and had to be in¬ 
terpreted by auxiliary priests or priestesses who themselves had 
gone through induction procedures. 

6. The erratic oracle. And then even this became difficult. 

The voices became fitful, the possessed prophet erratic, the 
interpretations impossible, and the oracle ended. 

The oracle of Delphi endured longest. It is striking evidence 
for its supreme importance to the god-nostalgic subjectivity of 
Greece in its golden age that it lasted so long, particularly when it 
is recalled that in almost every invasion it sided with the in¬ 
vader: with Xerxes I in the early fifth century B.C., with Philip II 
in the fourth century B.C., and even in the Peloponnesian Wars, it 
spoke on the side of Sparta. Such the strength of bicameral 
phenomena in the forces of history. It even lived out its sad, 
hilarious, patriotic mocking by Euripides in the amphitheaters. 

But by the first century A.D., Delphi had come to its sixth term. 
Bicamerality having receded further and further into the unre¬ 
membered past, skepticism had overgrown belief. The mighty 
cultural cognitive imperative of the oracular was played out and 
shattered, and the thing with increasing frequency would not 
work. One such instance at Delphi is told by Plutarch in AD. 60. 
The prophetess reluctantly attempted a trance, the omens being 
dreadful. She began to speak in a hoarse voice as if distressed, 
then appeared filled with a "dumb and evil spirit," and then ran 
screaming toward the entrance and fell down. Everyone else, 
including her prophetes, fled in terror. The report goes on that 
they found her partly recovered when they returned, but that she 
died within a few days. 16 As this was probably observed by a 
prophetes who was a personal friend of Plutarch's, we have no 
reason to doubt its authenticity. 1 ? 

16 Plutarch, Def. Orac., 51, 438C. 

Dodds, Greeks and the Irrational , p. 72. 



THE QUEST FOR AUTHORIZATION 


331 


Yet even with these neurotic failures, Delphi was still con¬ 
sulted by the tradition-hungry Greece-haunted Romans. The last 
to do so was my namesake, the Emperor Julian who, following 
his namesake Julianus (who had written down from hallucinated 
gods his Chaldaean Oracles), was attempting to revive the ancient 
gods. As part of this personal quest for authorization, he tried to 
rehabilitate Delphi in AD. 363, three years after it had been 
ransacked by Constantine. Through his remaining priestess, 
Apollo prophesied that he would never prophesy again. And the 
prophecy came true. The bicameral mind had come to one of its 
many ends. 


Sibyls 

The Age of Oracles occupies the entire millennium after the 
breakdown of the bicameral mind. And as it slowly dies away, 
there appear here and there what might be called amateur ora¬ 
cles, untrained and uninstitutionalized persons who spontane¬ 
ously felt themselves possessed by gods. Of course some simply 
spoke schizophrenic nonsense. Probably most. But others had 
an authenticity that could command belief. Among such were 
those few but unknown number of weird and wonderful women 
known as the Sibyls (from the Aeolic sios = god + boule = 
advice). In the first century B.C., Varro could count at least ten 
at one time around the Mediterranean world. But there were 
certainly others in more remote regions. They lived in solitude, 
sometimes in reverenced mountain shrines that were built for 
them, or in tufaceous subterranean caverns near the groan of the 
ocean, as did the great Cumaean Sibyl. Virgil had probably per¬ 
sonally visited the latter around 40 B.C., when he described her 
frenzied laboring with a possessing Apollo in Book VI of the 
Aeneid. 

Like oracles, the Sibyls were asked to make decisions on mat¬ 
ters high and low up to the third century AD. So gristled with 



332 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 


moral fervor were their replies that even the early Christian 
Fathers and Hellenistic Jews bowed to them as prophets on a 
level with those of the Old Testament. The early Christian 
Church, in particular, used their prophecies (often forged) to 
buttress its own divine authenticity. Even a thousand years later, 
at the Vatican, four of the Sibyls were painted into prominent 
niches on the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel by Michelangelo. And 
even centuries later, copies of these muscular ladies with their 
oracular books open used to look down on the wondering present 
writer in a Unitarian Sunday school in New England. Such is the 
thirst of our institutions after authorization. 

And when they too had ceased, when the gods no longer would 
inhabit living human forms in prophecy and oracle, mankind 
searches for other ways of taking up the slack, as it were, between 
heaven and earth. There are new religions, Christianity, Gnosti¬ 
cism, and Neo-Platonism. There are new orders of conduct to 
relate god-shorn men to the enormous conscious landscape of a 
now spatialized time, as in Stoicism and Epicureanism. There is 
an institutionalization and elaboration of divination beyond any¬ 
thing in Assyria, divination built into the political state officially 
to generate decisions on important matters. As the Greek civiliza¬ 
tions had been anchored into the divine by oracles, so the Roman 
now is by auspices and augurers. 


A Revival of Idols 

But even these cannot fill the need of the common man for 
transcendence. Following the failure of oracles and prophets as 
if to replace them is an attempted revival of idols similar to those 
of bicameral times. 

The great bicameral civilizations had, as we have seen, used a 
wide variety of effigies to help hallucinate bicameral voices. But 
when those voices ceased in the adjustment to subjective con¬ 
sciousness, all this was darkened. Most idols were destroyed. 



THE QUEST FOR AUTHORIZATION 


333 


Late bicameral kingdoms at the behest of their jealous gods had 
always smashed and burned the idols of opposing gods or kings. 
And the practice accelerated when the idols were no longer 
heard and worshiped. King Josiah, in the seventh century B.C., 
ordered all idols in his domain destroyed. The Old Testament is 
full of the destruction of idols, as well as imprecations on the 
heads of those who make new ones. By the middle of the first 
millennium B.C., idolatry is only here and there, fitful and unim¬ 
portant. 

Curiously, there is at this time a very minor cult of hallucinat¬ 
ing from severed heads. Herodotus (4:26) speaks of the practice 
in the obscure Issedones of gilding a head and sacrificing to it. 
Cleomenes of Sparta is said to have preserved the head of 
Archonides in honey and consulted it before undertaking any 
important task. Several vases of the fourth century B.C. in Etru¬ 
ria depict scenes of persons interrogating oracular heads. 18 And 
the severed head of the rustic Carians which continues to 'speak' 
is mentioned derisively by Aristotle.^ And this is about all. Thus, 
after subjective consciousness is firmly established, the practice of 
hallucinating from idols is only sporadically present. 

But as we approach the beginning of the Christian era, with 
the oracles mocked into silence, we have a very true revival of 
idolatry. The temples that whitened the hills and cities of deca¬ 
dent Greece and ascendant Rome were now crammed with more 
and more statues of gods. By the first century A.D., the Apostle 
Paul despairingly found Athens full of idols (Acts 17), and Pau- 
sanias, whom we met a few pages ago at Lebadea, described 
them as being simply everywhere on his travels and of every 
conceivable sort: marble and ivory, gilded and painted, life-sized 
and some two or three stories high. 

