Did such idols 'speak' to their worshipers? There is no doubt 


18 See John Cohen, "Human Robots and Computer Art," History Today, 1970, 
8:562. 

De Partibus Animalium, III, 10:9-12. 



334 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 

that this sometimes occurred, just as in bicameral times. But in 
general in the subjective era, it seems very doubtful that this 
happened spontaneously very often. For otherwise there would 
not have been the rising attention to artificial means, magical and 
chemical, for obtaining hallucinated messages from stone and 
ivory gods. And here again we see the entrance into history of 
the general bicameral paradigm: collective cognitive imperative, 
induction, trance, and archaic authorization. 

In Egypt, where the breaking point between bicamerality and 
subjectivity is far less sharp than in more volatile nations, there 
was the development of the so-called Hermetic literature. This is 
a series of papyri describing various induction procedures that 
came into being at the edge of bicameral certainty and spread 
over the conscious world. In one of them, there is a dialogue 
called the Asclepus (after the Greek god of healing) that de¬ 
scribes the art of imprisoning the souls of demons or of angels in 
statues with the help of herbs, gems, and odors, such that the 
statue could speak and prophesy. 20 In other papyri, there are 
still other recipes for constructing such images and animating 
them, such as when images are to be hollow so as to enclose a 
magic name inscribed on gold leaf. 

By the first century AD., this practice had spread over most of 
the civilized world. In Greece, rumors broke into legends over the 
miraculous behavior of public cult statues. In Rome, Nero prized 
a statue which warned him of conspiracies. 21 Apuleius was 
accused of possessing one. 22 So common were hallucinogenic 
idols by the second century AD. that Lucian in his Philopseudes 
satirized the belief in them. And Iamblichus, the Neo-Platonist 
apostle of theurgy, as it was called in his Peri agalmaton, tried to 

20 The records of the various temples to the medical god Asclepius are full of re¬ 
ported diagnoses and therapeutic directives told to the sick as they slept there. These 
have been collected and translated by E. J. and L. Edelstein, Asclepus: A Collection 
and Interpretation of the Testimonies, 2 vols., 1945. 

21 Suetonius, Nero, 56. 

22 Apuleius, Apol., 63. 



THE QUEST FOR AUTHORIZATION 


335 


prove “that idols are divine and filled with the divine presence,” 
establishing a vogue for such idols against the fuming execration 
of Christian critics. His disciples obtained omens of every sort 
and distinction from idols. One hallucinator boasted he could 
make a statue of Hecate laugh and cause the torches in her hand 
to light up. And another feels he can tell whether a statue is 
animate or inanimate by the sensation it gives him. Even Cyp¬ 
rian, the good gray Bishop of Carthage, complained in the third 
centuiy of the “spirits that lurk under statues and consecrated 
images .” 2 3 The whole civilized world, in this effort to recall the 
bicameral mind after the failure of oracles and prophecy, was 
filled with epiphanies of statues of every sort and description in 
this remarkable revival of idolatry. 

How was all this believable? Since this is well into the subjec¬ 
tive era, when men prided themselves on reason and common 
sense, and at last knew there were such experiences as false 
hallucinations, how was it possible that they could actually be¬ 
lieve that statues embodied real gods? And really spoke? 

Let us recall the almost universal belief of these centuries in 
an absolute dualism of mind and matter. Mind or soul or spirit or 
consciousness (all these were confused together) was a thing 
imposed from heaven on the bodily matter to give it life. All the 
newer religions of this era were allied about this point. And if a 
soul can be imposed on so fragile a thing as flesh to make it live, 
on a hurtable carcass that has to have vegetable and animal 
matter stuffed in one end and stenchfully excreted at another, a 
sense-pocked sinful vessel that the years wrinkle and the winds 
chafe and diseases cruelly hound, and that can be sliced off in a 
trice from the soul it holds by the same act that stabs an onion, 
how much more possible for life, divine life, to be imposed by 
heaven upon a statue of unbleeding beauty with a faultless and 
immaculate body of unwrinkling marble or diseaseless gold! 

2 3 Other instances are mentioned by E. R. Dodds, Greeks and the Irrational. 



336 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 

Here is Callistratus, for example, in the fourth century A.D., 
writing about an ivory and gold statue of the god Asclepius: 

Shall we admit that the divine spirit descends into human 
bodies, there to be even defiled by passions, and nevertheless 
not believe it in a case where there is no attendant engendering 
of evil? . . . for see how an image, after Art has portrayed 
in it a god, even passes over into the god himself! Matter 
though it is, it gives forth divine intelligence. 24 

And he and most of the world believed it. 

The evidence for all this would be much more obvious today, 
had not Constantine in the fourth century, even like King Josiah 
in Israel one millennium earlier, sent his armies of Christian 
converts out with sledge hammers through the once bicameral 
world to smash all its physical vestiges in sight. Every god is a 
jealous god after the breakdown of the bicameral mind. 

But even this destruction could not abolish idolatrous practice, 
so vital is it to have some kind of authorization for our behavior. 
Medieval Italy and Byzantium believed in enchanted idols who 
had power to avert disaster. The notorious Knights Templars 
were at least accused of taking orders from a gold head called 
Baphomet. So common had hallucinogenic idols become in the 
late Middle Ages that a bull of Pope John XXII in 1326 de¬ 
nounced those who by magic imprison demons in images or other 
objects, interrogate them, and obtain answers. Even up to the 
Reformation, monasteries and churches vied with each other to 
attract pilgrims (and their offerings) by miracle-producing 
statuary. 

In some epochs, perhaps when the cognitive imperatives for 
such neo-bicameral experiences began to wither under the sun¬ 
light of rationalism, the belief in statue animation was occasion- 

2< t Callistratus, Descriptions, 10, A. Fairbanks, trans. (Loeb Classical Library, 
1902). 



THE QUEST FOR AUTHORIZATION 


337 


ally sustained by the use of fraudulent contrivances. 25 In one 
instance of many, a life-sized medieval rood of the crucified Jesus 
at Boxley, which rolled its eyes at penitents, shed tears, and 
foamed at the mouth, was found in the sixteenth century to have 
“certain engines and old wires with old rotten sticks in the back of 
the same.” 26 But we shouldn’t cynicize too deeply here. While 
such artificial animation often functioned as chicanery to fool the 
miracle-hungry pilgrim, it may also have been meant as an en¬ 
ticement to the god to body itself in a more lifelike statue. As a 
fourteenth-century tract on the matter explained, “God’s power in 
working of his miracles loweth down in one image more than in 
another.” 2 ? Animated idols in some contemporary tribes are 
explained by their worshipers in the same way. 

Idolatry is still a socially cohesive force — its original function. 
Our parks and public gardens are still the beflowered homes of 
heroic effigies of past leaders. While few of us can hallucinate 
their speech, we still on appropriate occasions might give them 
gifts of wreaths, even as greater gifts were given in the gigunus 
of Ur. In churches, temples, and shrines the world over, religious 
statues are still being carved, painted, and prayed to. Figurines 
of a Queen of Heaven dangle protectively from the mirrors of 
American windshields. Teen-age girls I have interviewed, living 
in deeply religious convents, often sneak down to the chapel in 
the dead of night and have mentioned to me their excitement at 
being able to ‘hear 1 the statue of the Virgin Mary speak, and ‘see’ 
her lips move or her head bow or — sometimes — her eyes weep. 
Gentle idols of Jesus, Mary, and the saints throughout much of 
the Catholic world are still being bathed, dressed, incensed, 

2 s See F. Poulsen, “Talking, weeping-, and bleeding- sculptures.” Ada Archeologica, 
1945, 16 : 178k 

26 See Jonathan Sumption’s Pilgrimage: An Image of Medieval Religion (Totawa, 
N.J.: Rowman and Littlefield, 1975), p. 56; also Julia Holloway’s forthcoming The 
Pilgrim. I am grateful to her for bringing this to my attention. 

2 ? Quoted from the Lollard manuscript Lanterne of Lights by Sumption, p. 270. 



338 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 

flowered, jeweled, and launched shoulder-high and glorious out 
of bell-bellowing churches on outings through towns and coun¬ 
trysides on feast days. Placing special foods in front of them or 
dancing and bowing before them still generates its numinous 
excitement. 28 Such devotions differ from similar divine outings 
in bicameral Mesopotamia 4000 years ago mostly in the idol's 
relative silence. 

28 As in Flaubert's beautiful story Un Coeur Simple. 



CHAPTER 2 


Of Prophets and Possession 


I n the foregoing theory of oracles, I am sure that the reader 
has seen the profound gap that I have jumped over in my argu¬ 
ment. I have called the general bicameral paradigm a vestige of 
the bicameral mind. And yet the trance state of narrowed or 
absent consciousness is not, at least from the fourth oracular 
term and thereafter, a duplicate of the bicameral mind. Instead 
we have for the rest of the oracle's existence a complete domina¬ 
tion of the person and his speech by the god-side, a domination 
which speaks through the person but does not allow him to 
remember what has happened afterwards. This phenomenon is 
