known as possession. 

The problem it presents is not confined to far-off ancient ora¬ 
cles. It occurs today. It has occurred through history. It has a 
negatory form that seems to have been one of the most common 
maladies in the Galilee of the New Testament. And a good case 
could be made that at least some of the wandering prophets of 
Mesopotamia, Israel, Greece, and elsewhere did not simply relay 
to listeners something they were hearing in hallucination, rather 
that the divine message was coming directly from the prophet's 
vocal apparatus without any cognition on 'his' part during the 
speech or memory of it after. And if we call this a loss of 
consciousness, and I shall, such a statement is quite problematic. 
Is it not also possible to say that it is not the loss of consciousness 
so much as its replacement by a new and different conscious- 



340 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 

ness? But what can that mean? Or is that linguistic organization 
which speaks from the supposed possessed person not conscious 
at all in the sense of narratizing in a mind-space as described in 
1 . 2 ? 

These questions are not solved by simple answers. The fact that 
we may regard possession by metaphysical essences as ontologi¬ 
cal nonsense should not blind us from the psychological and 
historical insights that examination of such idiosyncrasies of his¬ 
tory and belief can give us. Indeed, any theory of consciousness 
and its origin in time must face such obscurities. And I do 
suggest that the theory in this book is a better torch for such dark 
corners of time and mind than any alternative theory. For if we 
still hold to a purely biological evolution of consciousness back 
somewhere among the lower vertebrates, how can we approach 
such phenomena or begin to understand their historically and 
culturally segregated nature? It is only if consciousness is 
learned at the mercy of a collective cognitive imperative that we 
can take hold of these questions in any way. 

Our first step in understanding any mental phenomenon must 
be to delimit its existence in historical time. When did it first 
occur? 

The answer in Greece, at least, is very clear. There is no such 
thing as possession or any hint of anything similar throughout 
the Iliad or Odyssey or other early poetry. No 'god' speaks 
through human lips in the truly bicameral age. Yet by 400 B.C., it 
is apparently as common as churches are with us, both in the 
many oracles scattered about Greece as well as in private individ¬ 
uals. The bicameral mind has vanished and possession is its 
trace. 

Plato, in the fourth century B.C., has Socrates casually say in 
the midst of a political discussion that "God-possessed men speak 
much truth, but know nothing of what they say," 1 as if such 

1 Meno, 99C. See also Ttmaeus, 71E-72A, where it is said "no man in his wits 
attains prophetic truth and inspirations." 



OF PROPHETS AND POSSESSION 


341 


prophets could be heard every day around the streets of Athens. 
And he was very clear about the loss of consciousness in the 
oracles of his time: 

. . . for prophecy is a madness, and the prophetess at Delphi 
and the priestesses at Dodona when out of their senses have con¬ 
ferred great benefits on Hellas, both in public and private life, 
but when in their senses few or none. 2 3 


And so in the centuries that follow, supposed possession is the 
obliteration of ordinary consciousness. Four hundred years after 
Plato, in the first century AD., Philo Judaeus categorically states, 


When he (a prophet) is inspired he becomes unconscious; 
thought vanishes away and leaves the fortress of the soul; but 
the divine spirit has entered there and taken up its abode; and 
this later makes all the organs resound so that the man gives 
clear expression to what the spirit gives him to say.3 

And so also in the century after that, as in Aristides 4 saying 
that the priestesses at the oracle of Dodona 


... do not know, before being seized by the spirits, what they 
are going to say, any more than after having recovered their 
natural senses they remember what they have said, so that every¬ 
one knows what they say except themselves. 4 


And Iamblichus, the leading Neo-Platonist at the beginning of 
the third century, insisted that divine possession "participated" in 
divinity, had a "common energy" with a god, and "comprehends 
indeed everything in us but exterminates our own proper con- 


2 Phaedrus, 244B. 

3 Philo, De Special Legibus, 4, 343M, Cohn and Wendland, eds., who in another 
place says, "He who is really inspired and filled with god cannot comprehend with his 
intelligence what he says; he only repeats what is suggested to him, as if another 
prompted him." 222M. 

4 Aristides, Opera, 213. 



342 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 

sciousness and motion."s Such possession, then, is not a return 
to the bicameral mind properly speaking. For when Achilles 
heard Athene a millennium earlier, he certainly did know what 
was said to him; that was the function of the bicameral mind. 

This then is the very core of the problem. The speech of 
possessed prophets is not an hallucination proper, not something 
heard by a conscious, semi-conscious, or even nonconscious man 
as in the bicameral mind proper. It is articulated externally and 
heard by others. It occurs only in normally conscious men and is 
coincident with a loss of that consciousness. What justification 
then do we have for saying that the two phenomena, the halluci¬ 
nations of the bicameral mind and the speech of the possessed, are 
related? 

I do not have a truly robust answer. I can only meekly main¬ 
tain that they are related (l) because they are serving the same 
social function, (2) because they yield similar communications 
of authorization, and (3) because the little evidence we have on 
the early history of oracles indicates that possession in a few 
institutionalized persons at certain locations is a gradual out¬ 
growth from the hallucinations of gods by anyone at those loca¬ 
tions. We can therefore at least suggest that possession is a 
transformation of a particular sort, a derivative of bicamerality in 
which the rituals of induction and the different collective cogni¬ 
tive imperatives and trained expectancies result in the ostensive 
possession of the particular person by the god-side of the bicam¬ 
eral mind. Perhaps we could say that, to retrieve the older 
mentality, developing consciousness more and more had to be 
obliterated, inhibiting the man-side with it, leaving the god-side 
in control of speech itself. 

And what of the neurology of such a mentality? From the 
model I have presented in 1.5, we must naturally hypothesize that 

5 Iamblichus, De Mysteriis, 3:8, or the English translation by Thomas Taylor 
(London: Theosophical Society, 1895), pp. 128-129. 



OF PROPHETS AND POSSESSION 


343 


in possession there is some kind of disturbance of normal hemi¬ 
spheric dominance relations, in which the right hemisphere is 
somewhat more active than in the normal state. In other words, 
if we could have placed electrodes on the scalp of a Delphic 
oracle in her frenzy, would we have found a relatively faster EEG 
(and therefore greater activity) over her right hemisphere, cor¬ 
relating with her possession? And particularly over her right 
temporal lobe? 

I suggest that we would. There is at least a possibility that the 
dominance relations of the two hemispheres would be changed, 
and that the early training of the oracle was indeed that of 
engaging a higher ratio of right hemisphere activity in relation to 
the left as a response to the complex stimulus of the induction 
procedures. Such a hypothesis might also explain the contorted 
features, the appearance of frenzy and the nystagmic eyes, as an 
abnormal right hemisphere interference or release from inhibi¬ 
tion by the left hemisphere. 6 

And a comment can be added here about sexual differences. It 
is now well known that women are biologically somewhat less 
lateralized in brain function than men. This means simply that 
psychological functions in women are not localized into one or 
the other hemisphere of the brain to the same degree as in men. 
Mental abilities in women are more spread over both hemi¬ 
spheres. Even by age six, for example, a boy can recognize objects 
in his left hand by feel alone better than in his right hand. In girls 
both hands are equal. This shows that haptic recognition (as it is 
called) has already been primarily localized in the right hemi¬ 
sphere in boys but not in girls. 7 And it is common knowledge that 

6 It is likely that it is not the right motor cortex controlling- the facial grimaces, 
but that the unusual right temporal-parietal lobe activity distorts the symmetry of 
input from the basal ganglia to facial expression. 

7 Sandra F. Witelson, "Sex and the Single Hemisphere," Science, 1976, 193:425- 
427. A collation of about thirty other studies on the subject may be found in Richard 
A. Harshman and Roger Remington, "Sex, Language, and the Brain, Part I: A Review 
of the Literature on Adult Sex Differences in Lateralization," authors' preprint, 19755 
see also Stevan Hamad, "On Gender Differences in Language," Contemporary 
Anthropology, 1976, 17:327—328. 



344 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 

elderly men with a stroke or hemorrhage in the left hemisphere 
are more speechless than elderly women with a similar diagnosis. 
Accordingly we might expect more residual language function in 
the right hemisphere of women, making it easier for women to 
learn to be oracles. And indeed the majority of oracles and Sibyls, 
at least in European cultures, were women. 

Induced Possession 

Institutionalized unconscious speaking in the prophets of ora¬ 
