cles as if by a god becomes, as we have seen in III. 1, erratic and 
silent toward the first centuries of the Christian era. It falls to a 
siege of rationalism, to volleys of criticism and ramming irrever¬ 
ence in comic drama and literature. Such public (indeed urban) 
suppression of a general cultural characteristic often results in 
pushing it into private practice, into abstruse sects and esoteric 
cults where its cognitive imperative is protected from such criti¬ 
cism. And so with induced possession. With the oracles mocked 
into silence, such the quest for authorization that there is a 
widespread attempt in private groups to bring back the gods and 
have them speak through almost anyone. 

The second century AD. saw a growing number of such cults. 
Their seances were sometimes in official shrines, but increas¬ 
ingly more often in private circles. Usually one person called a 
felestike or operator tried to incarnate the god temporarily in 
another called a katochos, or more specially a docheus, or what in 
contemporary lore is called a medium. 8 It was soon found that if 
the phenomenon was to work, the katochos should come from a 
simple unsophisticated background, something that runs through 
all the literature on possession. Iamblichus in the early third 
century, the real apostle of all this, states that the most suitable 

8 In this part of my discussion I am indebted to the wealth of information in E. R. 
Dodds, The Greeks and the Irrational (Berkeley: University of California Press, 
1968), Appendix II, Theurgy, where many other references may be found. 



OF PROPHETS AND POSSESSION 


345 


mediums are "young and simple persons." And so, we remember, 
were the uneducated country girls chosen to train as priestesses 
for the oracle at Delphi. Other writings mention adolescents 
such as the boy Aedesius, who "had only to put on the garland and 
look at the sun, when he immediately produces reliable oracles in 
the best inspirational style." Presumptively, this was due to care¬ 
ful training. That such induced bicameral possession has to be 
learned is known from the training of oracles as well as a com¬ 
ment of Pythagoras of Rhodes in the third century, that the gods 
come at first reluctantly, then more easily when they have 
formed the habit of entering the same person. 

What was learned, I suggest, was a state approaching the 
bicameral mind as a response to the induction. This is important. 
We do not ordinarily think of learning a new unconscious men¬ 
tality, perhaps a whole new relationship between our cerebral 
hemispheres, as we think of learning to ride a bicycle. 

Since this is the learning of a now difficult neurological state, 
so different from ordinary life, it is not surprising that the cues of 
the induction had to be wildly distinctive and have an extreme 
difference from ordinary life. 

And they certainly were different: anything odd, anything 
strange: bathing in smoke or sacred water, dressing in enchanted 
chitons with magical girdles, wearing weird garlands or mysteri¬ 
ous symbols, standing in a charmed magic circle as medieval 
magicians did, or upon charakteres as Faust did to hallucinate 
Mephistopheles, or smearing the eyes with strychnine to procure 
visions as was done in Egypt, or washing in brimstone (sulphur) 
and seawater, a very old method which began in Greece, as 
Porphyry said in the second century AD., to prepare the anima 
sfiritalis for the reception of a higher being. All these of course 
did nothing except as they were believed to do something — just 
as we in this latter age have no 'free wil' unless we believe we 
have. 



346 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 

And what was done, this 'reception of the god', was not psycho¬ 
logically different from the other forms of possession we have 
examined. Consciousness as well as normal reactivity in the 
katochos was usually in complete suspension so that it was neces¬ 
sary to have others look after him. And in such a deep trance, 
the 'god' would supposedly reveal past or future, or answer ques¬ 
tions and make decisions, as in the older Greek oracles. 

How was it to be explained when these gods were incorrect? 
Well, evil spirits might have been invoked instead of true gods, 
or other intrusive spirits might have occupied the medium. Iam- 
blichus himself claims to have unmasked in his medium an alleged 
Apollo who was only the ghost of a gladiator. Such excuses 
reverberate throughout the subsequent decadent literature of 
spiritualism. 

And when the seance did not seem to be working, the operator 
as well often went through an induction of purifying rites that 
put him into a hallucinatory state, such that he might 'see' more 
clearly or 'hear' from the unconscious medium something that 
perhaps the medium did not even say. This kind of doubling-up 
is similar to the prophetes’ relationship to their oracles, and 
explains various reported levitations, elongations, or dilations of 
the medium's body.? 

By the end of the third century, Christianity had suddenly 
flooded the pagan world with its own claims to authorization and 
began to dissolve into itself many of the then existing pagan 
practices. The idea of possession was one of those. But it was 
absorbed in a transcendental way. At almost the same time that 
Iamblichus was teaching the induction of gods into statues, or 
young illiterate katochoi to "participate" in divinity and have "a 
common energy" with a god, Athanasius, the competitive Bishop 
of Alexandria, began claiming the same thing for the illiterate 

9 It is safe to suggest that many feats of present-day stage magicians have their 
origin in duplicating these 'proofs' of divine intervention. 



OF PROPHETS AND POSSESSION 


347 


Jesus. The Christian Messiah had heretofore been regarded as 
like Yahweh, a demigod perhaps, half human, half divine, reflect¬ 
ing his supposed parentage. But Athanasius persuaded Constan¬ 
tine, his Council of Nicaea, and most of Christianity thereafter, 
that Jesus participated in Yahweh, was the same substance, the 
Bicameral Word made Flesh. I think we can say then that the 
growing church, in danger of shattering into sects, exaggerated 
the subjective phenomenon of possession into an objective theo¬ 
logical dogma. It did so to assert an even greater claim to an 
absolute authorization. For Athanasian Christians the actual 
gods had indeed returned to earth and would return again. 

Curiously, neither the oracle at Delphi nor the Sibyls were 
doubted as contacting a heavenly reality by this expanding Chris¬ 
tian Church. But such pagan seances as induced divine posses¬ 
sion in simple boys seemed theologically rowdy, the mischief of 
devils and shady spirits. And so as the church arches up into 
political authority over the Middle Ages, voluntary induced pos¬ 
session disappears at least from public notice. It goes even fur¬ 
ther underground into witchcraft and assorted necromancies, 
emerging into notice only from time to time. 

Its contemporary practice I shall come to in a moment. But 
first we should examine a cultural side effect of induced posses¬ 
sion, a disturbing phenomenon I shall call 


Negatory Possession 

There is another side to this vigorously strange vestige of the 
bicameral mind. And it is different from other topics in this 
chapter. For it is not a response to a ritual induction for the 
purpose of retrieving the bicameral mind. It is an illness in 
response to stress. In effect, emotional stress takes the place of 
the induction in the general bicameral paradigm just as in antiq¬ 
uity. And when it does, the authorization is of a different kind. 

The difference presents a fascinating problem. In the New 



348 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modem World 

Testament, where we first hear of such spontaneous possession, 
it is called in Greek daemonizomai, or demonization . 10 And from 
that time to the present, instances of the phenomenon most often 
have that negatory quality connoted by the term. The why of 
the negatory quality is at present unclear. In an earlier chapter 
(II.4) I have tried to suggest the origin of ‘evils in the volitional 
emptiness of the silent bicameral voices. And that this took place 
in Mesopotamia and particularly in Babylon, to which the Jews 
were exiled in the sixth century B.C., might account for the 
prevalence of this quality in the world of Jesus at the start of this 
syndrome. 

But whatever the reasons, they must in the individual be simi¬ 
lar to the reasons behind the predominantly negatory quality of 
schizophrenic hallucinations. And indeed the relationship of this 
type of possession to schizophrenia seems obvious. 

Like schizophrenia, negatory possession usually begins with 
some kind of an hallucination . 11 It is often a castigating ‘voice’ 
of a ‘demon’ or other being which is ‘heard’ after a considerable 
stressful period. But then, unlike schizophrenia, probably be¬ 
cause of the strong collective cognitive imperative of a particular 
group or religion, the voice develops into a secondary system of 
personality, the subject then losing control and periodically enter¬ 
ing into trance states in which consciousness is lost, and the 
‘demon’ side of the personality takes over. 

Always the patients are uneducated, usually illiterate, and all 
believe heartily in spirits or demons or similar beings and live in a 
society which does. The attacks usually last from several min¬ 
utes to an hour or two, the patient being relatively normal be- 

10 Moreover, instances of such possession occur most often in the oldest and most 
authentic of the Gospels: Mark 1:32, 5:15-18} and Matthew (which scholars are 
agreed is based upon Mark as well as some unknown older Gospel) 4:24; 8:16; 

8 :2 8—33; 9 :32 ; 12 :22. 

11 Here I am summarizing cases in the literature. For fuller discussions of this 
topic as well as other case descriptions (not very complete) see Oesterreich, Possession; 
as well as J. L. Nevius, Demon Possession and Allied Themes (Chicago: Revell, 
1896). 



OF PROPHETS AND POSSESSION 


3 4 9 


tween attacks and recalling little of them. Contrary to horror 
fiction stories, negatoiy possession is chiefly a linguistic phenom¬ 
enon, not one of actual conduct. In all the cases I have studied, it 
is rare to find one of criminal behavior against other persons. 
