The stricken individual does not run off and behave like a 
demon j he just talks like one. 

Such episodes are usually accompanied by twistings and writh- 
ings as in induced possession. The voice is distorted, often gut¬ 
tural, full of cries, groans, and vulgarity, and usually railing 
against the institutionalized gods of the period. Almost always, 
there is a loss of consciousness as the person seems the opposite 
of his or her usual self. 'He' may name himself a god, demon, 
spirit, ghost, or animal (in the Orient it is often 'the fox'), may 
demand a shrine or to be worshiped, throwing the patient into 
convulsions if these are withheld. 'He' commonly describes his 
natural self in the third person as a despised stranger, even as 
Yahweh sometimes despised his prophets or the Muses sneered at 
their poets . 12 And 'he' often seems far more intelligent and alert 
than the patient in his normal state, even as Yahweh and the 
Muses were more intelligent and alert than prophet or poet. 

As in schizophrenia, the patient may act out the suggestions of 
others, and, even more curiously, may be interested in contracts 
or treaties with observers, such as a promise that 'he' will leave 
the patient if such and such is done, bargains which are carried 
out as faithfully by the 'demon' as the sometimes similar cove¬ 
nants of Yahweh in the Old Testament. Somehow related to this 
suggestibility and contract interest is the fact that the cure for 
spontaneous stress-produced possession, exorcism, has never 
varied from New Testament days to the present. It is simply by 
the command of an authoritative person often following an in¬ 
duction ritual, speaking in the name of a more powerful god. 

12 I probably should not be making these cross-comparisons. But I am at least 
revealing my thinking. Is it possible that what corresponds to Wernicke's area on the 
right hemisphere always 'looks down' on Wernicke's area on the left? The references 
are to Exodus 4:24 and to Hesiod's Theogony, line 26, respectively. 



350 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 

The exorcist can be said to fit into the authorization element of 
the general bicameral paradigm, replacing the 'demon.' The cog¬ 
nitive imperatives of the belief system that determined the form 
of the illness in the first place determine the form of its cure. 

The phenomenon does not depend on age, but sex differences, 
depending on the historical epoch, are pronounced, demonstrat¬ 
ing its cultural expectancy basis. Of those possessed by 'demons' 
whom Jesus or his disciples cured in the New Testament, the 
overwhelming majority were men. In the Middle Ages and 
thereafter, however, the overwhelming majority were women. 
Also evidence for its basis in a collective cognitive imperative are 
its occasional epidemics, as in convents of nuns during the Mid¬ 
dle Ages, in Salem, Massachusetts, in the eighteenth century, 
or those reported in the nineteenth century at Savoy in the Alps. 
And occasionally today. 

Now, again, with any alteration of mentality as striking as this, 
we cannot escape the neurological question. What is happening? 
Are the speech areas of the right nondominant hemisphere acti¬ 
vated in spontaneous possession, as I have suggested they were in 
the induced possession of the oracles? And are the contorted 
features due to the intrusion of right hemisphere control? The 
fact that the majority of instances (as well as most oracles and 
Sibyls) were women, and that women are (presently in our cul¬ 
ture) less lateralized than men is somewhat suggestive. 

At least some instances of possession begin with contortions on 
the left side of the body, which may indicate this is true. Here is 
one case reported at the beginning of this century. The patient 
was a forty-seven-year-old uneducated Japanese woman who 
would become possessed by what she called the fox, six or seven 
times a day, always with the same laterality phenomena. As it 
was then observed by her physicians: 

At first there appeared slight twitchings of the mouth and 
arm on the left side. As these became stronger she violently 



OF PROPHETS AND POSSESSION 


351 


struck with her fist her left side which was already swollen and 
red with similar blows, and said to me: “Ah, sir, here he is 
stirring again in my breast.” Then a strange and incisive voice 
issued from her mouth: “Yes, it is true, I am there. Did you 
think, stupid goose, that you could stop me?” Thereupon the 
woman addressed herself to us: “Oh dear, gentlemen, forgive 
me, I cannot help it!” 

Continuing to strike her breast and contract the left side of 
her face . . . the woman threatened him, adjured him to be 
quiet, but after a short time he interrupted her and it was he 
alone who thought and spoke. The woman was now passive like 
an automaton, obviously no longer understanding what was said 
to her. It was the fox which answered maliciously instead. At 
the end of ten minutes the fox spoke in a more confused manner, 
the woman gradually came to herself and assumed back her 
normal state. She remembered the first part of the fit and 
begged us with tears to forgive her for the outrageous conduct 
of the fox.‘3 


But this is one case. I have not found any other patient in which 
such distinct laterality phenomena were in evidence. 

In puzzling about the neurology of negatory possession, it can 
be helpful, I think, to consider the contemporary illness known as 
Gilles de la Tourette’s Syndrome,^ or, occasionally, "foul-mouth 
disease." This bizarre group of symptoms usually begins in child¬ 
hood at age five or sometimes earlier, with perhaps merely a 
repeated facial twitch or bad word out of context. This then 
develops into an uncontrollable emission of ripe obscenities, 
grunts, barks, or profanities in the middle of otherwise normal 

*3 E. Balz, Ueber Besessenheit (Leipzig, 1907), as translated by Oesterreich, Pos¬ 
session,, p. 227. Physicians attending her were astonished to see the cleverness of 
speech, the witty and ironic language, so unlike the patient's own, which the 'fox' 
displayed. 

'4 For recent work on this subject as well as its history, see the references and 
data in A. K. Shapiro, E. Shapiro, H. L. Wayne, J. Clarkin, and R. D. Braun, 
"Tourette's Syndrome: summary of data on 34. patients," Psychosomatic Medicine, 

973, 35:4i9-435- 



352 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 

conversation, as well as various facial tics, sticking out the 
tongue, etc. These often continue through adult life, much to the 
distress of the patient. Such persons often end up refusing to 
leave their homes because of their horror and embarrassment at 
their own intermittent uncontrollable vulgarity. In one case I 
knew of recently, the man invented a cover of having severe 
bladder problems requiring him to urinate often. Actually, every 
time he dashed to the Men’s Room while at a restaurant or to the 
bathroom in a house, it was the welling up of profanity that he 
went to relieve himself of by shouting it at toilet walls.To be 
profane myself, the linguistic feeling within him may not have 
been unlike the prophet Jeremiah’s fire shut up in his bones (see 
11:6), although the semantic product was somewhat (but not 
altogether) different. 

What is of interest here is that Tourette’s Syndrome so clearly 
resembles the initial phase of stress-produced possession as to 
force upon us the suspicion that they share a common physiologi¬ 
cal mechanism. And this may indeed be incomplete hemispheric 
dominance, in which the speech areas of the right hemisphere 
(perhaps stimulated by impulses from the basal ganglia) are 
periodically breaking through into language under conditions 
which would have produced an hallucination in bicameral man. 
Accordingly it is not surprising that almost all sufferers from 
Tourette's Syndrome have abnormal brain wave patterns, some 
central nervous system damage, and are usually left-handed (in 
the majority of left-handed persons there is mixed dominance), 
and that the symptoms begin around the age of five when the 
neurological development of hemispheric dominance in regard to 
language is being completed. 

Now all of this says something important but unsettling about 

>5 Tourette’s Syndrome is often if not usually misdiagnosed as a form of insanity, 
which it definitely is not. Fortunately and interestingly, however, one of the new anti¬ 
psychotic tranquilizers, haloperidol, has been found to abolish the symptoms — which 
it did in the above-mentioned cases. I am grateful to Dr. Shapiro for discussion on 
these points. 



OF PROPHETS AND POSSESSION 


353 


our nervous systems. For while I believe the neurological model 
in I.5 to be in the right direction, we are getting further and 
further away from it. It is very improbable that modern spirit 
possession is everywhere engaging right hemisphere speech cen¬ 
ters for the articulated speech itself. Such an hypothesis is con¬ 
trary to so many clinical facts as to rule it out except in highly 
unusual cases. 

A more likely possibility, perhaps, is that the neurological 
difference between the bicameral mind and modern possession 
states is that in the former, hallucinations were indeed organized 
and heard from the right hemisphere; while in possession, the 
articulated speech is our normal left hemisphere speech but con¬ 
trolled or under the guidance of the right hemisphere. In other 
words, what corresponds to Wernicke's area on the right hemi¬ 
sphere is using Broca's area on the left hemisphere, the result 
being the trance state and its depersonalization. Such cross con¬ 
trol could be the neurological substrate of the loss of normal 
consciousness. 

Possession in the Modern World 

I wish now to turn to induced possession in our own times to 
demonstrate with some conclusiveness that it is a learned phe¬ 
nomenon. The best example I have found is the Umbanda reli¬ 
gion, the largest by far of the Afro-Brazilian religions practiced 
today by over half the population of Brazil. It is believed in as a 
source of decision by persons of all ethnic backgrounds and is 
certainly the most extensive occurrence of induced possession 
since the third century. 

Let us look in on a typical gira or “turn around,” as an Um¬ 
banda session is so aptly called. 16 It may be taking place at the 
present time in a room above a store or in an abandoned garage. 

16 This entire section on the Umbanda is based on the extremely rich and definitive 
study of Esther Pressel, “Umbanda Trance and Possession in Sao Paulo, Brazil,” in 
Felicitas Goodman et al., Trance, Healing, and Hallucination (New York: Wiley, 
1974-)- 

