

354 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 

Perhaps a dozen or fewer mediums (70 percent are women), all 
dressed ceremoniously in white, come out from a tiring room in 
front of a white-draped altar crammed with flowers, candles, and 
statues and pictures of Christian saints, an audience of a hundred 
or so being beyond a railing on the other side of the room. The 
drummers beat and the audience sings, as the mediums begin to 
sway or dance. This swaying and dancing is always in a counter¬ 
clockwise motion, that is, beginning with motor impulses from the 
right hemisphere. There follows a Christian type of service. 
Then drums are once more pounded furiously, everyone sings, 
and the mediums begin to call their spirits; some spin to the left 
like whirling dervishes, again exciting their right hemispheres. 
There is the explicit metaphor here of the medium as a cavalo 
or horse. A particular spirit is supposed to lower himself into his 
cavalo. As this is happening, the head and chest of the cavalo, 
or medium, jerks back and forth in opposing directions like a 
bronco being ridden. The hair falls into disarray. Facial expres¬ 
sions become contorted, as in ancient examples I have cited. 
Posture changes into the likeness of any of several possessing 
spirits. The possession accomplished, the ‘spirits’ may dance for 
a few minutes, may greet each other in the possessed state, may 
perform other actions suitable to the type of spirit, and then, 
when the drumming stops, go to preassigned places, and, curi¬ 
ously, as they wait for members of the audience to come forward 
for the consultas, they snap their fingers impatiently as their 
hands rest beside their bodies, palms outward. In the consultas 
the possessed medium may be asked for, and may give, decisions 
on any illness or personal problem, on getting or keeping a job, 
on financial business practices, family quarrels, love affairs, or 
even, among students, advice about scholastic grades. 

Now the evidence that possession is a learned mentality is very 
clear in these Brazilian cults. In a bairro playground, one may 
occasionally see children in their play imitating the distinctive 
back-and-forth jerking of the head and chest that is used for 



OF PROPHETS AND POSSESSION 


3 5 5 


inducing and terminating spirit possession. If a child wishes to 
become a medium, he is encouraged to do so and given special 
training, just as were the young country girls who became the 
oracles at Delphi and elsewhere. Indeed, some of the many 
Umbanda centers (there are 4000 in Sao Paulo alone) hold regu¬ 
lar training sessions, where the procedures include various ways 
of making the novice dizzy in order to teach him or her the trance 
state, as well as techniques similar to those used in hypnosis. 
And in the trance state, the novice is taught how each of several 
possible spirits behaves. This fact of a differentiation of possessing 
spirits is important, and I wish to comment further on it and its 
function in culture. 

The vestiges of the bicameral mind do not exist in any empty 
psychological space. That is, they should not be considered as 
isolated phenomena that simply appear in a culture and loiter 
around doing nothing but leaning on their own antique merits. 
Instead, they always live at the very heart of a culture or subcul¬ 
ture, moving out and filling up the unspoken and the unrational¬ 
ized. They become indeed the irrational and unquestionable sup¬ 
port and structural integrity of the culture. And the culture in 
turn is the substrate of its individual consciousnesses, of how the 
metaphor ‘me’ is ‘perceived’ by the analog ‘I’, of the nature of 
excerption and the constraints on narratization and conciliation. 

Such vestiges of the bicameral mind as we are here considering 
are no exception. A possession religion such as the Umbanda 
functions as a powerful psychological support to the hetero¬ 
geneous masses of its poor and uneducated and needy. It is 
pervaded with a feeling of caridade, or charity, which consoles and 
binds together this motley of political impotents, whose urbaniza¬ 
tion and ethnic diversity has stranded them without roots. And 
look at the pattern of particular neurological organizations that 
emerge as possessing divinities. They remind us of the presenting 
personal gods of Sumer and Babylon, interceders with those 



356 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 

above them. Each medium on any particular night may be pos¬ 
sessed by an individual spirit from any of four main groups. 
They are, in order of frequency: 

the caboclos, spirits of Brazilian-Indian warriors, who advise 
in situations requiring quick and decisive action, such as obtain¬ 
ing or maintaining a job; 

the pretos velhos, spirits of old Afro-Brazilian slaves, adept 
at handling long drawn-out personal problems; 

the crianqas, spirits of dead children, whose mediums make 
playful suggestions; 

the exus (demons) or, if female, pombagiras (turning 
pigeons), spirits of wicked foreigners, whose mediums make 
vulgar and aggressive suggestions. 

Each of these four main types of possessor spirits represents a 
different ethnic group corresponding to the ethnic hybridism of 
the worshipers: Indian, African, Brazilian (the criangas are “like 
us”), and European, respectively. Each represents a different 
familial relationship to the petitioner: father, grandfather, sib¬ 
ling, and stranger respectively. And each represents a different 
area of decision: quick decisions for choices of action, comforting 
advice on personal problems, playful suggestions, and decisions in 
matters of aggression respectively. Even as the Greek gods were 
originally distinguished as areas of decision, so the spirits of the 
Umbanda. And the whole is like a network or metaphor matrix 
of four-way inner-related distinctiveness that binds the individ¬ 
uals together and holds them in a culture. 

And all this, I suggest, is a vestige of the bicameral mind, as we 
go through these millennia of adjusting to a new mentality. 

True possession, as described by Plato and others, has always 
been held to go on without consciousness, thus differentiating it 
from acting. But the training of the persons of oracles must have 
admitted of degrees and stages toward such a state. In the Brazil¬ 
ian possession religions, apparently, this is exactly what happens. 



OF PROPHETS AND POSSESSION 


357 


The young novice may begin by acting out possession in play, 
then proceed with his training until eventually he can separate 
what a spirit would say from what he himself would normally 
talk about. Then there occurs a stage of passing back and forth 
between consciousness and unconsciousness. And then with full 
possession, perhaps the connecting up of Wernicke’s area on the 
right hemisphere with Broca's on the left, the much-desired state 
of unconsciousness, with no remembrance of what happens. 
This, however, is true of only some mediums. And in any 
pseudobicameral practice as extensive as this, it is to be expected 
that there will be many different qualities and degrees of acting 
and trance even within the same individual. 

Glossolalia 

A final phenomenon that is weakly similar to induced possession 
is glossolalia, or what the apostle Paul called “speaking in 
tongues.” It consists of fluent speech in what sounds like a 
strange language which the speaker himself does not understand 
and usually does not remember saying. It seems to have begun 
with the early Christian Church 1 ? in the asserted descent of the 
ghost of God into the assembled apostles. This event was re¬ 
garded as the birthday of the Christian Church and is commemo¬ 
rated in the festival of Pentecost, the fiftieth day after Easter. 18 
Acts 2 describes what is probably its first instance in history as a 
great rushing wind roaring with cloven tongues of fire, in which 
all the apostles begin to speak as if drunk in languages they had 
never learned. 

>7 Old Testament references to Yahweh’s pouring out his spirit are sometimes put 
forth as references to glossolalia, but I find this utterly unconvincing. The phe¬ 
nomenon can be regarded as peculiarly of Christian origin, particularly in the writ¬ 
ings of, or influenced by, Paul. 

18 Today at Vatican celebrations of Pentecost, red is worn to symbolize the tongues 
of fire; and in Protestant churches, white, to symbolize the Holy Ghost, hence the 
English term Whitsuntide, around white Sunday. 



358 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 

This alteration of mentality happening to the likes of the 
apostles became its own authorization. The practice spread. 
Soon early Christians were doing it everywhere. Paul even put it 
on a level with prophecy (I Corinthians 14:27, 29). From time 
to time in the centuries since Paul, glossolalia as a search for 
authorization after the breakdown of the bicameral mind has had 
its periods of fashion. 

Its recent practice, not just by the sects that are theologically 
extremely conservative, but also by members of mainline Protes¬ 
tant churches, has pushed it into some scientific scrutiny with 
some interesting results. Glossolalia first happens always in groups 
and always in the context of religious services. I am stressing the 
group factor, since I think this strengthening of the collective 
cognitive imperative is necessary for a particularly deep type of 
trance. Often there will be what corresponds to an induction, 
particularly hymn singing of a rousing sort, followed by the 
exhortations of a charismatic leader: “If you feel your language 
change, don’t resist it, let it happen. 

The worshiper, through repeated attendance at such meetings, 
watching others in glossolalia, first learns to enter into a deep- 
trance state of diminished or absent consciousness in which he is 
not responsive to exteroceptive stimuli. The trance in this case is 
almost an autonomic one: shakes, shivers, sweat, twitches, and 
tears. Then he or she may somehow learn to "let it happen." 
And it does, loud and clear, each phrase ending in a groan: aria 
ariari isa, vena amiria as aria ! 20 The rhythm pounds, the way 
epic dactyls probably did to the hearers of the aoidoi. And this 
quality of regular alternation of accented and unaccented sylla¬ 
bles, so similar to that of the Homeric epics, as well as the rising 
and then downward intonation at the end of each phrase, does 
not — and this is astonishing — does not vary with the native 

v > Felicitas D. Goodman, "Disturbances in the Apostolic Church: A Trance-Based 
Upheaval in Yucatan," in Goodman et al., Trance, Healing, and Hallucination, 
pp. 227-364. 

20 From a tape of Dr. Goodman’s of a male glossolalist of Mayan descent in Yuca¬ 
tan. Ibid., pp. 262-263. 

