

OF PROPHETS AND POSSESSION 


359 


language of the speaker. If the subject is English, Portuguese, 
Spanish, Indonesian, African, or Mayan, or wherever he is, the 
pattern of glossolalia is the same. 21 

After the glossolalia, the subject opens his eyes and slowly 
returns from these unconscious heights to dusty reality, remem¬ 
bering little of what happened. But he is told. He has been 
possessed by the Holy Spirit. He has been chosen by God as his 
puppet. His problems are stopped in hope and his sorrows torn 
with joy. It is the ultimate in authorization since the Holy Spirit 
is one with the highest source of all being. God has chosen to 
enter the lowly subject and has articulated his speech with the 
subject's own tongue. The individual has become a god — 
briefly. 


The cruel daylight of it all is less inspiring. While the phe¬ 
nomenon is not simply gibberish, nor can the average person 
duplicate the fluency and structure of what is spoken, it has no 
semantic meaning whatever. Tapes of glossolalia played before 
others in the same religious group are given utterly inconsistent 
interpretations. 22 That the metered vocalizations are similar 
across the cultures and language of the speakers, probably indi¬ 
cates that rhythmical discharges from subcortical structures are 
coming into play, released by the trance state of lesser cortical 
control.^ 

The ability does not last. It attenuates. The more it is prac- 

21 The important result of Dr. Goodman's earlier study., Speaking in Tongues: A 
Cross-Cultural Study of Glossolalia (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1972). 

22 This is a generalization from the careful work of John P. Kildahl on twenty- 
six American glossolalists all belonging to major Protestant denominations. See his 
The Psychology of Speaking in Tongues (New York: Harper & Row, 1972). He 
also gives a very complete bibliography on the matter. 

2 3 "The surface structure of a non-linguistic deep structure," as Dr. Goodman says 
in structuralist terms (p. 151-152). But the idea of an energy discharge from sub¬ 
cortical structures under diminished consciousness has been sharply criticized, par¬ 
ticularly by the linguist W. J. Samarin in his review of Goodman in Language, 
1974, 50:207-212. See also his Tongues of Men and Angels: The Religious Lan¬ 
guage of Pentecostalism (New York: Macmillan, 1972). I am grateful to Ronald 
Baker of the University of Prince Edward Island for bringing this to my attention. 



360 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 

ticed, the more it becomes conscious, which destroys the trance. 
An essential ingredient of the phenomenon, at least in more 
educated groups where the cognitive imperative would be weaker, 
is the presence of a charismatic leader who first teaches the 
phenomenon. And if tongue speaking is to be continued at all, 
and the resulting euphoria makes it a devoutly wished state of 
mind, the relationship with the authoritative leader must be con¬ 
tinued. It is really this ability to abandon the conscious direction 
of one's speech controls in the presence of an authority figure 
regarded as benevolent that is the essential thing. As we might 
expect, glossolalists by the Thematic Apperception Test reveal 
themselves as more submissive, suggestible, and dependent in the 
presence of authority figures than those who cannot exhibit the 
phenomenon.^ 

It is, then, this pattern of essential ingredients, the strong 
cognitive imperative of religious belief in a cohesive group, the 
induction procedures of prayer and ritual, the narrowing of con¬ 
sciousness into a trance state, and the archaic authorization in 
the divine spirit and in the charismatic leader, which denotes this 
phenomenon as another instance of the general bicameral para¬ 
digm and therefore a vestige of the bicameral mind. 

Aria ariari isa, vena amiria asaria 

Menin aeide thea Peleiadeo Achilleos 

My comparison of the sound of speaking in tongues with the 
sound of the Greek epics to their hearers (the second line above 
is the first line of the Iliad) is not just an ornature of my style. It 
is a very deliberate comparison. And one that I intend now as a 
lead-in to the next chapter. For we should not leave our inquiry 
into these cultural antiques without at least noting the oddity, the 
difference, the true profundity, and — ultimately — the question 
of and for poetry. 

2 4 John P. Kildahl, The Final Progress Report: Glossolalia and Mental Health 
(for NIMH), privately circulated. 



CHAPTER 3 


Of Poetry and Music 


W HY HAS so much of the textual material we have used as 
evidence in earlier chapters been poetry? And why, particu¬ 
larly in times of stress, have a huge proportion of the readers of 
this page written poems? What unseen light leads us to such 
dark practice? And why does poetry flash with recognitions of 
thoughts we did not know we had, finding its unsure way to 
something in us that knows and has known all the time, some¬ 
thing, I think, older than the present organization of our nature? 

To charter a discussion down this optional and deserted topic 
at this point in what has hitherto been a fairly linear argument 
may seem an unwarranted indirection. But the chapters of Book 
III, in contrast to the previous two books, are not a consecutive 
procession. They are rather a selection of divergent trajectories 
out of our bicameral past into present times. And I think it will 
become obvious that the earlier argument, particularly as relating 
to the Greek epics, needs to be rounded out with the present 
chapter. 

I shall state my thesis plain. The first poets were gods. Poetry 
began with the bicameral mind. The god-side of our ancient 
mentality, at least in a certain period of history, usually or per¬ 
haps always spoke in verse. This means that most men at one 
time, throughout the day, were hearing poetry (of a sort) com¬ 
posed and spoken within their own minds. 



362 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 


The evidence is, of course, only inferential. It is that all of 
those individuals who remained bicameral into the conscious age, 
when speaking of or from the divine side of their minds, spoke in 
poetry. The great epics of Greece were of course heard and 
spoken by the aoidoi as poetry. The ancient writings of Mesopo¬ 
tamia and Egypt are darkened with our ignorance of how such 
languages were pronounced; but with such assurances in trans¬ 
literation as we can muster, such writings when spoken were also 
poetry. In India, the oldest literature is the Veda, which were 
dictated by gods to the rishi or prophets; these too were poetry. 
Oracles spoke poetry. From time to time, their utterances from 
Delphi and elsewhere were written down, and every one of them 
that survives as more than a simple phrase is in dactylic hexam¬ 
eter, just as were the epics. The Hebrew prophets also, when 
relaying the hallucinated utterance of Yahweh, were often poets, 
though their scribes did not in every case preserve such speech in 
verse. 

As the bicameral mind recedes further into history, and the 
oracles reach their fifth term, there are exceptions. Poetic utter¬ 
ance by the oracles breaks down here and there. The oracle at 
Delphi, for example, in the first century AD. evidently spoke in 
both verse and prose, the latter to be put into verse by poets in the 
service of the temples. 1 But the very impulse to transpose oracu¬ 
lar prose back into dactylic hexameters is, I suggest, a part of the 
nostalgia for the divine in this late period; it demonstrates again 
that metered verse had been the rule previously. Even later, 
some oracles still spoke exclusively in dactylic hexameters. Taci¬ 
tus, for example, visited the oracle of Apollo at Claros about AD. 

1 Strabo, Geography, 9.3.5, or as translated by H. L. Jones in the Loeb edition, 
p. 353 - This observation was made about AD. 30. Plutarch's offhand suggestion in 
the second century a.d. that the raw prophetic outpouring of the oracle always had to 
be versified by inspired prophetes is contrary to all the earlier writings and evidence 
from the oracles themselves. See his The Oracles of Delphi in Vol. 5 of The Moralia, 
Loeb edition. I am not sure how seriously we should take Plutarch's rambling 
after-dinner conversation piece. 



OF POETRY AND MUSIC ggg 

100 and described how the entranced priest listened to his deci¬ 
sion-seeking petitioners; he then 

. . . swallows a draught of water from a mysterious spring 
and — though ignorant generally of writing and of meters — 
delivers his response in set verses. 2 


Poetry then was divine knowledge. And after the breakdown 
of the bicameral mind, poetry was the sound and tenor of author¬ 
ization. Poetry commanded where prose could only ask. It felt 
good. In the wanderings of the Hebrews after the exodus from 
Egypt, it was the sacred shrine that was carried before the multi¬ 
tude and followed by the people, but it was the poetry of Moses 
that determined when they would start and when stop, where 
they would go and where stay.s 

The association of rhythmical or repetitively patterned utter¬ 
ance with supernatural knowledge endures well into the later 
conscious period. Among the early Arabic peoples the word for 
poet was sha’ir, ‘the knower’, or a person endowed with knowl¬ 
edge by the spirits; his metered speech in recitation was the mark 
of its divine origin. The poet and divine seer have a long tradition 
of association in the ancient world, and several Indo-European 
languages have a common term for them. Rhyme and allitera¬ 
tion too were always the linguistic province of the gods and their 
prophets.4 In at least some instances of spontaneous possession, 
the demonic utterances are in meter.’ Even glossolalia today, as 

2 Tacitus, Annals, 2:54, or as translated by John Jackson in the Loeb edition, 
p. 471. 

3 Numbers 10:35, 36. My authority that these lines in Hebrew come under the 
rubric of poetry is Alfred Guillaume, Prophecy and Divination among the Hebrew 
and Other Semites (New York: Harper, 1938), p. 244. 

4 Guillaume, p. 245. 

5 A possessed woman in China at the beginning of this century, for example, would 
extemporize verses by the hour. "Everything she said was in measure verse, and was 
chanted to an unvarying tune . . . the rapid, perfectly uniform, and long continued 
utterances seemed to us such as could not possibly be counterfeited or premeditated." 
J. L. Nevius, Demon Possession and Allied Themes, p. 3 yf. 
