


364 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 


we have seen in III.2, wherever it is practiced, tends to fall into 
metrical patterns, particularly dactyls. 

Poetry then was the language of gods. 


Poetry and Song 

All the above discussion is mere literary tradition and sounds 
more plea than proof. We should, therefore, ask if there is 
another way of approaching the matter to show the relationship 
of poetry to the bicameral mind more scientifically. There is, I 
think, if we look at the relation of poetry to music. 

First of all, early poetry was song. The difference between 
song and speech is a matter of discontinuities of pitch. In ordi¬ 
nary speech, we are constantly changing pitch, even in the pro¬ 
nunciation of a single syllable. But in song, the change of pitch is 
discrete and discontinuous. Speech reels around all over a cer¬ 
tain portion of an octave (in relaxed speech about a fifth). Song 
steps from note to note on strict and delimited feet over a more 
extended range. 

Modern poetry is a hybrid. It has the metrical feet of song with 
the pitch glissandos of speech. But ancient poetry is much closer 
to song. Accents were not by intensity stress as in our ordinary 
speech, but by pitch. 6 In ancient Greece, this pitch is thought to 
have been precisely the interval of a fifth above the ground note of 
the poem, so that on the notes of our scale, dactyls would go GCC, 
GCC, with no extra emphasis on the G. Moreover, the three extra 
accents, acute, circumflex, and grave, were, as their notations 
' , A ,' imply, a rising pitch within the syllable, a rising and falling 
on the same syllable, and a falling pitch respectively. The result 
was a poetry sung like plainsong with various auditory orna¬ 
mentation that gave it beautiful variety. 

6 It was Thomas Day, whose new and syntactically vigorous translation of the 
Iliad is eagerly awaited, who first recited or rather sang epic Greek to me as it should 
be done. For the theory here, see W. B. Stanford, The Sound of Greek (Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 1967), and play the record inserted in the back cover. 



OF POETRY AND MUSIC 


365 


Now how does all this relate to the bicameral mind? Speech, as 
has long been known, is a function primarily of the left cerebral 
hemisphere. But song, as we are presently discovering, is pri¬ 
marily a function of the right cerebral hemisphere. The evidence 
is various but consistent: 

• It is common medical knowledge that many elderly patients 
who have suffered cerebral hemorrhages on the left hemisphere 
such that they cannot speak can still sing. 

• The so-called Wada Test is sometimes performed in hospi¬ 
tals to find out a person’s cerebral dominance. Sodium amytal is 
injected into the carotid artery on one side, putting the corre¬ 
sponding hemisphere under heavy sedation but leaving the other 
awake and alert. When the injection is made on the left side so 
that the left hemisphere is sedated and only the right hemisphere 
is active, the person is unable to speak, but can still sing. When 
the injection is on the right so that only the left hemisphere is 
active, the person can speak but cannot sing.? 

• Patients in whom the entire left hemisphere has been re¬ 
moved because of glioma can only manage a few words, if any, 
postoperatively. But at least some can sing. 8 One such patient 
with only a speechless right hemisphere to his name “was able to 
sing ‘America’ and ‘Home on the Range,’ rarely missing a word 
and with nearly perfect enunciation. ”9 

• Electrical stimulation on the right hemisphere in regions 
adjacent to the posterior temporal lobe, particularly the anterior 
temporal lobe, often produces hallucinations of singing and music. 
I have already described some of these patients in 1.5. And this 
in general is the area, corresponding to Wernicke’s area on the 

7 H. W. Gordon and J. E. Bogen, “Hemispheric Lateralization of Singing after 
Intracarotid Sodium Ammo-barbitol,” Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and 
Psychiatry, 1974, 37: 727-739. 

8 H. W. Gordon, “Auditory Specialization of Right and Left Hemispheres,” in 
M. Kinsbourne and W. Lynn Smith, eds. Hemispheric Disconnections and Cerebral 
Function (Springfield: Thomas, 1974), pp. 126-136. 

9 Charles W. Burklund, “Cerebral Hemisphere Function in the Human,” in 
W. L. Smith ed., Drug, Development and Cerebral Function (Springfield: Thomas, 
1972), p. 22. 



366 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 

left hemisphere, which I have hypothesized was where the audi¬ 
tory hallucinations of the bicameral mind were organized. 

Singing and melody then are primarily right hemisphere activ¬ 
ities. And since poetry in antiquity was sung rather than spoken, 
it was perhaps largely a right hemisphere function, as the theory 
of the bicameral mind in 1 .5 would predict. More specifically, 
ancient poetry involved the posterior part of the right temporal 
lobe, which I have suggested was responsible for organizing 
divine hallucinations, together with adjacent areas which even 
today are involved in music. 

For those who are still skeptical, I have devised an experiment 
where they may even feel for themselves right now the truth of 
these matters. First, think of two topics, anything, personal or 
general, on which you would like to talk for a couple of para¬ 
graphs. Now, imagining you are with a friend, speak out loud on 
one of the topics. Next, imagining you are with a friend, sing out 
loud on the other topic. Do each for one full minute, demanding 
of yourself that you keep going. Compare introspectively. Why 
is the second so much more difficult? Why does the singing 
crumble into cliches? Or the melody erode into recitative? Why 
does the topic desert you in midmelody? What is the nature of 
your efforts to get your song back on the topic? Or rather — and 
I think this is more the feeling — to get your topic back to the 
song? 

The answer is that your topic is ‘in’ Wernicke’s area on your left 
hemisphere, while your song is ‘in’ what corresponds to Wer¬ 
nicke’s area on your right hemisphere. Let me hasten to add that 
such a statement is an approximation neurologically. And by 
‘topic’ and ‘song’ I am meaning their neural substrates. But such 
an approximation is true enough to make my point. It is as if 
volitional speech is jealous of the right hemisphere and wants 
you to itself, just as your song is jealous of the left hemisphere 
and wants you to leave your left hemisphere topic behind. To 



OF POETRY AND MUSIC 


367 


accomplish the improvised singing of a pre-decided topic feels as 
if we were jumping back and forth between hemispheres. And so 
in a sense 'we' are, deciding on the words in the left and then 
trying to get back to song with them on the right before some 
other words have got there first. And usually the latter happens, 
the words are not on the topic, careering off on their own, or not 
consecutively coherent or not there at all, and so we stop singing. 

Of course we can learn to sing our verbal thoughts to a certain 
extent and musicians often do. And women, since they are less 
lateralized, may find it easier. If you practice it as an exercise 
twice a day for a month or a year or a lifetime, sincerely avoiding 
cliche and memorized material on the lyric side, and mere recita¬ 
tive on the melody side, I expect you will be more proficient at it. 
If you are ten years old, such learning will probably be much 
easier and might even make a poet out of you. And if you should 
be unlucky enough to have some left hemisphere accident at 
some future time, your thought-singing might come in handy. 
What is learned here is very probably a new relationship be¬ 
tween the hemispheres, not entirely different from some of the 
learned phenomena in the previous chapter. 


The Nature of Music 

I wish to expand a little upon the role of instrumental music in 
all this. For we also hear and appreciate music with our right 
hemispheres. 

Such lateralization of music can be seen even in very young 
infants. Six-month-old babies can be given EEG’s while being 
held in the laps of their mothers. If the recording electrodes are 
placed directly over Wernicke's area on the left hemisphere and 
over what corresponds to Wernicke's area on the right, then 
when tape recordings of speech are played, the left hemisphere 
will show the greatest activity. But when a tape of a music box is 
played or of someone singing, the activity will be greater over the 



368 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 


right hemisphere. In the experiment I am describing, not only 
did the children who were fidgeting or crying stop doing so at the 
sound of music, but also they smiled and looked straight ahead, 
turning away from the mother’s gaze, 10 even acting as we do when 
we are trying to avoid distraction. This finding has an immense 
significance for the possibility that the brain is organized at birth 
to ‘obey’ stimulation in what corresponds to Wernicke's area on 
the right hemisphere, namely the music, and not be distracted 
from it, even as earlier I have said that bicameral men neurologi- 
cally had to obey hallucinations from the same area. It also 
points to the great significance of lullabies in development, per¬ 
haps influencing a child's later creativity. 

Or you can prove this laterality of music yourself. Try hearing 
different musics on two earphones at the same intensity. You 
will perceive and remember the music on the left earphone bet¬ 
ter. 11 This is because the left ear has greater neural representa¬ 
tion on the right hemisphere. The specific location here is 
probably the right anterior temporal lobe, for patients in which it 
has been removed from the right hemisphere find it very difficult 
to distinguish one melody from another. And, conversely, with 
left temporal lobectomies, patients postoperatively have no 
trouble with such tests. 12 

10 This is the interesting recent work of Martin Gardiner of the Boston Children’s 
Hospital, personal communication. It is to be published as "EEG Indicators of 
Lateralization in Human Infants" in S. Hamad, R. Doty, L. Goldstein, J. Jaynes, 
and G. Krauthammer, eds., Lateralization in the Nervous System (New York: Aca¬ 
