demic Press, 1976). 

11 The experiment was done with Vivaldi concertos by Doreen Kimura, “Func¬ 
tional Asymmetry of the Brain in Dichotic Listening,” Cortex, 1967, 3: 163—178. 
But there is evidence that this is not true of musicians whose training has resulted 
in music’s being represented on both hemispheres. This was first discovered by R. C. 
Oldfield, “Handedness and the Nature of Dominance,” Talk at Educational Testing 
Service, Princeton, September 1969. See also Thomas G. Bever and R. J. Chiarello, 
"Cerebral Dominance in Musicians and Non-Musicians," Science (1974), Vol. 185, 
PP- 137 - 139 - 

12 D. Shankweiler, “Effects of Temporal-Lobe Damage on Perception of Dichoti- 
cally Presented Melodies,” Journal of Comparative and Physiological Psychology, 
1966, 62 : 115—119. 



OF POETRY AND MUSIC 


369 


Now we know neurologically that there can be a spread of 
excitation from one point of the cortex to adjacent points. Thus it 
becomes likely that a buildup of excitation in those areas on the 
right hemisphere serving instrumental music should spread to 
those adjacent serving divine auditory hallucinations — or vice 
versa. And hence this close relationship between instrumental 
music and poetry, and both with the voices of gods. I am suggest¬ 
ing here that the invention of music may have been as a neural 
excitant to the hallucinations of gods for decision-making in the 
absence of consciousness. 

It is thus no idle happenstance of history that the very name of 
music comes from the sacred goddesses called Muses. For music 
too begins in the bicameral mind. 

We thus have some ground for saying that the use of the lyre 
among early poets was to spread excitation to the divine speech 
area, the posterior part of the right temporal lobe, from immedi¬ 
ately adjacent areas. So also the function of flutes that accom¬ 
panied the lyric and elegiac poets of the eighth and seventh 
centuries B.C. And when such musical accompaniment is no 
longer used, as it is not in later Greek poetry, it is, I suggest, 
because the poem is no longer being sung from the right hemi¬ 
sphere where such spreading excitation would help. It is instead 
being recited from left hemispheric memory alone, rather than 
being recreated in the true prophetic trance. 

This change in musical accompaniment is also reflected in the 
way poetry is referred to, although a large amount of historical 
overlap makes the case not quite so clear. But more early poetry 
is referred to as song (as in the Iliad and the Theogony, for 
example), while later poetry is often referred to as spoken or 
told. This change perhaps corresponds roughly to the change 
from the aoidoi with their lyres to the rhapsodes with their 
rhapdoi (light sticks, perhaps to beat the meter) that took place 
perhaps in the eighth or seventh centuries B.C. And behind these 



370 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 


particulars is the more profound psychological change from bi¬ 
cameral composition to conscious recitation, and from oral to 
written remembering. In much later poetry, however, the poet as 
singer and his poem as song are brought back metaphorically as a 
conscious archaism, yielding its own authorization to the now 
conscious poetds 

Poesy and Possession 

A third way to examine this transformation of poetry during 
the rise and spread of consciousness is to look at the poet himself 
and his mentality. Specifically, were the relations of poets to the 
Muses the same as the relationship of the oracles to the greater 
gods? 

For Plato at least, the matter was quite clear. Poetry was a 
divine madness. It was katokoche or possession by the Muses; 

... all good poets, epic as well as lyric, composed their beau¬ 
tiful poems not by art, but because they are inspired and 
possessed . . . there is no invention in him until he has been 
inspired and is out of his senses and the mind is no longer in 
him. 1 "* 


Poets then, around 400 B.C., were comparable in mentality to the 
oracles of the same period, and went through similar psychologi¬ 
cal transformation when they performed. 

Now we might be tempted to think with Plato that such posses¬ 
sion characterized poetry all the way back into the epic tradition. 
But the evidence does not warrant such a generalization. In the 
Iliad itself, so many centuries before the existence of katokoche is 
ever mentioned or observed, a good argument could be made that 
the primitive aoidos was not "out of his senses and the mind no 

*3 On this matter see T. B. L. Webster, From Mycenae to Homer (London: 
Methuen, 1958), p. 271b 
Plato, Io. 534. 



OF POETRY AND MUSIC 


371 


longer in him.” For in several places, the poem breaks off as the 
poet gets stuck and has to beg the Muses to go on (2:483, 
11:218,14:508,16:112). 

Let it be stressed parenthetically here that the Muses were not 
figments of anyone’s imagination. I would ask the reader to 
peruse the first pages of Hesiod’s Theogony and realize that all of 
it was probably seen and heard in hallucination, just as can 
happen today in schizophrenia or under certain drugs. Bicameral 
men did not imagine; they experienced. The beautiful Muses 
with their unison “lily-like” voice, dancing out of the thick mists 
of evening, thumping on soft and vigorous feet about the lonely 
enraptured shepherd, these arrogances of delicacy were the hal¬ 
lucinatory sources of memory in late bicameral men, men who 
did not live in a frame of past happenings, who did not have 
‘lifetimes’ in our sense, and who could not reminisce because they 
were not fully conscious. Indeed, this is put into mythology by 
their chosen medium, the shepherd of Helicon himself: the 
Muses who, he tells us, always sing together with the same 

phrenes ^ and in “unwearying flows” of song, this special group 
of divinities who, instead of telling men what to do, specialized in 
telling certain men what had been done, are the daughters of 
Mnemosyne, the Titaness whose name later comes to mean 
memory — the first word with that meaning in the world. 

Such appeals to the Muses then are identical in function with 
our appeals to memory, like tip-of-the-tongue struggles with 
recollection. They do not sound like a man out of his senses who 
doesn’t know what he is doing. In one instance in the Iliad, the 
poet begins to have difficulty and so begs the Muses, 

Say now to me, Muses, having Olympian homes, for you are 
goddesses, and are present and know all; but we hear report 

15 The Greek for singing together is homophronas, in Hesiod, Theogony, line 60. 
I know of no records of contemporary hallucinations that sound like a group of 
people in unison. Just why the Muses are plural is an interesting problem. See II. 4, 
note 2. 



372 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 

alone, neither do we know anything: tell me who were the 
leaders and rulers of the Greeks? (2:483-487) 

and then goes on to plead in his own person that he, the poet, 
cannot name them, though he had "ten tongues and ten mouths 
and an unbreakable voice," unless the Muses start singing the 
material to him. I have italicized a phrase in the quotation to 
underline their actuality to the poet. 

Nor does possession seem to be occurring in Hesiod in his first 
meeting with them on the holy flanks of Mount Helicon while he 
was keeping watch over his sheep. He describes how the Muses 

. . . breathed into me a divine voice to celebrate things that 
shall be and things that were aforetime; and they begged me 
sing of the race of the blessed gods that are eternally, but ever to 
sing of themselves both first and last. 16 

Again, I think this should be believed literally as someone’s ex¬ 
perience in exactly the same way that we believe in the experi¬ 
ence of Hesiod's contemporary, Amos, in his meeting with 
Yahweh in the meadows of Tekoa while he too was keeping 
watch over his flock. 1 ? Nor does it seem possession when the 
Muses’ Theogony stops (line 104) and Hesiod cries out again in 
his own voice, praising the Muses and pleading with them again 
to go on with the poem: “Tell me these things from the begin¬ 
ning, you Muses,” having just given a long list of the topics which 
the poet wants the poem to be about (line 114). 

Nor does the stately and careful description of Demodocus in 
the Odyssey permit an interpretation of the poet as possessed. 
Evidently Demodocus, if he was real, may have gone through 

16 Hesiod, Theogony, translated by H. G. Evelyn-White, Loeb Classical Library. 
Another reason for thinking that this Hesiod is not the author of Works and Days, 
as I suggested in II.5, is the last phrase above. Certainly the work I have ascribed 
to Perses is not true to this promise to sing only about the gods "both first and last." 

>7 Amos, too, was not in a state of possession since he too had dialogue with his 
god. See Amos 7: 5-8; 8: 1-2. In some of my phrasing I am trying to remind the 
reader of Luke 2: 8-14. 



OF POETRY AND MUSIC 


373 


some kind of cerebral accident which left him blind, but with the 
power to hear the Muses sing such enchanting poetry as could 
make an Odysseus drape his head and moan with tears (8:63- 
92). Indeed Odysseus himself understands that Demodocus of 
the disabled vision, who could not have witnessed the Trojan 
War, could sing about it only because the Muse, or Apollo, was 
actually telling it to him. His chant was hormetheis theou, con¬ 
stantly given by the god himself (81499). 

The evidence, therefore, suggests that up to the eighth and 
probably the seventh century B.C., the poet was not out of his 
mind as he was later in Plato’s day. Rather, his creativity was 
perhaps much closer to what we have come to call bicameral. 
