The fact that such poets were “wretched things of shame, mere 
bellies,” as the Muses scornfully mocked their human adoring 
mediums, 18 unskilled roughs who came from the more primitive 
and lonely levels of the social structure, such as shepherds, is in 
accord with such a suggestion. Mere bellies out in the fields had 
less opportunity to be changed by the new mentality. And loneli¬ 
ness can lead to hallucination. 

But by the time of Solon in the sixth century B.C., something 
different is happening. The poet is no longer simply given his 
giftsj he has to have “lemming in the gift of the Muses” (Frag¬ 
ment 13:51). And then, in the fifth century B.C., we hear the 
very first hint of poets’ being peculiar with poetic ecstasy. What a 
contrast to the calm and stately manner of the earlier aoidoi, 
Demodocus, for example! It is Democritus who insists that no 
one can be a great poet without being frenzied up into a state of 
fury (Fragment 18). And then in the fourth century B.C., the 
mad possessed poet “out of his senses” that Plato and I have 
already described. Just as the oracles had changed from the 
prophet who heard his hallucinations to the possessed person in a 
wild trance, so also had the poet. 

Was this dramatic change because the collective cognitive im- 

18 Hesiod, Theogony, 1. 26. 



374 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 

perative had made the Muses less believable as real external 
entities? Or was it because the neurological reorganization of 
hemispheric relations brought on by developing consciousness 
prohibited such givenness; so that consciousness had to be out of 
the way to let poetry happen? Or was it Wernicke's area on the 
right hemisphere using Broca's area on the left, thus short- 
circuiting (as it were) normal consciousness? Or are these three 
hypotheses the same (as of course I presently think they are) ? 

For whatever reasons, decline continues decline in the ensuing 
centuries. Just as the oracles sputtered out through their latter 
terms until possession was partial and erratic, so, I suggest, poets 
slowly changed until the fury and possession by the Muses was 
also partial and erratic. And then the Muses hush and freeze into 
myths. Nymphs and shepherds, dance no more. Consciousness is a 
witch beneath whose charms pure inspiration gasps and dies into 
invention. The oral becomes written by the poet himself, and 
written, it should be added, by his right hand, worked by his left 
hemisphere. The Muses have become imaginary and invoked in 
their silence as a part of man's nostalgia for the bicameral mind. 

In summary, then, the theory of poetry I am trying to state in 
this scraggly collation of passages is similar to the theory I pre¬ 
sented for oracles. Poetry begins as the divine speech of the 
bicameral mind. Then, as the bicameral mind breaks down, 
there remain prophets. Some become institutionalized as oracles 
making decisions for the future. While others become specialized 
into poets, relating from the gods statements about the past. 
Then, as the bicameral mind shrinks back from its impulsive¬ 
ness, and as perhaps a certain reticence falls upon the right 
hemisphere, poets who are to obtain this same state must learn to 
do it. As this becomes more difficult, the state becomes a fury, 
and then ecstatic possession, just as happened in the oracles. 
And then indeed toward the end of the first millennium B.C., just 
as the oracles began to become prosaic and their statements 



OF POETRY AND MUSIC 


375 


versified consciously, so poetiy also. Its givenness by the unison 
Muses has vanished. And conscious men now wrote and crossed 
out and careted and rewrote their compositions in laborious 
mimesis of the older divine utterances. 

Why as the gods retreated even further into their silent 
heavens or, in another linguistic mode, as auditory hallucinations 
shrank back from access by left hemisphere monitoring mecha¬ 
nisms, why did not the dialect of the gods simply disappear? 
Why did not poets simply cease their rhapsodic practices as did 
the priests and priestesses of the great oracles? The answer is 
very clear. The continuance of poetry, its change from a divine 
given to a human craft is part of that nostalgia for the absolute. 
The search for the relationship with the lost otherness of divine 
directives would not allow it to lapse. And hence the frequency 
even today with which poems are apostrophes to often unbelieved- 
in entities, prayers to unknown imaginings. And hence the opening 
paragraph of this treatise. The forms are still there, to be worked 
with now by the analog T of a conscious poet. His task now is an 
imitation or mimesis 19 of the former type of poetic utterance and 
the reality which it expressed. Mimesis in the bicameral sense of 
mimicking what was heard in hallucination has moved through 
the mimesis of Plato as representation of reality to mimesis as 
imitation with invention in its sullen service. 

There have been some latter-day poets who have been very 
specific about actual auditory hallucinations. Milton referred to 
his "Celestial Patroness, who . . . unimplor'd . . . dictates to 
me my unpremeditated Verse," even as he, in his blindness, dic¬ 
tated it to his daughters. 20 And Blake's extraordinary visions and 
auditory hallucinations — sometimes going on for days and 
sometimes against his will — as the source of his painting and 


On the history of this word, see Eric A. Havelock, Preface to Plato (New York: 
Grosset & Dunlap, 1967), p. 57, n. 22, as well as Ch. 2. 

20 Paradise Lost, 9: 21-24. 



376 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 

poetry are well known. And Rilke is said to have feverishly 
copied down a long sonnet sequence that he heard in halluci¬ 
nation. 

But most of us are more ordinary, more with and of our time. 
We no longer hear our poems directly in hallucination. It is 
instead the feeling of something being given and then nourished 
into being, of the poem happening to the poet, as well and as 
much as being created by him. Snatches of lines would “bubble 
up” for Housman after a beer and a walk “with sudden and 
unaccountable emotions” which then “had to be taken in hand 
and completed by the brain.” “The songs made me, not I them,” 
said Goethe. “It is not I who think,” said Lamartine, “it is my 
ideas that think for me.” And dear Shelley said it plain: 

A man cannot say, “I will compose poetry.” The greatest 
poet even cannot say it; for the mind in creation is as a fading 
coal, which some invisible influence, like an inconstant wind, 
awakens to transitory brightness . . . and the conscious por¬ 
tions of our natures are unprophetic either of its approach or 
its departure. 21 

Is the fading coal the left hemisphere and the inconstant wind 
the right, mapping vestigially the ancient relationship of men to 
gods? 

Of course there is no universal rule in this matter. The nerv¬ 
ous systems of poets come like shoes, in all types and sizes, 
though with a certain irreducible topology. We know that the 
relations of the hemispheres are not the same in everyone. In¬ 
deed, poetry can be written without even a nervous system. A 
vocabulary, some syntax, and a few rules of lexical fit and mea¬ 
sure can be punched into a computer, which can then proceed to 
write quite inspired’ if surrealist verse. But that is simply a copy 
of what we, with two cerebral hemispheres and nervous systems, 

21 Percy Bysshe Shelley, “A Defense of Poetry” in The Portable Romantic Reader, 
H. E. Hugo, ed. (New York: Viking Press, 1957), p. 536. 



OF POETRY AND MUSIC 


377 


already do. Computers or men can indeed write poetry without 
any vestigial bicameral inspiration. But when they do, they are 
imitating an older and a truer poesy out there in history. Poetry, 
once started in mankind, needs not the same means for its pro¬ 
duction. It began as the divine speech of the bicameral mind. 
And even today, through its infinite mimeses, great poetry to the 
listener, however it is made, still retains that quality of the wholly 
other, of a diction and a message, a consolation and an inspira¬ 
tion, that was once our relationship to gods. 


A Homily on Thamyris 

I would like to end these rather clumsy suggestions on the 
biology of poetry with some homiletic sentiments on the true 
tragedy of Thamyris. He was a poet in the Iliad (2:594-600) 
who boasted he would conquer and control the Muses in his 
poetry. Gods, as they die away in the transition to consciousness, 
are jealous gods, as I have said earlier. And the Sacred Nine are 
no exception. They were enraged at the beautiful ambition of 
Thamyris. They crippled him (probably a paralysis on his left 
side), and deprived him forever of poetic expression, and made 
him forget his ability at harping. 

Of course, we do not know if there even was a Thamyris, or 
exactly what reality is being pointed at by this story. But I 
suggest it was among the later accretions to the Iliad, and that its 
insertion may point to the difficulties in hemisphere cooperation 
in artistic expression at the breakdown of the bicameral mind. 
The parable of Thamyris may be narratizing what is to us the 
feeling of losing consciousness in our inspiration and then losing 
that inspiration in our consciousness of that loss. Consciousness 
imitates the gods and is a jealous consciousness and will have no 
other executives of action before it. 

I remember when I was younger, at least through my twenties, 
while walking in woods or along a beach, or climbing hills or 



378 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 


almost anything lonely, I would quite often suddenly become 
conscious that I was hearing in my head improvised symphonies 
of unambiguous beauty. But at the very moment of my becoming 
conscious of the fact, not loitering even for a measure! the music 
vanished. I would strain to call it back. But there would be 
nothing there. Nothing but a deepening silence. Since the music 
was undoubtedly being composed in my right hemisphere and 
heard somehow as a semi-hallucination, and since my analog T 
with its verbalizations was probably, at that moment at least, a 
more left hemispheric function, I suggest that this opposition was 
very loosely like what is behind the story of Thamyris. T strained 
too much. I have no left hemiplegia. But I do not hear my music 
anymore. I do not expect ever to hear it again. 
