
The modern poet is in a similar quandary. Once, literary 
languages and archaic speech came somehow to his bold assis¬ 
tance in that otherness and grandeur of which true poetry is 
meant to speak. But the grinding tides of irreversible naturalism 
have swept the Muses even farther out into the night of the right 
hemisphere. Yet somehow, even helplessly in our search for 
authorization, we remain “the hierophants of an unapprehended 
inspiration.” And inspiration flees in attempted apprehension, 
until perhaps it was never there at all. We do not believe enough. 
The cognitive imperative dissolves. History lays her finger care¬ 
fully on the lips of the Muses. The bicameral mind, silent. And 
since 


The god approached dissolves into the air, 

Imagine then, by miracle, with me, 
(Ambiguous gifts, as what gods give must be) 
What could not possibly be there, 

And learn a style from a despair. 



CHAPTER 4 


Hypnosis 


I F I ASK YOU to taste vinegar as champagne, to feel pleasure 
when I jab a pin in your arm, or to stare into darkness and con¬ 
tract the pupils of your eyes to an imagined light, or to willfully 
and really believe something you do not ordinarily believe, just 
anything, you would find these tasks difficult if not impossible. 
But if I first put you through the induction procedures of hypno¬ 
sis, you could accomplish all these things at my asking without 
any effort whatever. 

Why? How can such supererogatory enabling even exist? 

It seems a very different company we enter when we go from 
the familiarity of poetry to the strangeness of hypnosis. For 
hypnosis is the black sheep of the family of problems which 
constitute psychology. It wanders in and out of laboratories and 
carnivals and clinics and village halls like an unwanted anomaly. 
It never seems to straighten up and resolve itself into the firmer 
proprieties of scientific theory. Indeed, its very possibility seems 
a denial of our immediate ideas about conscious self-control on 
the one hand, and our scientific idea about personality on the 
other. Yet it should be conspicuous that any theory of conscious¬ 
ness and its origin, if it is to be responsible, must face the diffi¬ 
culty of this deviant type of behavioral control. 

I think my answer to the opening question is obvious: hypnosis 
can cause this extra enabling because it engages the general 
bicameral paradigm which allows a more absolute control over 
behavior than is possible with consciousness. 



380 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 

In this chapter, I shall even go so far as to maintain that no 
theory other than the present one makes sense of the basic 
problem. For if our contemporary mentality is, as most people 
suppose, an immutable genetically determined characteristic 
evolved back somewhere in mammalian evolution or before, how 
can it be so altered as in hypnosis? And that alteration merely at 
some rather ridiculous ministrations of another person? It is 
only by rejecting the genetic hypothesis and treating conscious¬ 
ness as a learned cultural ability over the vestigial substrate of an 
earlier more authoritarian type of behavioral control that such 
alterations of mind can begin to seem orderly. 

The central structure of this chapter, obviously, will be to show 
how well hypnosis fits the four aspects of the bicameral para¬ 
digm. But before I do so, I wish to bring out clearly a most 
important feature of how hypnosis began in the first place. This 
is what I have emphasized in 1.2 and II.5, the generative force of 
metaphor in creating new mentality. 


The Paraphrands of Newtonian Forces 

Hypnosis, like consciousness, begins at a particular point in 
history in the paraphrands of a few new metaphors. The first of 
these metaphors followed Sir Isaac Newton’s discovery of the 
laws of universal gravitation and his use of them to explain the 
ocean tides under the attraction of the moon. The mysterious 
attractions and influences and controls between people were then 
compared to Newtonian gravitational influences. And the com¬ 
parison resulted in a new (and ridiculous) hypothesis, that there 
are tides of attraction between all bodies, living and material, that 
can be called animal gravitation, of which Newton’s gravitation is 
a special case. 1 


1 A full history of hypnosis is yet to be written. But see F. A. Pattie, “Brief His¬ 
tory of Hypnotism,” in J. E. Gordon, ed., Handbook of Clinical and Experimental 
Hypnosis (New York: Macmillan, 1967). See also an historical paper by one of 



HYPNOSIS 


381 


This is all very explicit in the romantic and turbid writings of a 
wanton admirer of Newton‘s called Anton Mesmer, who began it 
all. And then came another metaphor, or rather two. Gravita¬ 
tional attraction is similar to magnetic attraction. Therefore, 
since (in Mesmer‘s rhetorical thought) two things similar to a 
third thing are similar to each other, animal gravitation is like 
magnetic attraction, and so changes its name to animal mag¬ 
netism. 

Now at last the theory was testable in a scientific way. To 
demonstrate the existence of these vibrant magnetic tides in and 
through living things similar to celestial gravitation, Mesmer ap¬ 
plied magnets to various hysterical patients, even prefeeding the 
patients with medicines containing iron so that the magnetism 
might work better. And it did! The result could not be doubted 
with the knowledge of his day. Convulsive attacks were produced 
by the magnets, creating in Mesmer‘s words “an artificial ebb and 
flow” in the body and correcting with its magnetic attraction “the 
unequal distribution of the nervous fluids confused movement,” 
thus producing a “harmony of the nerves.” He had ‘proved’ that 
there are flows of forces between persons as mighty as those that 
hold the planets in their orbits. 

Of course he hadn‘t proved anything about any kind of mag¬ 
netism whatever. He had discovered what Sir James Braid on the 
metaphier of sleep later called hypnosis. The cures were effec¬ 
tive because he had explained his exotic theory to his patients 
with vigorous conviction. The violent seizures and peculiar twists 
of sensations at the application of magnets were all due to a cog¬ 
nitive imperative that these things would happen, which they 
did, constituting a kind of self-perpetuating escalating ‘proof’ that 
the magnets were working and could effect a cure. We should 
remember here that just as in ancient Assyria there was no 
concept of chance and so the casting of lots ‘had’ to be controlled 

the important experimenters in hypnosis, Theodore Sarbiris “Attempts to Under¬ 
stand Hypnotic Phenomena,” in Leo Postman, ed., Psychology in the Making (New 
York: Knopf, 1964), pp. 745-784. 



382 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 

by the gods, so in the eighteenth century there was no concept of 
suggestion and the result had to be due to the magnets. 

Then when it was found that not only magnets, but cups, 
bread, wood, human beings, and animals to which a magnet had 
been touched were also efficacious (how false beliefs breed upon 
each other!), the whole matter jumped over into another meta¬ 
phor (this is the fourth), that of static electricity, which — Ben¬ 
jamin Franklin's kite and all — was being so much studied at the 
time. Thus Mesmer thought there was a "magnetic material" 
that could be transferred to a countless array of objects, just as 
static electricity can. Human beings in particular could store up 
and absorb magnetism, particularly Mesmer himself. Just as a 
carbon rod stroked with fur produces static electricity, so patients 
were to be stroked by Mesmer. He could now dispense with 
actual magnets and use his own animal magnetism. By stroking 
or making passes over the bodies of his patients, as if they were 
carbon rods, he produced the same results: convulsions, coiling 
twists of peculiar sensations, and the cure of what later were 
called hysterical illnesses. 

Now it is critical here to realize and to understand what we 
might call the paraphrandic changes which were going on in the 
people involved, due to these metaphors. A paraphrand, you will 
remember, is the projection into a metaphrand of the associations 
or paraphiers of a metaphier. The metaphrand here is the influ¬ 
ences between people. The metaphiers, or what these influences 
are being compared to, are the inexorable forces of gravitation, 
magnetism, and electricity. And their paraphiers of absolute 
compulsions between heavenly bodies, of unstoppable currents 
from masses of Leyden jars, or of irresistible oceanic tides of 
magnetism, all these projected back into the metaphrand of 
interpersonal relationships, actually changing them, changing 
the psychological nature of the persons involved, immersing 
them in a sea of uncontrollable control that emanated from the 



HYPNOSIS 383 

'magnetic fluids’ in the doctor's body, or in objects which had 
'absorbed' such from him. 

It is at least conceivable that what Mesmer was discovering 
was a different kind of mentality that, given a proper locale, a 
special education in childhood, a surrounding belief system, and 
isolation from the rest of us, possibly could have sustained itself 
as a society not based on ordinary consciousness, where meta¬ 
phors of energy and irresistible control would assume some of the 
functions of consciousness. 

How is this even possible? As I have mentioned already, I 
think Mesmer was clumsily stumbling into a new way of engaging 
that neurological patterning I have called the general bicameral 
paradigm with its four aspects: collective cognitive imperative, 
induction, trance, and archaic authorization. I shall take up each 
in turn. 

The Changing Nature of Hypnotic Man 

That the phenomenon of hypnosis is under the control of a 
collective cognitive imperative or group belief system is clearly 
demonstrated by its continual changing in history. As beliefs 
about hypnosis changed, so also its very nature. A few decades 
after Mesmer, subjects no longer twisted with strange sensations 
and convulsions. Instead they began spontaneously to speak and 
