reply to questions during their trance state. Nothing like this had 
happened before. Then, early in the nineteenth century, patients 
spontaneously began to forget what had happened during the 
trance, 2 something never reported previously. Around 1825, for 
some unknown reason, persons under hypnosis started to spon¬ 
taneously diagnose their own illnesses. In the middle of the 
century, phrenology, the mistaken idea that conformations of the 
skull indicate mental faculties, became so popular that it actually 

2 As revealed in the important writings of A.-M.-J. Chastenet, Marquis de 
Puyseg-ur, "Memoires four Servir a L’Histoire et a L’Establissement du Magnetism 
Animate>" 2nd ed. (Paris, 1809). 



384 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 

engulfed hypnosis for a time. Pressure on the scalp over a phre¬ 
nological area during hypnosis caused the subject to express the 
faculty controlled by that area (yes, this actually happened), a 
phenomenon never seen before or since. When the scalp area 
over the part of the brain supposedly responsible for "veneration" 
was pressed, the hypnotized subject sunk to his knees in prayerf's 
This was so because it was believed to be so. 

A little later, Charcot, the greatest psychiatrist of his time, 
demonstrated to large professional audiences at the Salpetriere 
that hypnosis was again quite different! Now it had three succes¬ 
sive stages: catalepsy, lethargy, and somnambulism. These 
"physical states" could be changed from one to another by 
manipulating muscles, or various pressures, or friction on the top 
of the head. Even rubbing the head over Broca's area produced 
aphasia! And then Binet, arriving at the Salpetriere to check on 
the findings of Charcot, promptly compounded the problem by 
returning to Mesmer's magnets and discovering even more bi¬ 
zarre behavior .4 Placing magnets on one side or the other of the 
body of a hypnotized person, he could flip-flop perceptions, hys¬ 
terical paralyses, supposed hallucinations, and movements from 
one side to the other, as if such phenomena were so many iron 
filings. None of these absurd results was ever found before or 
since. 

It is not simply that the operator, Mesmer or Charcot or who¬ 
ever, was suggesting to the pliant patient what the operator 
believed hypnosis to be. Rather, there had been developed within 

3 These demonstrations by Sir James Braid, otherwise the first cautions student of 
the subject, later embarrassed him. He never referred to such results after 1845 — and 
probably never understood them. A detailed account of Braid's pivotal position in 
the history of hypnosis may be found in J. M. Bramwell, Hypnotism: Its History, 
Practice, and Theory (London: 19035 New York: Julian Press, 1956). 

"t See Alfred Binet and C. Fere, Le Magnetisme Animate (Paris: Alcan, 1897). 
This self-deluding work and the dispute with Delboeuf and the more correct Nancy 
School that followed, as well as Binet's later acknowledgment of his foolish error, 
are described in Theta Wolfs excellent biography Alfred Binet (Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press, 1973), pp. 40-78. 



HYPNOSIS 


385 


the group in which he worked a cognitive imperative as to what 
the phenomenon was 'known' to be. Such historical changes then 
clearly show that hypnosis is not a stable response to given 
stimuli, but changes as do the expectations and preconceptions of 
a particular age. 

What is obvious in history can be shown in a more experi¬ 
mentally controlled way. Previously unheard-of manifestations 
of hypnosis can be found by simply informing subjects before¬ 
hand that such manifestations are expected in hypnosis, that is, 
are a part of the collective cognitive imperative about the matter. 
For example, an introductory psychology class was casually told 
that under hypnosis a subject's dominant hand cannot be moved. 
This had never occurred in hypnosis in any era. It was a he. 
Nevertheless, when members of the class at a later time were 
hypnotized, the majority, without any coaching or further sugges¬ 
tion, were unable to move their dominant hand. Out of such 
studies has come the notion of the "demand characteristics" of 
the hypnotic situation, that the hypnotized subject exhibits the 
phenomena which he thinks the hypnotist expects.s But that 
expresses it too personally. It is rather what he thinks hypnosis 
is. And such "demand characteristics,” taken in this way, are of 
precisely the same nature as what I am calling the collective 
cognitive imperative. 

Another way of seeing the force of the collective imperative is 
to note its strengthening by crowds. Just as religious feeling and 
belief is enhanced by crowds in churches, or in oracles by the 
throngs that attended them, so hypnosis in theaters. It is well 
known that stage hypnotists with an audience packed to the 

5 This is one of the important ideas in the history of hypnosis research. See the 
papers of Martin Orne, particularly, "Nature of Hypnosis: Artifact and Essence," 
Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 1959, 58: 277-299; in this connection 
David Rosenhan's important and sobering, "On the Social Psychology of Hypnosis 
Research" in J. E. Gordon, ed., Handbook of Clinical and Experimental Psychology. 



386 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 

rafters, reinforcing the collective imperative or expectancy of 
hypnosis, can produce far more exotic hypnotic phenomena than are 
found in the isolation of laboratory or clinic. 

The Induction 

Secondly, the place of an induction procedure in hypnosis is 
obvious. 6 And needs little comment. The variety of techniques 
in contemporary practice is enormous, but they all share the 
same narrowing of consciousness, similar to the induction proce¬ 
dures for oracles, or the relationship between a pelestike and a 
katochos which we looked at in the previous chapters. The sub¬ 
ject may be seated or standing or lying down, may be stroked or 
not, stared at or not, asked to look at a small light or flame or 
gem, or perhaps a thumbtack on the wall, or at the thumbnail of 
his own clasped hands, or not — there are hundreds of varia¬ 
tions. But always the operator is trying to confine the subject'; 
attention to his own voice. "All you hear is my voice and you are 
getting sleepier and sleepier, etc." is a common pattern, repeated 
until the subject, if hypnotized, is unable to open his clasped 
hands if the operator says he can't, for example, or cannot move 
his relaxed arm if the operator so suggests, or cannot remember 
his name if that is suggested. Such simple suggestions are often 
used as indications of the success of the hypnosis in its beginning 
stages. 

If the subject is not able to narrow his consciousness in this 
fashion, if he cannot forget the situation as a whole, if he re¬ 
mains in a state of consciousness of other considerations, such as 
the room and his relationship to the operator, if he is still narra- 

6 The best discussion of induction procedures is that of Perry London, "Hie In¬ 
duction of Hypnosis," in J. E. Gordon, pp. 44-79. And for discussions of hypnosis 
in general that I have found helpful, see the papers of Ronald Shor, particularly his 
"Hypnosis and the Concept of the Generalized Reality-Orientation," American Jour¬ 
nal of Psychotherapy, 1959, 13: 582-602, and "Three Dimensions of Hypnotic 
Depth," International Journal of Clinical and Experimental Hypnosis, 1962, 10: 
23 - 38 . 



HYPNOSIS 


387 


tizing with his analog T or 'seeing' his metaphor 'me' being hyp¬ 
notized, hypnosis will be unsuccessful. But repeated attempts 
with such subjects often succeed, showing that the "narrowing" 
of consciousness in hypnotic induction is partly a learned ability, 
learned, I should add, on the basis of the aptic structure I have 
called the general bicameral paradigm. As we saw earlier that 
the ease with which a katochos can enter an hallucinatory trance 
improves with practice, so also in hypnosis: even in the most 
susceptible, the length of the induction and its substances can be 
radically reduced with repeated sessions. 


Trance and Paralogic Compliance 

Thirdly, the hypnotic trance is called just that. It is of course 
usually different from the kind of trance that goes on in other 
vestiges of the bicameral mind. Individuals do not have true 
auditory hallucinations, as in the trances of oracles or mediums. 
That place in the paradigm is taken over by the operator. But 
there is the same diminution and then absence of normal con¬ 
sciousness. Narratization is severely restricted. The analog 'P is 
more or less effaced. The hypnotized subject is not living in a 
subjective world. He does not introspect as we do, does not know 
he is hypnotized, and is not constantly monitoring himself as, in 
an unhypnotized state, he does. 

In recent times, the metaphor of submersion in water is al¬ 
most invariably used to talk about the trance. Thus there are 
references to "going under" and to "deep" or "shallow" trances. 
The hypnotist often tells a subject he is going "deeper and 
deeper." It is indeed possible that without the submersion meta- 
phier, the whole phenomenon would be different, particularly in 
regard to post-hypnotic amnesia. The paraphiers of above and 
below the surface of water, with its different visual and tactual 
fields, could be creating a kind of two-world-ness resulting in 
something similar to state-dependent memory. And the sudden 



388 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 

appearance of spontaneous post-hypnotic amnesia in the early 
nineteenth century may be due to this change from gravitational 
to submersion metaphors. In other words, spontaneous post¬ 
hypnotic amnesia may have been a paraphrand of the submer¬ 
sion metaphor. (It is interesting to note that such spontaneous 
amnesia is presently disappearing from hypnotic phenomena. 
Possibly, hypnosis has become so familiar as to become a thing 
in itself, its metaphorical basis wearing away with use, reducing 
the power of its paraphrands.) 

It is in the "deeper" stages of the trance that the most interest¬ 
ing phenomena can be elicited. These are extremely important 
for any theory of mind to explain. Unless otherwise suggested, 
the subject is 'deaf to all but the operator's voice; he does not 
’hear’ other people. Pain can be 'blocked' off, or enhanced above 
normal. So can sensory experience. Emotions can be totally 
structured by suggestion: told he is about to hear a funny joke, 
the subject will laugh uproariously at "grass is green." The sub¬ 
ject can somehow control certain automatic responses better than 
in the normal state at the suggestion of the operator. His sense 
of identity can be radically changed. He can be made to act as if 
he were an animal, or an old man, or a child. 

But it is an as-if with a suppression of an it-isn't. Some extrem¬ 
ists in hypnosis have sometimes claimed that when a subject in a 
