trance is told he is now only five or six years old, that an actual 
regression to that age of childhood occurs. This is clearly untrue. 
Let me cite one example. The subject had been bom in Ger¬ 
many, and emigrated with his family to an English-speaking 
country at about age eight, at which time he learned English, 
forgetting most of his German. When the operator suggested to 
him under 'deep' hypnosis that he was only six years old, he 
displayed all kinds of childish mannerisms, even writing in child¬ 
ish print on a blackboard. Asked in English if he understood 
English, he childishly explained in English that he could not 
understand or speak English but only German! He even printed 



HYPNOSIS 


389 


on the blackboard in English that he could not understand a word 
of English!? The phenomenon is thus like play acting, not a true 
regression. It is an uncritical and illogical obedience to the oper¬ 
ator and his expectations that is similar to the obedience of a 
bicameral man to a god. 

Another common error made about hypnosis, even in the best 
modern textbooks, is to suppose that the operator can induce true 
hallucinations. Some unpublished observations of my own bear 
to the contrary. After a subject was in deep hypnosis, I went 
through the motions of giving him a nonexistent vase and asked 
him to place nonexistent flowers from a table into the vase, saying 
out loud the color of each one. This was easily done. It was play¬ 
acting. But giving him a nonexistent book, and asking him to 
hold it in his hands, to turn to page one and begin reading was a 
different matter. It could not be play-acted without more creativ¬ 
ity than most of us can muster. The subject would readily go 
through the suggested motions of holding such a book, might 
stumble through some cliche first phrase or possibly a sentence, 
but then would complain that the print was blurry, or too difficult 
to read, or some similar rationalization. Or when asked to de¬ 
scribe a picture (nonexistent) on a blank piece of paper, the 
subject would reply in a halting way if at all, giving only short 
answers when prodded by questions as to what he saw. If this 
had been a true hallucination, his eyes would have roamed over 
the paper and a full description would have been a simple mat¬ 
ter — as it is when schizophrenics describe their visual hallucina¬ 
tions. There were great individual differences here, as might be 
expected, but the behavior is much more consistent with an as-if 
hesitant role-taking than with the effortless givenness with which 
true hallucinations are experienced. 

This point is brought out by another experiment. If a hypno¬ 
tized person is told to walk across the room, and a chair has been 
placed in his path, and he is told that there is no chair there, he 

7 I am grateful to Martin Orne for this example. 



390 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 

does not hallucinate the chair out of existence. He simply walks 
around it. He behaves as if he did not notice it — which of 
course he did, since he walked around it. It is interesting here 
that if unhypnotized subjects are asked to simulate hypnosis in 
this particular situation, they promptly crash into the chair, 8 9 
since they are trying to be consistent with the erroneous view that 
hypnosis actually changes perceptions. 

Hence the important concept of trance logic which has been 
brought forward to denote this difference .9 This is simply the 
bland response to absurd logical contradictions. But it is not any 
kind of logic really, nor simply a trance phenomenon. It is rather 
what I would prefer to dress up as paralogical compliance to 
ver'bally mediated j'eality. It is paralogic because the rules of 
logic (which we remember are an external standard of truth, not 
the way the mind works) are put aside to comply with assertions 
about reality that are not concretely true. It is a type of behavior 
found everywhere in the human condition from contemporary 
religious litanies to various superstitions of tribal societies. But 
it is particularly pronounced in and centrally characteristic of the 
mental state of hypnosis. 

It is paralogic compliance that a subject walks around a chair 
he has been told is not there, rather than crashing into it (logical 
compliance), and finds nothing illogical in his actions. It is para¬ 
logical compliance when a subject says in English that he knows 
no English and finds nothing amiss in saying so. If our German 
subject had been simulating hypnosis, he would have shown 
logical compliance by talking only in what German he could 
remember or being mute. 

It is paralogic compliance when a subject can accept that the 
same person is in two locations at the same time. If a hypnotized 
subject is told that person X is person Y, he will behave accord- 

8 The basic work in comparing hypnotized subjects with control subjects asked to 
simulate the hypnotic state has been done by Martin Orne. This ingeniously simple 
example is due to him. 

9 Martin Orne, "The Nature of Hypnosis: Artifact and Essence." 



HYPNOSIS 


391 


ingly. Then if the real person Y walks into the room, the subject 
finds it perfectly acceptable that both are person Y. This is 
similar to the paralogic compliance found today in another ves¬ 
tige of the bicameral mind, schizophrenia. Two patients in a 
ward may both believe themselves to be the same important or 
divine person without any feelings of illogicality. 10 I suggest 
that a similar paralogic compliance was also evident in the bi¬ 
cameral era itself, as in treating unmoving idols as living and 
eating, or the same god as being in several places at one time, or 
in the multiples of jewel-eyed effigies of the same god-king found 
side-by-side in the pyramids. Like a bicameral man, the hypno¬ 
tized subject does not recognize any peculiarities and inconsis¬ 
tencies in his behavior. He cannot ‘see’ contradictions because he 
cannot introspect in a completely conscious way. 

The sense of time in a trance is also diminished, as we have 
seen it was in the bicameral mind. This is particularly evident in 
post-hypnotic amnesia. We, in our normal states, use the spatial- 
ized succession of conscious time as a substrate for successions of 
memories. Asked what we have done since breakfast, we com¬ 
monly narratize a row of happenings that are what we can call 
"time-tagged." But the subject in a hypnotic trance, like the 
schizophrenic patient or the bicameral man, has not such a 
schema of time in which events can be time-tagged. The before- 
and afterness of spatialized time is missing. Such events as can 
be remembered from the trance by a subject in post-hypnotic 
amnesia are vague isolated fragments, cuing off the self, rather 
than spatialized time as in normal remembering. Amnesic sub¬ 
jects can only report, if anything, "I clasped my hands, I sat in a 
chair," with no detail or sequencing, in a way that to me is 
reminiscent of Hammurabi or Achilles. 11 What is significantly 

10 For an extensive description of one example, see Milton Rokeach, The Three 
Christs of Ypsilanti (New York: Knopf, i960). 

11 I am grateful to John Kihlstrom of Harvard for discussions on these points. The 
distinct contrast between the language of amnesics and that of rememberers is from 
his study, soon to be published. 



392 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 

different about the contemporary hypnotic subject, however, is 
the fact that at the suggestion of the operator, the narratized 
sequential memories can often be brought back to the subject, 
showing that there has been some kind of parallel processing by 
consciousness outside of the trance. 

Such facts make the hypnotic trance a fascinating complexity. 
Parallel processing! While a subject is doing and saying one 
thing, his brain is processing his situation in at least two different 
ways, one more inclusive than the other. This conclusion can be 
demonstrated even more dramatically by the recent discovery 
that has been dubbed "the hidden observer." A hypnotized sub¬ 
ject, after the suggestion that he will feel nothing when keeping 
his hand in a bucket of ice-cold water for a minute (a really 
painful, but benign experience!), may show no discomfort and 
say he felt nothing; but if it has previously been suggested that 
when and only when the operator touches his shoulder, he will 
say in another voice exactly what he really felt, that is what 
happens. At such a touch, the subject, often in a low guttural 
voice, may give full expression to his discomfiture, yet return 
immediately to his ordinary voice and to the anesthetized state 
when the operator's hand is lifted. 12 

Such evidence returns us to a once rejected notion of hypnosis 
known as dissociation that emerged from studies of multiple 
personality at the beginning of this century.^ The idea is that in 
hypnosis the totality of mind or reactivity is being separated into 
concurrent streams which can function independently of each 
other. What this means for the theory of consciousness and its 
origin as described in Book I is not immediately apparent. But 

12 Ernest Hilgard, "A Neodissociation Interpretation of Pain Reduction in Hyp¬ 
nosis," Psychological Review, 1973, 80: 396-411. I would like to record here my 
gratitude to Ernest Hilgard for a critical reading of the earlier chapters. His en¬ 
couraging criticisms were extremely helpful. 

*3 The classics in this field are Pierre Janet, The Major Symptoms of Hysteria, 
1907 (2nd ed., New York: Holt, 1920) and Morton Prince, The Unconscious (New 
York: Macmillan, 1914). For an excellent discussion see Ernest Hilgard's "Dissocia¬ 
tion Revisited" in M. Henle, J. Jaynes, and J. J. Sullivan, eds., Historical Concep¬ 
tions of Psychology (New York: Springer, 1973). 



HYPNOSIS 


393 


such dissociated processing is certainly reminiscent of the bicam¬ 
eral organization of mind itself, as well as the kind of noncon- 
scious problem solving discussed in I.i. 

Perhaps the least discussed aspect of hypnosis is the difference 
in the nature of the trance among persons who have never seen 
or known much about hypnosis before. Usually, of course, the 
trance is in our time a passive and suggestible state. But some 
subjects really do go to sleep. Others are always partly conscious 
and yet peculiarly suggestible until who can judge between acting 
and reality? Others tremble so severely that the subject has to be 
'awakened'. And so on. 

That such individual differences are due to differences in the 
belief or collective cognitive imperative of the individual is sug¬ 
gested by a recent study. Subjects were asked to describe in 
