writing what happens in hypnosis. They were later hypnotized, 
and the results compared with their expectation. One 'awoke' 
from the trance each time she was given a task for which she had 
to see. A later perusal of her paper showed she had written, "A 
person's eyes must be closed in order to be in a hypnotic trance." 
Another could only be hypnotized on a second attempt. He had 
written, "Most people cannot be hypnotized the first time." And 
another could not perform tasks under hypnosis when standing. 
She had written, "The subject has to be reclining or sitting."^ 
But the more hypnosis is talked about, even as on these pages, 
the more standardized the cognitive imperative and hence the 
trance becomes. 

The Hypnotist as Authorization 

And so, fourthly, a very particular kind of archaic authoriza¬ 
tion which also determines in part the different nature of the 
trance. For here, instead of the authorization being an halluci¬ 
nated or possessing god, it is the operator himself. He is mani- 

*4 T. R. Sarbin, "Contribution to Role-Taking Theory: I. Hypnotic Behavior," 
Psychology Review, 1943, 57: 255-270. 



394 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 

festly an authority figure to the subject. And if he is not, the sub¬ 
ject will be less hypnotizable, or will require a much longer induc¬ 
tion or a much greater belief in the phenomenon to begin with (a 
stronger cognitive imperative). 

Indeed, most students of the subject insist that there must be 
developed a special kind of trust relationship between the subject 
and the operator. 16 One common test of the susceptibility to 
hypnosis is to stand behind the prospective subject and ask him to 
permit himself to fall voluntarily to see what it feels like to ‘let 
go’. If the subject steps back to break his fall, some part of him 
lacking confidence that he will be caught, he almost invariably 
turns out to be a poor hypnotic subject for that particular 
operator. 16 

Such trust explains the difference between hypnosis in the 
clinic and in the laboratory. The hypnotic phenomena found in a 
medical psychiatric setting are commonly more profound, be¬ 
cause, I suggest, a psychiatrist is a more godlike figure to his 
patient than is an investigator to his subject. And a similar 
explanation can be made for the age at which hypnosis is most 
easily done. Hypnotic susceptibility is at its peak between the 
ages of eight and ten. 1 ? Children look up to adults with a vastly 

'5 Even Clark Hull, a strident behaviorist, the first to perform really controlled 
experiments in hypnosis, and who scorned introspective data, was compelled to look 
on hypnosis as "prestige suggestion," perhaps with "a quantitative shift in the upward 
direction which may result from the hypnotic procedure." Hypnosis and Suggesti¬ 
bility: An Experimental Approach (New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1933), 
P- 392. 

16 See Ernest Hilgard, Hypnotic Susceptibility (New York: Harcourt, Brace and 
World, 1965), p. 101. Those investigating glossolalia, discussed in III.2, have 
remarked that the person able to "speak in tongues" must have a very similar kind 
of trust in his charismatic leader. When such trust in such a leader diminishes, so 
does the phenomenon. It would be a simple matter, using cassette recordings for 
hypnotic induction procedures, to manipulate the variable of prestige and really 
demonstrate the importance of this factor in hypnosis. 

V From the data of Theodore X. Barber and D. S. Calverley, "Hypnotic-Like 
Suggestibility in Children and Adults," Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 
1963, 66: 5S9-597. In a forthcoming book, I shall be discussing the development of 
consciousness in the child, suggesting that this age of greatest hypnotic susceptibility 
is just after the full development of consciousness. 



HYPNOSIS 


395 


greater sense of adult omnipotence and omniscience, and this 
thus increases the potentiality of the operator in fulfilling the 
fourth element of the paradigm. The more godlike the operator 
is to the subject, the more easily is the bicameral paradigm 
activated. 

Evidence for the Bicameral Theory of Hypnosis 

If it is true that the relationship of subject to operator in 
hypnosis is a vestige of an earlier relationship to a bicameral 
voice, several interesting questions arise. If the neurological 
model outlined in I.5 is in the right direction, then we might 
expect some kind of laterality phenomenon in hypnosis. Our 
theory predicts that in EEG’s of a subject under hypnosis, the 
ratio of brain activity in the right hemisphere would be increased 
over that of the left, although this is complicated by the fact that 
it is the left hemisphere that to some extent must understand the 
operator. But at least we would expect proportionally more right 
hemisphere involvement than in ordinary consciousness. 

At the present time we have no clear idea about even a usual 
EEG under hypnosis, such the conflicting findings of researchers. 
But there are other lines of evidence, even if they are unfortu¬ 
nately more correlational and indirect. They are: 

Individuals can be categorized by whether they use the right 
or left hemisphere relatively more than others. A simple way of 
doing this is to face a person and ask questions and note which 
way his eyes move as he thinks of an answer. (As in 1.5, we are 
speaking only of right-handed people.) If to his right, he is using 
his left hemisphere relatively more, and if to the left, his right 
hemisphere — since activation of the frontal eye fields of either 
hemisphere turns the eyes to the contralateral side. It has been 
recently reported that people who, in answering questions face to 
face, turn their eyes to the left, who are thus using their right 
hemisphere more than most others, are much more susceptible to 



396 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 

hypnosis. 18 This can be interpreted as indicating that hypnosis 
may involve the right hemisphere in very special ways, that the 
more easily hypnotized person is the one who can ‘listen to* and 
‘rely on’ the right hemisphere more than others. 

As we saw in 1.5, the right hemisphere, which we have 
presumed to have been the source of divine hallucinations in 
earlier millennia, is presently considered to be the more creative, 
spatial, and responsible for vivid imagery. Several recent studies 
have found that individuals who manifest these characteristics 
more than others are indeed more susceptible to hypnosis.^ 
These findings are consistent with the hypothesis that hypnosis 
is a reliance on right hemisphere categories, just as a bicameral 
man relied on his divine guidance. 

If calling hypnosis a vestige of the bicameral mind is valid, 
we might also expect that those most susceptible to being hypno¬ 
tized would be those most susceptible to other instances of the 
general bicameral paradigm. In regard to religious involvement, 
this appears to be true. Persons who have attended church regu¬ 
larly since childhood are more susceptible to hypnosis, while 
those who have had less religious involvement tend to be less 
susceptible. At least some investigators of hypnosis that I know 
seek their subjects in theological colleges because they have 
found such students to be more susceptible. 

f* The phenomenon of imaginary companions in childhood is 
something I shall have more to say about in a future work. But it 
too can be regarded as another vestige of the bicameral mind. At 
least half of those whom I have interviewed remembered dis¬ 
tinctly that hearing their companions speak was the same quality 
of experience as hearing the question as I asked it. True halluci- 

18 R. C. Gur and R. E. Gur, “Handedness, Sex, and Eyedness as Moderating Vari¬ 
ables in the Relation between Hypnotic Susceptibility and Functional Brain As- 
symetry,” Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 1974, 83: 635-643. 

‘9 Josephine R. Hilgard, Personality and Hypnosis (Chicago: University of Chi¬ 
cago Press, 1970), Ch. 7. The data on which the next three paragraphs are based 
also come from her important book, Chs. 5, 8, and 14 respectively. 



HYPNOSIS 


397 


nation. The incidence of imaginary companions occurs mostly 
between the ages of three and seven, just preceding what I would 
regard as the full development of consciousness in children. My 
thinking here is that, either by some innate or environmental 
predisposition to have imaginary companions, the neurological 
structure of the general bicameral paradigm is (to use a meta¬ 
phor) exercised. If the hypothesis of this chapter is correct, we 
might then expect such persons to be more susceptible to the 
engagement of that paradigm later in life — as in hypnosis. And 
they are. Those who have had imaginary companions in child¬ 
hood are easier to hypnotize than those who have not. Again it is 
a case where hypnotizability is correlated with another vestige of 
the bicameral mind. 

p* If we can regard punishment in childhood as a way of 
instilling an enhanced relationship to authority, hence training 
some of those neurological relationships that were once the bi¬ 
cameral mind, we might expect this to increase hypnotic suscep¬ 
tibility. And this is true. Careful studies show that those who 
have experienced severe punishment in childhood and come from 
a disciplined home are more easily hypnotized, while those who 
were rarely punished or not punished at all tend to be less suscep¬ 
tible to hypnosis. 

These laboratory findings are only suggestive, and there are 
quite different ways of understanding them, for which I refer the 
reader to the original reports. But together they do form a pat¬ 
tern which lends support to the hypothesis that hypnosis is in 
part a vestige of a preconscious mentality. Placing the phenom¬ 
ena of hypnosis against the broad historical background of man¬ 
kind in this way gives them certain contours that they would not 
otherwise have. If one has a very definite biological notion of 
consciousness and that its origin is back in the evolution of mam¬ 
malian nervous systems, I cannot see how the phenomenon of 
hypnosis can be understood at all, not one speck of it. But if we 



398 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 


fully realize that consciousness is a culturally learned event, 
balanced over the suppressed vestiges of an earlier mentality, 
then we can see that consciousness, in part, can be culturally 
unlearned or arrested. Learned features, such as analog ‘I,’ can 
under the proper cultural imperative be taken over by a different 
initiative, and one such instance is what we call hypnosis. The 
reason that that different initiative works in conjunction with the 
other factors of the diminishing consciousness of the induction 
and trance is that in some way it engages a paradigm of an older 
