mentality than subjective consciousness. 


Objection: Does Hypnosis Exist? 

Finally, I should briefly refer to possible alternative interpreta¬ 
tions. But presently there are not so much theories of hypnosis 
as points of view, each correct as far as it goes. One view insists 
that imagination and concentration on what the hypnotist sug¬ 
gests, and the tendency of such an imagination to result in con¬ 
forming action, are important. 20 They are. Another, that it is 
condition of monomotivation that counts. 21 Of course, that is a 
description. Another states that the basic phenomenon is simply 
the ability to enact different roles, the as-if nature of most hypnotic 
performances. 22 This certainly is true. Another correctly 
stresses the dissociation.^ Another that hypnosis is a regression 
to a childlike relation to a parent.^ And indeed this is often how 


20 Magda Arnold, "On the Mechanism of Suggestion and Hypnosis," Journal of 
Abnormal and Social Psychology, 1946, 41 : 107-128. 

21 Robert White, "A Preface to the Theory of Hypnotism," Journal of Abnormal 
and Social Psychology, 1941, 16:477-505. 

22 T. R. Sarbin, "Contributions to Role-Taking Theory." But see also his more 
recent paper with Milton Anderson "Role-Theoretical Analysis of Hypnotic Behavior," 
in J. E. Gordon. 

2 3 Ernest Hilgard, "A Neodissociation Interpretation.” 

2 4 One of two psychoanalytic interpretations of hypnosis. See for example Mer¬ 
ton M. Gill and Margaret Brenman, Hypnosis and Related States (New York: In¬ 
ternational Universities Press, 1959). The other, that hypnosis is a love relation¬ 
ship between operator and subject, is no longer taken seriously. 



HYPNOSIS 


399 

any vestige of the bicameral mind appears, since the bicameral 
mind itself is based on such admonitory experience. 

But the main theoretical controversy — and it is a continuing 
one, and the one that is most important for us here — is whether 
or not hypnosis is really anything different from what happens 
every day in the normal state. For if this view is final, my 
interpretation in this chapter of a different mentality is utterly 
wrong. Hypnosis cannot be a vestige of anything since it does not 
really exist. All the manifestations of hypnosis, this position 
insists, can be shown to be simply exaggerations of normal phe¬ 
nomena. We can tick them off: 

As for the kind of obedience to the operator, all of us do the 
same thing without thinking in situations that are so definedy as 
with a teacher or a traffic policeman, or perhaps the caller at a 
square dance. 

As to such phenomena as suggested deafness, everyone has 
had the experience of 'listening' carefully to another person and 
yet not hearing a word. And so the mother who sleeps through a 
thunderstorm and yet hears and wakes to the cry of her baby is 
not engaging a different mechanism from that of the hypnotized 
subject who hears only the hypnotist's voice and is asleep to all 
else. 

As for the induced amnesia which so astonishes an observer, 
who can remember what he was thinking five minutes ago? You 
must suggest to yourself a set or struction to remember at the 
time. And this the operator of the present day can do or not do, 
negating or enhancing the paraphrand of submersion, so that the 
subject does or does not remember. 

As for the suggested paralysis under hypnosis, who has not 
been in discussion with a friend during a walk until, becoming 
more and more absorbed, both walk more slowly until you are 
standing still? Concentrated attention has meant arrest of 
movement. 

As for hypnotic anesthesia, that most remarkable of hypnotic 
phenomena, who has not seen a hurt child distracted by a toy 



400 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 

until the crying stops and the pain is forgotten? Or known of 
victims of accidents bleeding from unfelt wounds? And acupunc¬ 
ture may indeed be a related phenomenon. 

And as for the "hidden observer," this kind of parallel process¬ 
ing goes on all the time. In ordinary conversation, we listen to 
someone and plan what we are going to say at the same time. 
And actors do this constantly, always acting as their own hidden 
observers; Stanislavski to the contrary, they are always able to 
criticize their performances. And many of the examples of non- 
conscious thought in I.i, or my description of driving a car and 
conversing which opened I.4, are further instances. 

And as for the startling success of post-hypnotic suggestion, we 
all sometimes decide to react to some event in a certain way and 
then do so, even forgetting our prior reason. It is really not 
different from 'pre-hypnotic suggestion', as in the supposed paral¬ 
ysis of the dominant hand a few pages ago. It is a structuring of 
the collective cognitive imperative that can predetermine our 
reactions in very specific ways. 

And so for other remarkable feats performed under hypnosis j 
all are exaggerations of everyday phenomena. Hypnosis, the 
argument runs, just seems different to an observer. The trance 
behavior is simply intense concentration as in the proverbial 
"absent-minded professor." Indeed a host of recent experiments 
have been aimed at showing that all hypnotic phenomena can be 
duplicated in waking subjects by simple suggestion.^ 

My reply, and it is the reply of others as well, is that this is not 
explaining hypnosis. It is explaining it away. Even though all of 
the phenomena of hypnosis can be duplicated in ordinary life 
(and I do not think they can), hypnosis can still be defined by 
distinct procedures, distinct susceptibilities which correlate with 

2 s The most prominent and untiring researcher with this view is Theodore X. 
Barber. For Barber, "hypnosis" just does not exist as a state different from waking 
life, and the term should therefore always be written with quotation marks. Among 
his numerous papers, see his "Experimental Analysis of 'Hypnotic' Behavior: Review 
of Recent Empirical Findings," Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 1965, 70: 132-154. 



HYPNOSIS 


401 


other experiences as well as other vestiges of the bicameral mind, 
and by huge differences in the ease with which hypnotic phenom¬ 
ena can be reproduced with and without hypnotic induction. In 
any speculation about possible future changes in our mentality, 
this latter difference is extremely important. That is why I began 
this chapter as I did. If we are asked to be animals, five-year-olds, 
painless when pricked, color-blind, cataleptic, or show nystagmus 
to imagined whirlings of the visual field, 26 or to taste vinegar as 
champagne — it is enormously more difficult to do in our normal 
state of consciousness than when ordinary consciousness is ab¬ 
sent under hypnosis. Such feats without rapport with an oper¬ 
ator require grotesque efforts of persuasion and massive burdens 
of concentration. The full consciousness of the waking state 
seems itself like a huge wilderness of distracting closenesses that 
cannot easily be crossed to catch into such immediate control. 
Try looking out the window and pretending to be red-green color¬ 
blind to such an extent that those colors really do look like shades 
of gray. 2 " It can be done to a certain extent, but it is much easier 
under hypnosis. Or get up now from where you are sitting and 
act like a bird, flapping your arms and emitting strange calls for 
for the next fifteen minutes, something easy to do under hyp¬ 
nosis. But there is not one reader of that last sentence who can 
do it — if he is alone. Whatever those sweaty feelings of foolish¬ 
ness or silliness are, the why-should-hs and the this-is-absurd's, 
they crowd in like careful tyrants jealous as a god of such a 
performance; you need the permission of a group, the authoriza- 

26 J. P. Brady and E. Levitt, "Nystagmus as a Criterion of Hypnotically Induced 
Visual Hallucinations," Science, 1964, 146: 85-86. But I do not agree with the 
authors that this proves the existence of true hallucinations. 

2 ? Normal subjects asked to respond to the Ishihara color-blindness test by trying 
not to see the color red and then by trying not to see green read some of the Ishihara 
cards in the manner expected from individuals with red or green color-blindness. This 
was shown by Theoder X. Barber and D. C. Deeley, "Experimental Evidence for a 
Theory of Hypnotic Behavior: I. 'Hypnotic Color-Blindness' without 'Hypnosis'," 
International Journal of Clinical and Experimental Hypnosis, 1961, 9: 79-86. But 
under hypnosis this pseudo-color-blindness is easier to obtain, as in Milton Erickson’s 
"The Induction of Color-Blindness by a Technique of Hypnotic Suggestion," Journal 
of General Psychology, 1939, 20: 61-89. 



402 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 

tion of a collective imperative as well as the command of an 
operator — or a god — to achieve such obedience. Or put your 
hands on the table in front of you and make one of them dis¬ 
tinctly redder; possible for you to do now, but much easier under 
hypnosis. Or raise both your hands for fifteen minutes without 
feeling any discomfort, a simple task under hypnosis but onerous 
without it. 

What is it then that hypnosis supplies that does this extraordi¬ 
nary enabling, that allows us to do things we cannot ordinarily do 
except with great difficulty? Or is it ‘we’ that do them? Indeed, 
in hypnosis it is as if someone else were doing things through us. 
And why is this so? And why is this easier? Is it that we have to 
lose our conscious selves to gain such control, which cannot then 
be by us? 

On another level, why is it that in our daily lives we cannot get 
up above ourselves to authorize ourselves into being what we 
really wish to be? If under hypnosis we can be changed in 
identity and action, why not in and by ourselves so that behavior 
flows from decision with as absolute a connection, so that what¬ 
ever in us it is that we refer to as will stands master and captain 
over action with as sovereign a hand as the operator over a subject? 

The answer here is partly in the limitations of our learned 
consciousness in this present millennium. We need some vestige 
of the bicameral mind, our former method of control, to help us. 
With consciousness we have given up those simpler more abso¬ 
lute methods of control of behavior which characterized the 
bicameral mind. We live in a buzzing cloud of whys and where¬ 
fores, the purposes and reasonings of our narratizations, the 
many-routed adventures of our analog Ts. And this constant 
spinning out of possibilities is precisely what is necessary to save 
us from behavior of too impulsive a sort. The analog T and the 
metaphor ‘me’ are always resting at the confluence of many 
collective cognitive imperatives. We know too much to command 
ourselves very far. 
