


HYPNOSIS 


403 


Those who through what theologians call the "gift of faith" can 
center and surround their lives in religious belief do indeed have 
different collective cognitive imperatives. They can indeed 
change themselves through prayer and its expectancies much as 
in post-hypnotic suggestion. It is a fact that belief, political or 
religious, or simply belief in oneself through some earlier cogni¬ 
tive imperative, works in wondrous ways. Anyone who has ex¬ 
perienced the sufferings of prisons or detention camps knows 
that both mental and physical survival is often held carefully in 
such untouchable hands. 

But for the rest of us, who must scuttle along on conscious 
models and skeptical ethics, we have to accept our lessened con¬ 
trol. We are learned in self-doubt, scholars of our very failures, 
geniuses at excuse and tomorrowing our resolves. And so we 
become practiced in powerless resolution until hope gets undone 
and dies in the unattempted. At least that happens to some of us. 
And then to rise above this noise of knowings and really change 
ourselves, we need an authorization that ‘we’ do not have. 

Hypnosis does not work for everyone. There are many reasons 
why. But in one particular group who find hypnosis difficult, the 
reason is neurological and partly genetic. In such people, I think 
that the inherited neurological basis of the general bicameral 
paradigm is organized slightly differently. It is as if they cannot 
readily accept the external authorization of an operator because 
that part of the bicameral paradigm is already occupied. Indeed, 
they often seem to the rest of us as if they were already hypno¬ 
tized, particularly when confined in hospitals as they commonly 
are from time to time. Some theorists have even speculated that 
that is precisely their condition — a continuous state of self hyp¬ 
nosis. But I think such a position is a dreadful misuse of the term 
hypnosis, and that the behavior of schizophrenics, as we call 
them, should be looked at in another way — which is what we 
shall do in the next chapter. 



CHAPTER 5 


Schizophrenia 


M OST OF US spontaneously slip back into something approach¬ 
ing the actual bicameral mind at some part of our lives. For 
some of us, it is only a few episodes of thought deprivation or 
hearing voices. But for others of us, with over active dopamine 
systems, or lacking an enzyme to easily break down the biochemical 
products of continued stress into excretable form, it is a much 
more harrowing experience — if it can be called an experience at 
all. We hear voices of impelling importance that criticize us and 
tell us what to do. At the same time, we seem to lose the 
boundaries of ourselves. Time crumbles. We behave without 
knowing it. Our mental space begins to vanish. We panic, and 
yet the panic is not happening to us. There is no us. It is not that 
we have nowhere to turn; we have nowhere. And in that no¬ 
where, we are somehow automatons, unknowing what we do, 
being manipulated by others or by our voices in strange and 
frightening ways in a place we come to recognize as a hospital 
with a diagnosis we are told is schizophrenia. In reality, we have 
relapsed into the bicameral mind. 

At least that is a provocative if oversimplified and exaggerated 
way of introducing an hypothesis that has been obvious in earlier 
parts of this essay. For it has been quite apparent that the views 
presented here suggest a new conception for that most common 
and resistant of mental illnesses, schizophrenia. This suggestion 
is that, like the phenomena discussed in the preceding chapters, 



SCHIZOPHRENIA 


405 


schizophrenia, at least in part, is a vestige of bicamerality, a 
partial relapse to the bicameral mind. The present chapter is a 
discussion of this possibility. 


The Evidence in History 

Let us begin with a glance, a mere side-glance, at the earliest 
history of this disease. If our hypothesis is correct, there should 
first of all be no evidence of individuals set apart as insane prior 
to the breakdown of the bicameral mind. And this is true, even 
though it makes an extremely weak case, since the evidence is so 
indirect. But in the sculptures, literature, murals, and other arti¬ 
facts of the great bicameral civilizations, there is never any depic¬ 
tion or mention of a kind of behavior which marked an individual 
out as different from others in the way in which insanity does. 
Idiocy, yes, but madness, no. 1 There is, for example, no idea of 
insanity in the Iliad. 2 3 I am emphasizing individuals set apart 
from others as ill, because, according to our theory, we could say 
that before the second millennium B.C., everyone was schizo¬ 
phrenic. 

Secondly, we should expect on the basis of the above hypothe¬ 
sis that when insanity is first referred to in the conscious period, 
it is referred to in definitely bicameral terms. And this makes a 
much stronger case. In the Phaedrus, Plato calls insanity “a 
divine gift, and the source of the chiefest blessings granted to 
men .”3 And this passage preludes one of the most beautiful and 

1 Even the word found in I Samuel 13 that is sometimes brought forward as the 
first reference to schizophrenia is the Hebrew halal, which is better translated as 
foolish in the sense of an idiot. 

2 When E. R. Dodds suggests that a few places in the Odyssey refer to madness, I 
find his argument unconvincing. And when he concludes that there was a concept 
of mental disease common in Homer’s time, “and probably long before,” this is a 
completely unwarranted assertion. See E. R. Dodds, The Greeks and the Irrational 
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1968), p. 67. 

3 Phaedrus, 244A. 



406 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 

soaring passages in all the Dialogues in which four types of 
insanity are distinguished: prophetic madness due to Apollo, 
ritual madness due to Dionysus, the poetic madness “of those 
who are possessed by the Muses, which taking hold of the deli¬ 
cate and virgin soul, and there inspiring frenzy, awaken lyrical 
and all other numbers,” and, finally, erotic madness due to Eros 
and Aphrodite. Even the word for prophetic, mantike, and the 
word for psychotically mad, manike, were for the young Plato 
the same word, the letter t being for him “only a modern and 
tasteless insertion .”4 The point I am trying to make here is that 
there is no doubt whatever of the early association of forms of 
what we call schizophrenia with the phenomena that we have 
come to call bicameral. 

This correspondence is also brought out in another ancient 
Greek word for insanity, paranoia, which, coming from para + 
nous, literally meant having another mind alongside one’s own, 
descriptive both of the hallucinatory state of schizophrenia and of 
what we have described as the bicameral mind. This, of course, 
has nothing whatever to do with the modern and etymologically 
incorrect usage of this term, with its quite different meaning of 
persecutory delusions, which is of nineteenth-century origin. 
Paranoia, as the ancient general term for insanity, lasted along 
with the other vestiges of bicamerality described in the previous 
chapter, and then linguistically died with them about the second 
century AD. 

But even in Plato’s own time, a time of war, famine, and 
plague, the four divine insanities were gradually shifting into the 
realm of the wise man’s poetry and the plain man’s superstition. 
The sickness aspect of schizophrenia comes to the fore. In later 
dialogues, the elderly Plato is more skeptical, referring to what 
we call schizophrenia as a perpetual dreaming in which some 
men believe “that they are gods, and others that they can fly,” 5 in 

4 Ibid., 244C. 

s Theaetetus, 158. 



SCHIZOPHRENIA 


407 


which case the family of those so afflicted should keep them at 
home under penalty of a fine. 6 

The insane are now to be shunned. Even in the exotic farces 
of Aristophanes, stones are thrown at them to keep them away. 

What we now call schizophrenia, then, begins in human his¬ 
tory as a relationship to the divine, and only around 400 B.C. 
comes to be regarded as the incapacitating illness we know today. 
This development is difficult to understand apart from the theory 
of a change in mentality which this essay is about. 

The Difficulties of the Problem 

Before looking at its contemporary symptoms from the same 
point of view, I would make a few preliminary observations of a 
very general sort. As anyone knows who has worked in the 
literature on the subject, there is today a rather vague panorama 
of dispute as to what schizophrenia is, whether it is one disease or 
many, or the final common path of multiple etiologies, whether 
there exist two basic patterns variously called process and re¬ 
active, or acute and chronic, or quick-onset and slow-onset schizo¬ 
phrenia. The reason for this disagreement and its vagueness is 
because research in the area is as obstinate a tangle of control 
difficulties as can be found anywhere. How may we study schizo¬ 
phrenia and at the same time eliminate the effects of hospitaliza¬ 
tion, of drugs, of prior therapy, of cultural expectancy, of various 
learned reactions to bizarre experiences, or of differences in ob¬ 
taining accurate data about the situational crises of patients who, 
through the trauma of hospitalization, find it frightening to 
communicate? 

It is beyond my effort here to sort out a way through these 
difficulties to any definitive position. Rather I intend to step 
around them with some simplicities on which there is wide agree¬ 
ment. These are, that there does exist a syndrome that can be 


6 Laws, 934 . 


