
408 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 

called schizophrenia, that at least in the florid state it is easily 
recognized in the clinic, and that it is found in all civilized so¬ 
cieties the world over.? Moreover, for the truth of this chapter, it 
is not really important whether I am speaking of all patients with 
this diagnosis. 8 Nor of the illness as it first appears, or as it 
develops subsequent to hospitalization. My thesis is something 
less, that some of the fundamental, most characteristic, and most 
commonly observed symptoms of floj'id unmedicated schizo¬ 
phrenia are uniquely consistent with the description I have given 
on previous pages of the bicameral mind. 

These symptoms are primarily the presence of auditory hallu¬ 
cinations as described in 1:4, and the deterioration of conscious¬ 
ness as defined in 1:2, namely the loss of the analog the erosion 
of mind-space, and an inability to narratize. Let us look at these 
symptoms in turn. 

Hallucinations 

Again, hallucinations. And what I shall say here is merely 
adjunctory to my earlier discussion. 

If we confine ourselves to florid unmedicated schizophrenics, 
we can state that hallucinations are absent only in exceptional 
cases. Usually they predominate, crowding in persistently and 
massively, making the patient appear confused, particularly 
when they are changing rapidly. In very acute cases, visual 
hallucinations accompany the voices. But in more ordinary 
cases, the patient hears a voice or many voices, a saint or a devil, 

7 “The Experiential World Inventory” developed by H. Osmond and A. El. Miligi 
at the Princeton Neuro-Psychiatric Institute, has been given to schizophrenics in differ¬ 
ent countries and cultures with very similar results. 

8 Nor of just such patients. There is a growing movement in psychiatry to dis¬ 
tinguish diagnostic categories by the drugs specific to them, the schizophrenias by the 
phenothiazines and manic-depression by lithium. If this is correct, many patients 
formerly diagnosed as having paranoid schizophrenia are really manic-depressive 
since they respond only to lithium. In the manic phase, almost half of such patients 
have hallucinations. 



SCHIZOPHRENIA 


409 


a band of men under his window who want to catch him, burn 
him, behead him. They lie in wait for him, threaten to enter 
through the walls, climb up and hide under his bed or above him 
in the ventilators. And then there are other voices who want to 
help him. Sometimes God is a protector, at other times one of the 
persecutors. At the persecuting voices, the patients may flee, 
defend themselves, or attack. With helpful consoling hallucina¬ 
tions, the patient may listen intently, enjoy them like a festivity, 
even weeping at hearing the voices of heaven. Some patients 
may go through all sorts of hallucinated experiences while lying 
under the blankets in their beds, while others climb around, talk 
loudly or softly to their voices, making all kinds of incomprehen¬ 
sible gestures and motions. Even during conversation or reading, 
patients may be constantly answering their hallucinations softly 
or whispering asides to their voices every few seconds. 

Now one of the most interesting and important aspects of all 
this in respect to the parallel with the bicameral mind is the 
following: auditory hallucinations in general are not even 
slightly under the control of the individual himself, but they are 
extremely susceptible to even the most innocuous suggestion 
from the total social circumstances of which the individual is a 
part. In other words, such schizophrenic symptoms are influ¬ 
enced by a collective cognitive imperative just as in the case of 
hypnosis. 

A recent study demonstrates this very clearly.? Forty-five 
hallucinating male patients were divided into three groups. One 
group wore on their belts a small box with a lever which when 
pressed administered a shock. They were instructed to thus 
shock themselves whenever they began to hear voices. A second 
group wore similar boxes, were given similar instructions, but 

®9 Arthur H. Weingaertner, “Self-administered aversive stimulation with hallucinat¬ 
ing hospitalized schizophrenics,” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 
1971 , 36 : 422-429- 



410 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 

pressing the lever did not give the patient a shock. A third group 
were given similar interviews and evaluation, but had no boxes. 
The boxes, incidentally, contained counters which recorded the 
number of lever presses, the frequency ranging from 19 to 2362 
times over the fortnight of the experiment. But the important 
thing is that all three groups were casually led to expect that the 
frequency of hallucinations might diminish. 

It was of course predicted on the basis of learning theory that 
the shocked group alone would improve. But alas for learning 
theory, all three groups heard significantly fewer voices. In some 
cases the voices vanished completely. And no group was superior 
to another in this respect, showing clearly the huge role of expec¬ 
tation and belief in this aspect of mental organization. 

A further observation is a related one, that hallucinations are 
dependent on the teachings and expectations of childhood — as 
we have postulated was true in bicameral times. In contempo¬ 
rary cultures where an orthodox excessive personal relationship 
to God is a part of the child’s education, individuals that become 
schizophrenic tend to hear strict religious hallucinations more 
than others. 

On the British island of Tortola in the West Indies, for ex¬ 
ample, children are taught that God literally controls each detail 
of their life. The name of the Deity is invoked in threats and 
punishment. Churchgoing is the major social activity. When the 
natives of this island require any psychiatric care whatever, they 
invariably describe experiences of hearing commands from God 
and Jesus, feelings of burning in hell or hallucinations of loud 
praying and hymn-singing, or sometimes a combination of prayer 
and profanity. 10 

When the auditory hallucinations of schizophrenia have no 
particular religious basis they are still playing essentially the 

10 Edwin A. Weinstein, “Aspects of Hallucinations,” Hallucinations, L. J. West, 
ed. (New York: Grune and Stratton, 1962), pp. 233-238. 



SCHIZOPHRENIA 


411 


same role as I have suggested was true for the bicameral mind, 
that of initiating and guiding the patient’s behavior. Occasionally 
the voices are recognized as authorities even within the hospital. 
One woman heard voices that were mainly beneficial which she 
believed were created by the Public Health Service to provide 
psychotherapy. Would that psychotherapy could always be so 
easily accomplished! They constantly gave her advice, including, 
incidentally, not to tell the psychiatrist that she heard voices. 
They advised her on difficult pronunciations, or gave her hints 
on sewing and cooking. As she described it, 

When I am making a cake, she gets too impatient with me. 

I try to figure it out all by myself. I am trying to make a 
clothspin apron and she is right there with me trying to tell 
me what to do. 11 

Some psychiatric investigators, particularly of a psychoanalytic 
persuasion, wish to infer by the associations the patient uses that 
the voices can “in all instances ... be traced to persons who 
were formerly significant in the patients’ lives, especially their 
parents.” 12 It is supposed that because such figures if recognized 
would produce anxiety, they are therefore unconsciously distorted 
and disguised by the patients. But why should that be so? It is 
more parsimonious to think that it is the patient’s experiences 
with his parents (or other loved authorities) that become the core 
around which the hallucinated voice is structured, even as I have 
suggested was the case with the gods in the bicameral era. 

I do not mean that parents do not figure in hallucinations. 
They often do, particularly in younger patients. But otherwise, 
the voice-figures of schizophrenia are not parents in disguise; 
they are authority figures created by the nervous system out of 
the patient’s admonitory experience and his cultural expecta- 

II A. H. Modell, “Hallucinations in schizophrenic patients and their relation to 
psychic structure,” in West, pp. 166-1735 the quotation is from p. 169. 

12 Modell, in West, p. 168. 



412 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 

tions, his parents of course being an important part of that ad¬ 
monitory experience. 

One of the most interesting problems in hallucinations is their 
relation to conscious thought. If schizophrenia is partly a return 
to the bicameral mind, and if this is antithetical to ordinary 
consciousness (which it need not be in all cases), one might 
expect hallucinations to be the replacement of ‘thoughts.’ 

In some patients at least, this is how hallucinations first ap¬ 
pear. Sometimes, the voices seem to begin as thoughts which 
then transform themselves into vague whispers, which then 
gradually become louder and more authoritative. In other cases, 
patients feel the beginning of voices “as if their thoughts were 
dividing.” In mild cases, the voices may even be under the control 
of conscious attention as are ‘thoughts.’ As one nondeluded pa¬ 
tient described it: 

Here I have been in this ward for two years and a half and 
almost every day and every hour of the day I hear voices about 
me, sometimes sounding from the wind, sometimes from foot¬ 
steps, sometimes rattling dishes, from the rustling trees, or from 
the wheels of passing trains and vehicles. I hear the voices only 
if I attend to them, but hear them I do. The voices are words 
that tell me one story or another, just as if they were not 
thoughts in my head, but were recounting past deeds — yet 
only when I think of them. The whole day through they keep 
on telling truly my daily history of head and heart.‘3 

Hallucinations often seem to have access to more memories 
and knowledge than the patient himself — even as did the gods 
of antiquity. It is not uncommon to hear patients at certain 
stages of their illness complain that the voices express their 
thoughts before they have a chance to think them themselves. 
This process of having one’s thoughts anticipated and expressed 

