*3 Gustav Storring, Mental Pathology (Berlin: Swan Sonnenschein, 1907), p. 27. 



SCHIZOPHRENIA 


413 

aloud to one is called in the clinical literature Gedankenlaut- 
werden and is approaching closely the bicameral mind. Some say 
they never get a chance to think for themselves; it is always done 
for them and the thought is given to them. As they try to read, 
the voices read in advance to them. Trying to speak, they hear 
their thoughts spoken in advance to them. Another patient told 
his physician that: “Thinking hurts him, for he can not think for 
himself. Whenever he begins to think, all his thoughts are dic¬ 
tated to him. He is at pains to change the train of thought, but 
again his thinking is done for him ... In church he not infre¬ 
quently hears a voice singing, anticipating what the choir sings 
... If he walks down the street and sees, say, a sign, the voice 
reads out to him whatever is on it . . . If he sees an acquaint¬ 
ance in the distance, the voice calls out to him, ‘Look, there goes 
so and so,’ usually before he begins to think of the person. Occa¬ 
sionally, though he has not the least intention of noticing 
passersby, the voice compels him to attend to them by its remarks 
about them .”'4 

It is the very central and unique place of these auditory hallu¬ 
cinations in the syndrome of many schizophrenics which it is 
important to consider. Why are they present? And why is “hear¬ 
ing voices” universal throughout all cultures, unless there is some 
usually suppressed structure of the brain which is activated in the 
stress of this illness? 

And why do these hallucinations of schizophrenics so often 
have a dramatic authority, particularly religious? I find that the 
only notion which provides even a working hypothesis about this 
matter is that of the bicameral mind, that the neurological struc¬ 
ture responsible for these hallucinations is neurologically bound 
to substrates for religious feelings, and this is because the source 
of religion and of gods themselves is in the bicameral mind. 

Religious hallucinations are particularly common in the so- 

'4 Ibid., p. 30. 



414 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 


called twilight states, which are a kind of waking dream in many 
patients, varying in time from a few minutes to a few years, six 
months’ duration being quite common. Invariably such states are 
characterized by religious visions, posturing, ceremony, and wor¬ 
ship, a patient living with hallucinations just as in the bicameral 
state, except that the environment itself may be hallucinated and 
the hospital surroundings blotted out. The patient may be in 
contact with the saints in heaven. Or he may recognize doctors 
or nurses around him for what they are, but believe that they will 
prove to be gods or angels in disguise. Such patients may even cry 
with joy at talking directly with the inhabitants of heaven, may 
continually cross themselves as they converse with the divine 
voices or even with the stars, calling to them out of the night. 

Often the paranoid, after a lengthy period of difficulties in 
getting on with people, may begin the schizophrenic aspect of his 
illness with an hallucinated religious experience in which an 
angel, Christ, or God speaks to the patient bicamerally, showing 
him some new wayds He becomes convinced therefore of his 
own special relationship to the powers of the universe, and the 
pathological self-reference of all the occurrences around him 
then becomes elaborated into delusional ideas which may be 
pursued for years without the patient’s being able to discuss it. 

Particularly illustrative of the tendency toward religious hallu¬ 
cinations is the famous case of Schreber, a brilliant German jurist 
around the close of the nineteenth century. 16 His own extremely 
literate retrospective account of his hallucinations while ill with 
schizophrenia is remarkable from the point of view of their simi¬ 
larity to the relationships of ancient men to their gods. His 
disease began with a severe anxiety attack during which he hal¬ 
lucinated a crackling in the walls of his house. Then one night, 


’5 Eugen Bleuler, Dementia Praecox or The Grouf of Schizophrenias, Joseph 
Zinkin, trans. (New York: International Universities Press, 1950), p. 229. 

16 D. P. Schreber, Memoirs of My Nervous Illness, I. MacAlpine and R. A. 
Hunter, trans, and eds. (London: Dawson, 1955). 



SCHIZOPHRENIA 


415 


the cracklings suddenly became voices which he immediately 
recognized as divine communications and “which since then have 
spoken to me incessantly.” The voices were continuous “for a 
period of seven years, except during sleep, and would persist 
undeterred even when I was speaking with other people.” 1 ? He 
saw rays of light like “long-drawn-out filaments approaching my 
head from some vast distant spot on the horizon ... Or from 
the sun or other distant stars that do not come towards me in a 
straight line, but in a kind of circle or parabola.” 18 And these 
were the carriers of the divine voices, and could form into the 
physical beings of gods themselves. 

As his illness progressed, it is of particular interest how the 
divine voices soon organized themselves into a hierarchy of upper 
and lower gods, as may be supposed to have occurred in bicam¬ 
eral times. And then, streaming down their rays from the gods, 
the voices seemed to be trying to “suffocate me and eventually to 
rob me of my reason.” They were committing “soul-murder,“ and 
were progressively “unmanning” him, that is, taking away his own 
initiative or eroding his analog Later in his illness, during 
more conscious periods, he narratized this into the delusion of 
being bodily turned into a woman. Freud, I think, overempha¬ 
sized this particular narratization in his famous analysis of these 
memoirs, making the entire illness the result of repressed homo¬ 
sexuality that was erupting from the unconscious. 1 ? But such 
an interpretation, while possibly related to the original etiology of 
the stress that began the illness, is not very powerful in explain¬ 
ing the case as a whole. 

Now, can we have the temerity to draw a parallel with such 
phenomena of mental illness and the organization of gods in 
antiquity? That Schreber also had voice-visions of “little men” is 
suggestive of the figurines found in so many early civilizations. 

v Ibid., p. 225. 

18 Ibid., pp. 227-228. 

Sigmund Freud, “Psycho-analytic notes on an autobiographical account of a 
case of paranoia,” in Complete Psychological Works, Vol. 12, James Strachey, trans. 
and ed. (London: Hogarth Press, 1958). 



416 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 

And the fact that, as he slowly recuperated, the tempo of speech 
of his gods slowed down and then degenerated into an indistinct 
hissing 20 is reminiscent of how idols sounded to the Incas after 
the conquest. 

A further suggestive parallel is the fact that the sun as the 
world’s brightest light takes on a particular significance in many 
unmedicated patients, as it did in the theocracies of bicameral 
civilizations. Schreber, for example, after hearing his “upper God 
(Ormuzd)” for some time, finally saw him as “the sun . . . sur¬ 
rounded by a silver sea of rays . . . 21 And a more contempo¬ 
rary patient wrote: 

The sun came to have an extraordinary effect on me. It 
seemed to be charged with all power; not merely to symbolize 
God but actually to be God. Phrases like: “Light of the 
World,” “The Sun of Righteousness that Setteth Nevermore,” 
etc., ran through my head without ceasing, and the mere sight 
of the sun was sufficient greatly to intensify this manic excite¬ 
ment under which I was laboring. I was impelled to address the 
sun as a personal god, and to evolve from it a ritual sun wor¬ 
ship. 22 

In no sense am I thinking here that there is innate sun-worship 
or innate gods in the nervous system that are released under the 
mental reorganization of psychosis. The reasons that hallucina¬ 
tions take the -particular form they do lie partly in the physical 
nature of the world, but mostly in education and a familiarity 
with gods and religious history. 

But I do mean to suggest 

(1) that there are in the brain aptic structures for the very ex¬ 
istence of such hallucinations, 

20 Schreber, pp. 226, 332. 

21 Ibid., p. 269. 

22 J. Custance, Wisdom, Madness and Folly (New York: Pellegrini and Cudahy, 
1952), p. 18. 



SCHIZOPHRENIA 


417 


(2) that these structures develop in civilized societies such 
that they determine the general religious quality and au¬ 
thority of such hallucinated voices, and perhaps organize 
them into hierarchies, 

(3) that the paradigms behind these aptic structures were 
evolved into the brain by natural and human selection dur¬ 
ing the early civilizing of mankind, and 

(4) are released from their normal inhibition by abnormal 
biochemistry in many cases of schizophrenia and particu¬ 
larized into experience. 

There is a great deal more to say about these very real phe¬ 
nomena of hallucination in schizophrenia. And the need for 
more research here cannot be overstressed. We would like to 
know the life history of hallucinations and how this relates to the 
life history of the patient’s illness, of this hardly anything is 
known. We would like to know more of how the particular 
hallucinatory experiences relate to the individuals upbringing. 
Why do some patients have benevolent voices, while others have 
voices so relentlessly persecuting that they flee or defend them¬ 
selves or attack someone or something in an attempt to end 
them? And why do still others have voices so ecstatically reli¬ 
