gious and inspiring that the patient enjoys them like a festivity? 
And what are the language characteristics of the voices? Do 
they use the same syntax and lexicon as the patient’s own 
speech? Or are they more patterned as we might expect from 
III.3? All these are problems that can be resolved empirically. 
When they are, they may indeed give us more insight into the 
bicameral beginnings of civilization. 


The Erosion of the Analog T 

Of what transcending importance is this analog we have of 
ourselves in our metaphored mind-space, the very thing with 
which we narratize out solutions to problems of personal action, 



418 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 


and see where we are going, and who we are! And when in 
schizophrenia it begins to diminish, and the space in which it 
exists begins to collapse, how terrifying the experience must be! 

Florid schizophrenic patients all have this symptom in some 
degree: 


When I am ill I lose the sense of where I am. I feel ‘I’ can 
sit in the chair, and yet my body is hurtling out and somer¬ 
saulting about 3 feet in front of me. 

It is really very hard to keep conversations with others be¬ 
cause I can’t be sure if others are really talking or not and if I 
am really talking back. 2 s 

Gradually I can no longer distinguish how much of myself 
is in me, and how much is already in others. I am a conglomera¬ 
tion, a monstrosity, modeled anew each day. 2 -* 

My ability to think and decide and will to do, is torn apart by 
itself. Finally, it is thrown out where it mingles with every 
other part of the day and judges what it has left behind. In¬ 
stead of wishing to do things, they are done by something that 
seems mechanical and frightening . . . the feeling that should 
dwell within a person is outside longing to come back and yet 
having taken with it the power to return. 26 

Many are the ways in which this loss of ego is described by 
patients who are able to describe it at all. Another patient has to 
sit still for hours at a time “in order to find her thoughts again.” 
Another feels as if “he died away.” Schreber, as we have seen, 
talked of “soul-murder.” One very intelligent patient needs 

23 Both quotations from patients of Dr. C. C. Pfeiffer of the Brain-Bio Center of 
Princeton, New Jersey, where schizophrenia is regarded as several biochemical illnesses 
primarily treatable by brain nutrients. 

2 4 Storch as quoted by H. Werner, Comparative Psychology of Mental Develop¬ 
ment (New York: International Universities Press, 1957), p. 467. 

26 From E. Meyer and L. Covi, “The experience of depersonalization: A written 
report by a patient,” Psychiatry, i960, 23: 215-217. 



SCHIZOPHRENIA 


419 


hours of strenuous effort “to find her own ego for a few brief 
moments.” Or the self feels it is being absorbed by all that is 
around it by cosmic powers, forces of evil or of good, or by God 
himself. Indeed, the very term schizophrenia was coined by 
Bleuler to point to this central experience as the identifying 
mark of schizophrenia. It is the feeling of ‘losing one’s minds, of 
the self ‘breaking off until it ceases to exist or seems to be 
unconnected with action or life in the usual way, resulting in 
many of the more obvious descriptive symptoms, such as “lack of 
affect” or abulia. 

Another way in which this erosion of the analog ‘I’ shows itself 
is in the relative inability of schizophrenics to draw a person. It 
is, of course, a somewhat tenuous assumption to say that when 
we draw a person on paper, that drawing is dependent upon an 
intact metaphor of the self that we have called the analog ‘I’ But 
so consistent has this result been that it has become what is 
called the Draw-A-Person Test (DAP), now routinely adminis¬ 
tered as an indicator of schizophrenia. 26 Not all schizophrenic 
patients find such drawings difficult. But when they do, it is 
extremely diagnostic. They leave out obvious anatomical parts, 
like hands or eyes; they use blurred and unconnected lines; sex¬ 
uality is often undifferentiated; the figure itself is often distorted 
and befuddled. 

But the generalization that this inability to draw a person is a 
reflecting of the erosion of the analog ‘I’ should be taken with 
some circumspection. It has been found that older people some¬ 
times show the same fragmented and primitive drawings as do 
these schizophrenics, and it should also be noticed that there is a 
considerable inconsistency with this result and the hypothesis 
being examined in this chapter. We have stated in an earlier 

26 The first several years of research with the DAP have been reported in L. W. 
Jones and C. B. Thomas, “Studies on figure drawings,” Psychiatric Quarterly Suffle- 
menty 1961, 35: 212-216. 



420 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 

chapter that the analog ‘I’ came into being toward the end of the 
second millennium B.C. If the ability to draw a person is depen¬ 
dent upon the drawer having an analog T, then we would expect 
no coherent pictures of humans before that time. And this most 
definitely is not the case. It is obvious that there are ways of 
explaining this discrepancy, but I prefer to simply record the 
anomaly at this time. 

We should not leave this discussion of the erosion of the 
analog T without mentioning the tremendous anxiety in our own 
culture that accompanies it, and the attempt, sometimes success¬ 
ful, sometimes unsuccessful, to arrest this terrifying fading-off of 
that most important part of our interior selves, the almost sacra¬ 
mental center of conscious decision. In fact, much of the behav¬ 
ior that has nothing to do with any reversion to a bicameral mind 
can be construed as an effort to combat this loss of the analog 
T. 

Sometimes, for example, there is what is called the “I am” 
symptom. The patient in trying to keep some control over his 
behavior repeats over and over to himself “I am,” or “I am the one 
present in everything,” or “I am the mind, not the body.” Another 
patient may use only single words like “strength” or “life” to try 
to anchor himself against the dissolution of his consciousness. 2 ? 

The Dissolution of Mind-Space 

A schizophrenic not only begins to lose his ‘I’ but also his mind- 
space, the pure paraphrand that we have of the world and its 
objects that is made to seem like a space when we introspect. To 
the patient it feels like losing his thoughts, or “thought depriva¬ 
tion,” a phrase which elicits immediate recognition from the 
schizophrenic. The effect of this is so bound up with the erosion 

2 7 Carney Landis, Varieties of Psychopathological Experience (New York: Holt, 
Rinehart and Winston, 1964). 



SCHIZOPHRENIA 


421 


of the analog ‘I’ as to be inseparable from it. Patients cannot 
easily think of themselves in the places that they are in and so 
they are unable to utilize information to prepare in advance for 
things that may happen to them. 

One way this can be experimentally observed is in reaction¬ 
time studies. All schizophrenics of every type are much less 
capable than normally conscious people when they attempt to 
respond to stimuli presented to them at intervals of varying 
lengths. The schizophrenic, lacking an intact analog T and a 
mind-space in which to picture himself doing something, is un¬ 
able to “get ready” to respond, and, once responding, is unable to 
vary the response as the task demands. 28 A patient who has 
been sorting blocks on the basis of form may be unable to shift to 
sorting them for color when instructed to sort in a different 
way. 

Similarly, the loss of the analog T and its mind-space results in 
the loss of as-if behaviors. Because he cannot imagine in the usual 
conscious way, he cannot play-act, or engage in make-believe 
actions, or speak of make-believe events. He cannot, for ex¬ 
ample, pretend to drink water out of a glass if there is no water 
in it. Or asked what he would do if he were the doctor, he might 
reply that he is not a doctor. Or if an unmarried patient is asked 
what he would do if he were married, he might answer that he is 
not married. And hence his difficulty with the as-if behavior of 
hypnosis, as I mentioned at the end of the previous chapter. 

Another way the dissolving of mind-space shows itself is in the 
disorientation in respect to time so common in the schizophrenic. 
We can only be conscious of time as we can arrange it into a 
spatial succession, and the diminishing of mind-space in schizo¬ 
phrenia makes this difficult or impossible. For example, patients 
may complain that “time has stopped,” or that everything seems 
to be “slowed down” or “suspended,” or more simply that they 

28 This is an interpretation of a widely held theory of David Shakow, “Segmental 
Set,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 1962, 6: 1-17. 



422 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 


have “trouble with time.” As one former patient remembered it 
after he was well: 

For a long time no days seemed to me like a day and no night 
seemed like a night. But this in particular has no shape in my 
memory. I used to tell time by my meals, but as I believed we 
were served sets of meals in each real day — about half a dozen 
sets of breakfast, lunch, tea, and dinner in each twelve hours — 
this was not much help. 28 

On the face of it, this may seem inconsistent with the hypothe¬ 
sis that schizophrenia is a partial relapse to the bicameral mind. 
For bicameral man certainly knew the hours of the day and the 
seasons of the year. But this knowing was, I suggest, a very 
different knowing from the narratization in a spatially successive 
time which we who are conscious are constantly doing. Bicam¬ 
eral man had behavioral knowing, responding to the cues for 
rising and sleeping, for planting and harvesting, cues so impor¬ 
