tant that they were worshiped, as at Stonehenge, and were prob¬ 
ably hallucinogenic in themselves. For someone coming from 
a culture where attention to such cues has been superseded by a 
different sense of time, the loss of that spatial successiveness 
leaves the patient in a relatively timeless world. It is interesting 
in this connection that when it is suggested to normal hypnotic 
subjects that time does not exist, a schizophrenic form reaction 
results. 3 ° 


The Failure of Narratization 

With the erosion of the analog and its mind-space, narratiza¬ 
tion becomes impossible. It is as if all that was narratized in the 
normal state shatters into associations subordinated to some gen- 
2 9 M. Harrison, Spinners Lake (London: Lane, 1941), p. 32. 

80 Bernard S. Aaronson, “Hypnosis, responsibility, and the boundaries of self,” 
American Journal of Clinical Hypnosisy 1967, 9: 229-246. 



SCHIZOPHRENIA 


423 


eral thing perhaps, but unrelated to any unifying conceptive pur¬ 
pose or goal, as occurs in normal narratization. Logical reasons 
cannot be given for behaviors, and verbal answers to questions do 
not originate in any interior mind-space, but in simple associa¬ 
tions or in the external circumstances of a conversation. The 
whole idea that a person can explain himself, something which in 
the bicameral era was distinctly the function of gods, can no 
longer occur. 

With the loss of the analog T, its mind-space, and the ability to 
narratize, behavior is either responding to hallucinated direc¬ 
tions, or continues on by habit. The remnant of the self feels like 
a commanded automaton, as if someone else were moving the 
body about. Even without hallucinated orders, a patient may 
have the feeling of being commanded in ways in which he must 
obey. He may shake hands normally with a visitor, but, asked 
about this, reply, “I don’t do it, the hand proffers itself.” Or a 
patient may feel that somebody else is moving his tongue in 
speech, particularly as in coprolalia, when scatalogical or obscene 
words are substituted for others. Even in early stages of schizo¬ 
phrenia, the patient feels memories, music, or emotions, either 
pleasant or unpleasant, which seem to be forced upon him from 
some alien source, and, therefore, over which ‘he‘ has no control. 
This symptom is extremely common and diagnostic. And these 
alien influences often then develop into the full-blown halluci¬ 
nations I have discussed earlier. 

According to Bleuler, “conscious feelings rarely accompany the 
automatisms which are psychic manifestations split off from the 
personality. The patients can dance and laugh without feeling 
happy; can commit murder without hating; do away with them¬ 
selves without being disappointed with life . . . the patients 
realize that they are not their own masters.’^ 1 

Many patients simply allow such automatisms to take place. 
Others, still able to narratize marginally, invent protective de- 


3 1 Bleuler, p. 204. 



424 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 

vices against such foreign control of their actions. Negativism 
itself, even, I think, in neurotics, is such. One of Bleuler’s pa¬ 
tients, for example, who was inwardly driven to sing, managed to 
get hold of a small block of wood which he would cram into his 
mouth in order to stop his mouth from singing. At present we do 
not know whether such automatisms and inner commands are 
always the result of articulate voices directing the patient in his 
actions, as a relapse to the bicameral mind would suggest. It may 
indeed be impossible to know, since the split-off fragment of the 
personality that is still responding to the physician may have 
suppressed the bicameral commands which are being ‘heard’ by 
other parts of the nervous system. 

In many patients this appears as the symptom called Com¬ 
mand Automatism. The patient obeys any and every suggestion 
and command coming from the outside. He is incapable of not 
obeying authoritative short orders, even when otherwise negativ- 
istic. Such orders must deal with simple activities and cannot 
apply to a long complicated task. The well-known waxy flexibil¬ 
ity of catatonics may fall under this heading; the patient is really 
obeying the physician by remaining in any position in which he is 
placed. While not all such phenomena are, of course, character¬ 
istic of what we have called the bicameral mind, the underlying 
principle is. An interesting hypothesis would be that patients 
with such Command Automatism are those in whom auditory 
hallucinations are absent, and the external voice of the physician 
is taking its place. 

Consistent with such an hypothesis is the symptom known as 
echolalia. When no hallucinations are present, the patient re¬ 
peats back the speech, cries, or expressions of others. But when 
hallucinations are present, this becomes hallucinatory echolalia, 
where the patient must repeat out loud all that his voices say to 
him, rather than those of his environmental surroundings. Hal¬ 
lucinatory echolalia is, I suggest, essentially the same mental 
organization that we have seen in the prophets of the Old Testa¬ 
ment, as well as the aoidoi of the Homeric poems. 



SCHIZOPHRENIA 


425 


Body Image Boundary Disturbance 

It is possible that the erosion of the analog ‘I’ and its mind- 
space also results in what is called Boundary Loss in Rorschach 
studies of schizophrenia. This is a score for the proportion of 
images seen in the ink blots that have poorly defined, fuzzy, or 
inexistent boundaries or edges. Most interesting from our point 
of view here is that this measure is strongly correlated with the 
presence of vivid hallucinatory experiences. A patient high in 
Boundary Loss often describes it as a feeling of disintegration. 

When I am melting I have no hands, I go into a doorway 
in order not to be trampled on. Everything is flying away from 
me. In the doorway I can gather together the pieces of my 
body. It is as if something is thrown in me, bursts me asunder. 

Why do I divide myself in different pieces? I feel that I am 
without poise, that my personality is melting and that my ego 
disappears and that I do not exist anymore. Everything pulls me 
apart . . . The skin is the only possible means of keeping the 
different pieces together. There is no connection between the 
different parts of my body . . , 32 

In one study on Boundary Loss, the Rorschach was given to 80 
schizophrenic patients. Boundary definiteness scores were sig¬ 
nificantly lower than in the group of normals and neurotics 
matched for age and socio-economic status. Such patients would 
commonly see in the ink blots mutilated bodies, animal or hu- 
man.33 This mirrors the breaking up of the analog self, or the 
metaphor picture that we have of ourselves in consciousness. In 
another study of 604 patients in Worcester State Hospital, it was 
specifically found that Boundary Loss, including, we may pre¬ 
sume, the loss of the analog ‘I’, is a factor in the development of 
hallucinations. Patients who had more hallucinations were those 

32 P. Schilder, The Image and Appearance of the Human Body (London: Kegan 
Paul, Trench, Trubner, and Co., 1935), p. 159. 

33 S. Fisher and S. E. Cleveland, “The Role of Body Image in Psychosomatic 
Symptom Choice,” Psychological Monographs, 1955, 69, No. 17, whole no. 402. 



426 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 

who were less successful in establishing “boundaries between the 
self and the world.”34 

Along the same line of thought, chronic schizophrenic patients 
are sometimes unable to identify themselves in a photograph, or 
may misidentify themselves, whether they are photographed in¬ 
dividually or in a group. 

The Advantages of Schizophrenia 

A curious heading, certainly, for how can we say there are 
advantages of so terrifying an illness? But I mean such advantages 
in the light of all human history. Very clearly, there is a genetic 
inherited basis to the biochemistry underlying this radically dif¬ 
ferent reaction to stress. And a question that must be asked of 
such a genetic disposition to something occurring so early in our 
reproductive years is, what biological advantage did it once have? 
Why, in the slang of the evolutionist, was it selected for? And 
at what period long, long ago, since such genetic disposition is 
present all over the world? 

The answer, of course, is one of the themes I have stated so 
often before in this essay. The selective advantage of such genes 
was the bicameral mind evolved by natural and human selection 
over the millennia of our early civilizations. The genes involved, 
whether causing what to conscious men is an enzyme deficiency or 
other, are the genes that were in the background of the prophets 
and the ‘sons of the nabiim’ and bicameral man before them. 

Another advantage of schizophrenia, perhaps evolutionary, is 
tirelessness. While a few schizophrenics complain of generalized 
fatigue, particularly in the early stages of the illness, most pa¬ 
tients do not. In fact, they show less fatigue than normal persons 
and are capable of tremendous feats of endurance. They are not 
fatigued by examinations lasting many hours. They may move 
about day and night, or work endlessly without any sign of being 
tired. Catatonics may hold an awkward position for days that the 

34 L. Phillips and M. S. Rabinovitch, Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 
1958, 57: 181. 



SCHIZOPHRENIA 


427 


reader could not hold for more than a few minutes. This suggests 
that much fatigue is a product of the subjective conscious mind, 
and that bicameral man, building the pyramids of Egypt, the 
ziggurats of Sumer, or the gigantic temples at Teotihuacan with 
only hand labor, could do so far more easily than could conscious 
self-reflective men. 

A further thing that schizophrenics do ‘better’ than the rest 
