of us — although it certainly is no advantage in our abstractly 
complicated world — is simple sensory perception. They are more 
alert to visual stimuli, as might be expected if we think of them 
as not having to strain such stimuli through a buffer of conscious¬ 
ness. This is seen in their ability to block EEG alpha waves more 
quickly than normal persons following an abrupt stimulus, and to 
recognize projected visual scenes coming into focus considerably 
better than the normal.35 Indeed, schizophrenics are almost 
drowning in sensory data. Unable to narratize or conciliate, they 
see every tree and never the forest. They seem to have a more 
immediate and absolute involvement with their physical environ¬ 
ment, a greater in-the-world-ness. Such an interpretation, at least, 
could be put on the fact that schizophrenics fitted with prism 
glasses that deform visual perception learn to adjust more easily 
than the rest of us, since they do not overcompensate as much. 3 6 

The Neurology of Schizophrenia 

If schizophrenia is in part a relapse to the bicameral mind, and 
if our earlier analyses have any merit, then we should find some 
kind of neurological changes that are consistent with the neuro¬ 
logical model suggested in 1 .5. There I proposed that the halluci- 

35 See R. L. Cromwell and J. M. Held, “Alpha blocking latency and reaction time 
in schizophrenics and normals,” Perceptual and Motor Skills, 1969, 29: 195-201; 
E. Ebner and B. Ritzier, “Perceptual recognition in chronic and acute schizophrenics,” 
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 1969, 33: 200-206. 

3 6 See E. Ebner, V. Broekma, and B. Ritzier, “Adaptation to awkward visual 
proprioceptive input in normals and schizophrenics,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 
1971, 24: 367-371- 



428 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 

nated voices of the bicameral mind were amalgams of stored 
admonitory experiences that were somehow organized in the 
right temporal lobe and conveyed to the left or dominant hemi¬ 
sphere over the anterior commissures and perhaps the corpus 
callosum. 

Further, I have suggested that the advent of consciousness 
necessitated an inhibition of these auditory hallucinations origi¬ 
nating in the right temporal cortex. But what precisely this 
means in a neuro-anatomical sense is far from clear. We defi¬ 
nitely know that there are specific areas of the brain that are 
inhibitory to others, that the brain in a very general way is always 
in a kind of complicated tension (or balance) between excitation 
and inhibition, and also that inhibition can occur in a number of 
different ways. One way is an inhibition of an area in one hemi¬ 
sphere by excitation of an area in the other. The frontal eye 
fields, for example, are mutually inhibitory, such that stimulation 
of the frontal eye field on one hemisphere inhibits the other .37 
And we may suppose that some proportion of the fibers of the 
corpus callosum which connects the frontal eye fields are inhibi¬ 
tory themselves, or else excite inhibitory centers on the opposite 
hemisphere. In behavior, this means that looking in any direc¬ 
tion is programmed as the vector resultant of the opposing excita¬ 
tion of the two frontal eye fields.s 8 And this mutual inhibition of 
the hemispheres can be presumed to operate in various other 
bilateral functions. 

But to generalize this reciprocal inhibition to asymmetrical 
unilateral functions is a more daring matter. Can we suppose, 
for example, that some mental process on the left hemisphere is 
paired in reciprocal inhibition with some different function on the 

37 A. S. F. Layton and C. S. Sherrington, “Observation on the excitable cortex of 
chimpanzees, orangutan, and gorilla,” Quarterly Journal of Experimental Physiology, 

1917, 11: 135. 

3 s The phrasing here is that of Marcel Kinsbourne in “The control of attention by 
interaction between the cerebral hemispheres,” Fourth International Symposium on 
Attention and Performance, Boulder, Colorado, August 1971. 



SCHIZOPHRENIA 


429 


right, so that some of the so-called higher mental processes could 
be the resultants of the two opposing hemispheres? 

At any rate, the first step in bringing some credence to these 
ideas about the relationship of schizophrenia to the bicameral 
mind and its neurological model is to look for some kind of lateral¬ 
ity differences in schizophrenics. Do such patients have different 
right-hemispheric activity from the rest of us? Research on this 
hypothesis is only beginning, but the following very recent studies 
are at least suggestive: 

• In most of us, the total EEG over a long time period shows 
slightly greater activity in the dominant left hemisphere than 
in the right hemisphere. But the reverse tends to occur in schizo¬ 
phrenia: slightly more activity in the right .39 

• This increased right hemisphere activity in schizophrenia is 
much more pronounced after several minutes of sensory depriva¬ 
tion, the same condition that causes hallucinations in normal 
persons. 

• If we arrange our EEG machine so that we can tell which 
hemisphere is more active every few seconds, we find that in most 
of us this measure switches back and forth between the hemispheres 
about once a minute. But in those schizophrenics so far tested, the 
switching occurs only about every four minutes, an astonishing lag. 
This may be part of the explanation of the “segmental set” I have 
previously referred to, that schizophrenics tend to “get stuck” on 
one hemisphere or the other and so cannot shift from one mode of 
information processing to another as fast as the rest of us. Hence 
their confusion and often illogical speech and behavior in interac¬ 
tion with us, who switch back and forth at a faster rate.4" 

39 Arthur Sugarman, L. Goldstein, G. Marjerrison, and N. Stoltyfus, “Recent 
Research in EEG Amplitude Analysis,” Diseases of the Nervous System , 1973, 34: 
162-181. 

4° This is the preliminary work on a few subjects of Leonide E. Goldstein, “Time 
Domain Analysis of the EEG: the Integrated Method,” Rutgers Medical School pre¬ 
print, 1975. I am grateful to him for discussing these suggestions with me. 



430 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 

• It is possible that the explanation of this slower switching in 
schizophrenia is anatomical. A series of autopsies of long-term 
schizophrenics have, surprisingly, shown that the corpus callosum 
which connects the two hemispheres is i mm. thicker than in nor¬ 
mal brains. This is a statistically reliable result. Such a difference 
may mean more mutual inhibition of the hemispheres in schizo- 
phrenicsd 1 The anterior commissures in this study were not meas¬ 
ured. 

• If our theory is true, any extensive dysfunction of the left 
temporal cortex due to disease, circulatory changes, or stress- 
induced alteration of its neurochemistry should release the right 
temporal cortex from its normal inhibitory control. When tem¬ 
poral lobe epilepsy is caused by a lesion on the left temporal lobe 
(or on both the left and right), thus (presumably) releasing the 
right from its normal inhibition, a full 90 percent of the patients 
develop paranoid schizophrenia with massive auditory hallucina¬ 
tions. When the lesion is on the right temporal lobe alone, fewer 
than 10 percent develop such symptoms. In fact this latter group 
tend to develop a manic-depressive psychosis^ 2 

These findings need to be confirmed and explored further. But 
together they indicate without doubt and for the first time signif¬ 
icant laterality effects in schizophrenia. And the direction of these 
effects can be interpreted as partial evidence that schizophrenia 
may be related to an earlier organization of the human brain which 
I have called the bicameral mind. 

In Conclusion 

Schizophrenia is one of our most morally prominent problems 
of research, such the agony of heart that it spreads both in those 

4 1 Randall Rosenthal and L. B. Bigelow, “Quantitative Brain Measurements in 
Chronic Schizophrenia,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 1972, 121: 259-264. 

4 2 P. Flor-Henry, “Schizophrenic-like Reactions and Affective Psychoses Associated 
with Temporal Lohe Epilepsy: Etiological Factors,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 
1969, 126: 400—404. 



SCHIZOPHRENIA 


431 

afflicted and in those who love them. Recent decades have 
watched with gratitude a strong and accelerating improvement in 
the way this illness is treated. But this has come about not under 
the banners of new and sometimes flamboyant theories such as 
mine, but rather in the down-to-earth practical aspects of day-to- 
day therapy. 

Indeed, theories of schizophrenia — and they are legion — be¬ 
cause they have too often been the hobbyhorses of competing 
perspectives, have largely defeated themselves. Each discipline 
construes the findings of others as secondary to the factors in its 
own area. The socio-environmental researcher sees the schizo¬ 
phrenic as the product of a stressful environment. The biochem¬ 
ist insists that the stressful environment has its effect only 
because of an abnormal biochemistiy in the patient. Those who 
speak in terms of information processing say that a deficit in this 
area leads directly to stress and counterstress defenses. The 
defense-mechanism psychologist views the impaired information 
processing as a self-motivated withdrawal from contact with real¬ 
ity. The geneticist makes hereditary interpretations from family 
history data. While others might develop interpretations about 
the role of schizophrenogenic parental influence from the same 
data. And so on. As one critic has expressed it, “Like riding the 
merry-go-round, one chooses his horse. One can make believe his 
horse leads the rest. Then when a particular ride is finished, one 
must step off only to observe that the horse has really gone 
nowhere.43 

It is thus with some presumption that I add yet one more 
loading to this heavy roster. But I have felt impelled to do so, if 
only out of responsibility in completing and clarifying the sugges¬ 
tiveness of earlier parts of this book. For schizophrenia, whether 
one illness or many, is in its florid stage practically defined by 
certain characteristics which we have stated earlier were the 
salient characteristics of the bicameral mind. The presence of 

43 R. L. Cromwell, “Strategies for Studying Schizophrenic Behavior” (prepublica¬ 
tion copy), p. 6. 



432 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 

