auditory hallucinations, their often religious and always authori¬ 
tative quality, the dissolution of the ego or analog and of the 
mind-space in which it once could narratize out what to do and 
where it was in time and action, these are the large resem¬ 
blances. 

But there are great differences as well. If there is any truth to 
this hypothesis, the relapse is only partial. The learnings that 
make up a subjective consciousness are powerful and never 
totally suppressed. And thus the terror and the fury, the agony 
and the despair. The anxiety attendant upon so cataclysmic a 
change, the dissonance with the habitual structure of interpersonal 
relations, and the lack of cultural support and definition for the 
voices, making them inadequate guides for everyday living, the 
need to defend against a broken dam of environmental sensory 
stimulation that is flooding all before it — produce a social with¬ 
drawal that is a far different thing from the behavior of the 
absolutely social individual of bicameral societies. The conscious 
man is constantly using his introspection to find ‘himself and to 
know where he is, relevant to his purposes and situation. And 
without this source of security, deprived of narratization, living 
with hallucinations that are unacceptable and denied as unreal 
by those around him, the florid schizophrenic is in an opposite 
world to that of the god-owned laborers of Marduk or of the idols 
of Ur. 

The modern schizophrenic is an individual in search of such a 
culture. But he retains usually some part of the subjective con¬ 
sciousness that struggles against this more primitive mental orga¬ 
nization, that tries to establish some kind of control in the middle 
of a mental organization in which the hallucination ought to do 
the controlling. In effect, he is a mind bared to his environment, 
waiting on gods in a godless world. 



CHAPTER 6 


The Auguries of Science 


I have tried in these few heterogeneous chapters of Book III to 
explain as well as I could how certain features of our recent 
world, namely, the social institutions of oracles and religions, and 
the psychological phenomena of possession, hypnosis, and 
schizophrenia, as well as artistic practices such as poetry and 
music, how all these can be interpreted in part as vestiges of an 
earlier organization of human nature. These are not in any sense 
a complete catalogue of the present possible projections from our 
earlier mentality. They are simply some of the most obvious. 
And the study of their interaction with the developing conscious¬ 
ness continually laying siege to them allows us an understand¬ 
ing that we would not otherwise have. 

In this final chapter, I wish to turn to science itself and point 
out that it too, and even my entire essay, can be read as a 
response to the breakdown of the bicameral mind. For what is 
the nature of this blessing of certainty that science so devoutly 
demands in its very Jacob-like wrestling with nature? Why 
should we demand that the universe make itself clear to us? 
Why do we care? 

To be sure, a part of the impulse to science is simple curiosity, 
to hold the unheld and watch the unwatched. We are all children 
in the unknown. It is no reaction to the loss of an earlier mental¬ 
ity to delight in the revelations of the electron miscroscope or in 
quarks or in negative gravity in black holes among the stars. 



434 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 

Technology is a second and even more sustaining source of the 
scientific ritual, carrying its scientific basis forward on its own 
increasing and uncontrollable momentum through history. And 
perhaps a deep aptic structure for hunting, for bringing a prob¬ 
lem to bay, adds its motivational effluence to the pursuit of 
truth. 

But over and behind these and other causes of science has 
been something more universal, something in this age of speciali¬ 
zation often unspoken. It is something about understanding the 
totality of existence, the essential defining reality of things, the 
entire universe and man’s place in it. It is a groping among stars 
for final answers, a wandering the infinitesimal for the infinitely 
general, a deeper and deeper pilgrimage into the unknown. It is 
a direction whose far beginning in the mists of history can be 
distantly seen in the search for lost directives in the breakdown of 
the bicameral mind. 

It is a search that is obvious in the omen literature of Assyria 
where, as we saw in II.4, science begins. It is also obvious a mere 
half millennium later when Pythagoras in Greece is seeking the 
lost invariants of life in a theology of divine numbers and their 
relationships, thus beginning the science of mathematics. And so 
through two millennia, until, with a motivation not different, 
Galileo calls mathematics the speech of God, or Pascal and Leib¬ 
nitz echo him, saying they hear God in the awesome rectitudes of 
mathematics. 

We sometimes think, and even like to think, that the two 
greatest exertions that have influenced mankind, religion and 
science, have always been historical enemies, intriguing us in 
opposite directions. But this effort .at special identity is loudly 
false. It is not religion but the church and science that were 
hostile to each other. And it was rivalry, not contravention. Both 
were religious. They were two giants fuming at each other over 
the same ground. Both proclaimed to be the only way to divine 
revelation. 



THE AUGURIES OF SCIENCE 


435 


It was a competition that first came into absolute focus with 
the late Renaissance, particularly in the imprisonment of Galileo 
in 1633. The stated and superficial reason was that his publica¬ 
tions had not been first stamped with papal approval. But the 
true argument, I am sure, was no such trivial surface event. For 
the writings in question were simply the Copernican heliocentric 
theory of the solar system which had been published a century 
earlier by a churchman without any fuss whatever. The real 
division was more profound and can, I think, only be understood 
as a part of the urgency behind mankind’s yearning for divine 
certainties. The real chasm was between the political authority 
of the church and the individual authority of experience. And the 
real question was whether we are to find our lost authorization 
through an apostolic succession from ancient prophets who heard 
divine voices, or through searching the heavens of our own ex¬ 
perience right now in the objective world without any priestly 
intercession. As we all know, the latter became Protestantism 
and, in its rationalist aspect, what we have come to call the 
Scientific Revolution. 

If we would understand the Scientific Revolution correctly, we 
should always remember that its most powerful impetus was the 
unremitting search for hidden divinity. As such, it is a direct 
descendant of the breakdown of the bicameral mind. In the late 
seventeenth century, to choose an obvious example, it is three 
English Protestants, all amateur theologians and fervently de¬ 
vout, who build the foundations for physics, psychology, and 
biology: the paranoiac Isaac Newton writing down God’s speech 
in the great universal laws of celestial gravitation j the gaunt and 
literal John Locke knowing his Most Knowing Being in the riches 
of knowing experience; and the peripatetic John Ray, an un¬ 
kempt ecclesiastic out of a pulpit, joyfully limning the Word of 
his Creator in the perfection of the design of animal and plant 
life. Without this religious motivation, science would have been 
mere technology, limping along on economic necessity. 

The next century is complicated by the rationalism of the 



436 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 

Enlightenment, whose main force I shall come to in a moment. 
But in the great shadow of the Enlightenment, science continued 
to be bound up in this spell of the search for divine authorship. 
Its most explicit statement came in what was called Deism, or in 
Germany, Vernunftreligion. It threw away the church’s “Word,” 
despised its priests, mocked altar and sacrament, and earnestly 
preached the reaching of God through reason and science. The 
whole universe is an epiphany! God is right out here in Nature 
under the stars to be talked with and heard brilliantly in all the 
grandeur of reason, rather than behind the rood screens of igno¬ 
rance in the murky mutterings of costumed priests. 

Not that such scientific deists were in universal agreement. 
For some, like the apostle-hating Reimarus, the modern founder 
of the science of animal behavior, animal triebe or drives were 
actually the thoughts of God and their perfect variety his very 
mind. Whereas for others, like the physicist. Maupertuis, God 
cared little about any such meaningless variety of phenomena; he 
lived only in pure abstractions, in the great general laws of 
Nature which human reason, with the fine devotions of mathe¬ 
matics, could discern behind such variety. 1 Indeed, the tough- 
minded materialist scientist today will feel uncomfortable with 
the fact that science in such divergent and various directions only 
two centuries ago was a religious endeavor, sharing the same 
striving as the ancient psalms, the effort to once again see the 
elohim “face to face.” 

This drama, this immense scenario in which humanity has 
been performing on this planet over the last 4000 years, is clear 
when we take the large view of the central intellectual tendency 
of world history. In the second millennium B.C., we stopped 
hearing the voices of gods. In the first millennium B.C., those of 
us who still heard the voices, our oracles and prophets, they too 

1 I discuss this more fully in my paper with William Woodward, “In the Shadow 
of the Enlightenment,” Journal of the History of the Behavioral Sciences, 1974, 10: 
3-15, 144-159- 



THE AUGURIES OF SCIENCE 


437 


died away. In the first millennium AD., it is their sayings and 
hearings preserved in sacred texts through which we obeyed our 
lost divinities. And in the second millennium AD., these writings 
lose their authority. The Scientific Revolution turns us away 
from the older sayings to discover the lost authorization in 
Nature. What we have been through in these last four millennia 
is the slow inexorable profaning of our species. And in the last 
part of the second millennium AD., that process is apparently 
becoming complete. It is the Great Human Irony of our noblest 
and greatest endeavor on this planet that in the quest for authori¬ 
zation, in our reading of the language of God in Nature, we should 
read there so clearly that we have been so mistaken. 

