This secularization of science, which is now a plain fact, is 
certainly rooted in the French Enlightenment which I have just 
alluded to. But it became rough and earnest in 1842 in Germany 
in a famous manifesto by four brilliant young physiologists. 
They signed it like pirates, actually in their own blood. Fed up 
with Hegelian idealism and its pseudoreligious interpretations of 
material matters, they angrily resolved that no forces other than 
common physicochemical ones would be considered in their sci¬ 
entific activity. No spiritual entities. No divine substances. No 
vital forces. This was the most coherent and shrill statement of 
scientific materialism up to that time. And enormously influ¬ 
ential. 

Five years later, one of their group, the famous physicist and 
psychologist Hermann von Helmholtz, proclaimed his Principle 
of the Conservation of Energy. Joule had said it more kindly, 
that “the Great Agents of Nature are indestructible,” that sea and 
sun and coal and thunder and heat and wind are one energy and 
eternal. But Helmholtz abhorred the mush of the Romantic. His 
mathematical treatment of the principle coldly placed the em¬ 
phasis where it has been ever since: there are no outside forces 
in our closed world of energy transformations. There is no comer 



438 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 

in the stars for any god, no crack in this closed universe of matter 
for any divine influence to seep through, none whatever. 

All this might have respectfully stayed back simply as a mere 
working tenet for Science, had it not been for an even more 
stunning profaning of the idea of the holy in human affairs that 
followed immediately. It was particularly stunning because it 
came from within the very ranks of religiously motivated science. 
In Britain since the seventeenth century, the study of what was 
called “natural history” was commonly the consoling joy of find¬ 
ing the perfections of a benevolent Creator in nature. What more 
devastation could be heaped upon these tender motivations and 
consolations than the twin announcement by two of their own 
midst, Darwin and Wallace, both amateur naturalists in the 
grand manner, that it was evolution, not a divine intelligence, 
that has created all nature. This too had been put earlier in a 
kindlier way by others, such as Darwin’s grandfather, Erasmus 
Darwin, or Lamarck, or Robert Chambers, or even in the exalta¬ 
tions of an Emerson or a Goethe. But the new emphasis was 
dazzling strong and unrelieving. Cold Dncalculating Chance, by 
making some able to survive better in this wrestle for life, and so 
to reproduce more, generation after generation, has blindly, even 
cruelly, carved this human species out of matter, mere matter. 
When combined with German materialism, as it was in the 
wantonly abrasive Huxley, as we saw in the Introduction to this 
essay, the theory of evolution by natural selection was the hollow¬ 
ing knell of all that ennobling tradition of man as the purposed 
creation of Majestic Greatnesses, the elohim, tnat goes straight 
back into the unconscious depths of the Bicameral Age. It said in 
a word that there is no authorization from outside. Behold! there 
is nothing there. What we must do must come from ourselves. 
The king at Eynan can stop staring at Mount Hermon; the dead 
king can die at last. We, we fragile human species at the end of 
the second millennium AD., we must become our own authori¬ 
zation. And here at the end of the second millennium and about 
to enter the third, we are surrounded with this problem. It is one 



THE AUGURIES OF SCIENCE 


439 


that the new millennium will be working out, perhaps slowly, 
perhaps swiftly, perhaps even with some further changes in our 
mentality. 

The erosion of the religious view of man in these last years of 
the second millennium is still a part of the breakdown of the 
bicameral mind. It is slowly working serious changes in every 
fold and field of life. In the competition for membership among 
religious bodies today, it is the older orthodox positions, ritually 
closer to the long apostolic succession into the bicameral past, 
that are most diminished by conscious logic. The changes in the 
Catholic Church since Vatican II can certainly be scanned in 
terms of this long retreat from the sacred which has followed the 
inception of consciousness into the human species. The decay of 
religious collective cognitive imperatives under the pressures of 
rationalist science, provoking, as it does, revision after revision of 
traditional theological concepts, cannot sustain the metaphoric 
meaning behind ritual. Rituals are behavioral metaphors, belief 
acted, divination foretold, exopsychic thinking. Rituals are 
mnemonic devices for the great narratizations at the heart of 
church life. And when they are emptied out into cults of sponta¬ 
neity and drained of their high seriousness, when they are acted 
unfelt and reasoned at with irresponsible objectivity, the center is 
gone and the widening gyres begin. The result in this age of 
communications has been worldwide: liturgy loosened into the 
casual, awe softening in relevance, and the washing out of that 
identity-giving historical definition that told man what he was 
and what he should be. These sad temporizings, often begun by a 
bewildered clergy, 2 do but encourage the great historical tide 
they are designed to deflect. Our paralogical compliance to verb- 

2 Theologians are well aware of these problems. To enter into their discussions, 
one might start with Harvey Cox’s The Secular City and then Mary Douglas’ 
Natural Symbols y and then Charles Davis’ “Ghetto or Desert: Liturgy in a Cultural 
Dilemma,” in Worship and Secularization, ed. Wiebe (Vos, Holland: Bussum, 1970), 
pp. 10-27, and follow that with James Hitchcock’s The Recovery of the Sacred 
(New York: Seabury Press, 1974). 



440 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 

ally mediated reality is diminished: we crash into chairs in our 
way, not go around them; we will be mute rather than say we do 
not understand our speech; we will insist on simple location. It is 
the divine tragedy or the profane comedy depending on whether 
we would be purged of the past or quickened into the future. 

What happens in this modern dissolution of ecclesiastical 
authorization reminds us a little of what happened long ago after 
the breakdown of the bicameral mind itself. Everywhere in the 
contemporary world there are substitutes, other methods of au¬ 
thorization. Some are revivals of ancient ones: the popularity of 
possession religions in South America, where the church had 
once been so strong; extreme religious absolutism ego-based on 
“the Spirit,” which is really the ascension of Paul over Jesus; 
an alarming rise in the serious acceptance of astrology, that 
direct heritage from the period of the breakdown of the bicameral 
mind in the Near East; or the more minor divination of the I 
Ching, also a direct heritage from the period just after the break¬ 
down in China. There are also the huge commercial and some¬ 
times psychological successes of various meditation procedures, 
sensitivity training groups, mind control, and group encounter 
practices. Other persuasions often seem like escapes from a new 
boredom of unbelief, but are also characterized by this search 
for authorization: faiths in various pseudosciences, as in Scien¬ 
tology, or in unidentified flying objects bringing authority 
from other parts of our universe, or that gods were at one time 
actually such visitors; or the stubborn muddled fascination with 
extrasensory perception as a supposed demonstration of a spir¬ 
itual surround of our lives whence some authorization might 
come; or the use of psychotropic drugs as ways of contacting 
profounder realities, as they were for most of the American 
native Indian civilizations in the breakdown of their bicameral 
mind. Just as we saw in III.2 that the collapse of the institu¬ 
tionalized oracles resulted in smaller cults of induced possession, 
so the waning of institutional religions is resulting in these 



THE AUGURIES OF SCIENCE 


441 


smaller, more private religions of every description. And this 
historical process can be expected to increase the rest of this 
century. 

Nor can we say that modern science itself is exempt from a 
similar patterning. For the modern intellectual landscape is in¬ 
formed with the same needs, and often in its larger contours goes 
through the same quasi-religious gestures, though in a slightly 
disguised form. These scientisms, as I shall call them, are 
clusters of scientific ideas which come together and almost sur¬ 
prise themselves into creeds of belief, scientific mythologies 
which fill the very felt void left by the divorce of science and 
religion in our time.s They differ from classical science and its 
common debates in the way they evoke the same response as did 
the religions which they seek to supplant. And they share with 
religions many of their most obvious characteristics: a rational 
splendor that explains everything, a charismatic leader or succes¬ 
sion of leaders who are highly visible and beyond criticism, a 
series of canonical texts which are somehow outside the usual 
arena of scientific criticism, certain gestures of idea and rituals 
of interpretation, and a requirement of total commitment. In 
return the adherent receives what the religions had once given 
him more universally: a world view, a hierarchy of importances, 
and an auguring place where he may find out what to do and 
think, in short, a total explanation of man. And this totality is 
obtained not by actually explaining everything, but by an encase¬ 
ment of its activity, a severe and absolute restriction of attention, 
such that everything that is not explained is not in view. 

The materialism I have just mentioned was one of the first 
such scientisms. Scientists in the middle of the nineteenth cen¬ 
tury were almost numbed with excitement by dramatic dis¬ 
coveries of how nutrition could change the bodies and minds of 


3 George Steiner in his articulate Massey Lectures of 1974 called these “mytholo¬ 
gies” and discussed the point at greater length. I have borrowed some of his phrasing. 



442 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 

men. And so it became a movement called Medical Materialism, 
identified with relieving poverty and pain, taking to itself some of 
the forms and all of the fervor of the religions eroding around it. 
It captured the most exciting minds of its generation, and its 
program sounds distantly familiar: education, not prayers; nutri¬ 
tion, not communion; medicine, not love; and politics, not 
preaching. 

Distantly familiar because Medical Materialism, still haunted 
with Hegel, matured in Marx and Engels into dialectical material¬ 
ism, gathering to itself even more of the ecclesiastical forms of 
the outworn faiths around it. Its central superstition then, as 
now, is that of the class struggle, a kind of divination which gives 
a total explanation of the past and predecides what to do in every 
office and alarm of life. And even though ethnicism, nationalism, 
and unionism, those collective identity markers of modern man, 
have long ago showed the mythical character of the class struggle, 
still Marxism today is joining armies of millions into battle to 
erect the most authoritarian states the world has ever seen. 

