In the medical sciences, the most prominent scientism, I think, 
has been psychoanalysis. Its central superstition is repressed 
childhood sexuality. The handful of early cases of hysteria which 
could be so interpreted become the metaphiers by which to 
understand all personality and art, all civilization and its discon¬ 
tents. And it too, like Marxism, demands total commitment, 
initiation procedures, a worshipful relation to its canonical texts, 
and gives in return that same assistance in decision and direction 
in life which a few centuries ago was the province of religion. 

And, to take an example closer to my own tradition, I will add 
behaviorism. For it too has its central auguring place in a hand¬ 
ful of rat and pigeon experiments, making them the metaphiers 
of all behavior and history. It too gives to the individual adherent 
the talisman of control by reinforcement contingencies by which 
he is to meet his world and understand its vagaries. And even 
though the radical environmentalism behind it, of belief in a 
tabula rasa organism that can be built up into anything by rein- 



THE AUGURIES OF SCIENCE 


443 


forcement has long been known to be questionable, given the 
biologically evolved aptic structuring of each organism, these prin¬ 
ciples still draw adherents into the hope of a new society based 
upon such control. 

Of course these scientisms about man begin with something 
that is true. That nutrition can improve health both of mind and 
body is true. The class struggle as Marx studied it in the France 
of Louis Napoleon was a fact. The relief of hysterical symptoms 
in a few patients by analysis of sexual memories probably hap¬ 
pened. And hungry animals or anxious men certainly will learn 
instrumental responses for food or approbation. These are true 
facts. But so is the shape of a liver of a sacrificed animal a true 
fact. And so the Ascendants and Midheavens of astrologers, or 
the shape of oil on water. Applied to the world as representative 
of all the world, facts become superstitions. A superstition is after 
all only a metaphier grown wild to serve a need to know. Like the 
entrails of animals or the flights of birds, such scientistic super¬ 
stitions become the preserved ritualized places where we may 
read out the past and future of man, and hear the answers that 
can authorize our actions. 

Science then, for all its pomp of factness, is not unlike some of 
the more easily disparaged outbreaks of pseudoreligions. In this 
period of transition from its religious basis, science often shares 
with the celestial maps of astrology, or a hundred other irrational¬ 
isms, the same nostalgia for the Final Answer, the One Truth, the 
Single Cause. In the frustrations and sweat of laboratories, it 
feels the same temptations to swarm into sects, even as did the 
Khabiru refugees, and set out here and there through the dry 
Sinais of parched fact for some rich and brave significance flow¬ 
ing with truth and exaltation. And all of this, my metaphor and 
all, is a part of this transitional period after the breakdown of 
the bicameral mind. 

And this essay is no exception. 



444 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 

Curiously, none of these contemporary movements tells us any¬ 
thing about what we are supposed to be like after the wrinkles in 
our nutrition have been ironed smooth, or “the withering away of 
the state” has occurred, or our libidos have been properly 
cathected, or the chaos of reinforcements has been made 
straight. Instead their allusion is mostly backward, telling us 
what has gone wrong, hinting of some cosmic disgrace, some 
earlier stunting of our potential. It is, I think, yet another charac¬ 
teristic of the religious form which such movements have taken 
over in the emptiness caused by the retreat of ecclesiastical cer¬ 
tainty — that of a supposed fall of man. 

This strange and, I think, spurious idea of a lost innocence 
takes its mark precisely in the breakdown of the bicameral mind 
as the first great conscious narratization of mankind. It is the 
song of the Assyrian psalms, the wail of the Hebrew hymns, the 
myth of Eden, the fundamental fall from divine favor that is the 
source and first premise of the world’s great religions. I interpret 
this hypothetical fall of man to be the groping of newly conscious 
men to narratize what has happened to them, the loss of divine 
voices and assurances in a chaos of human directive and selfish 
privacies. 

We see this theme of lost certainty and splendor not only 
stated by all the religions of man throughout history, but also 
again and again even in nonreligious intellectual history. It is 
there from the reminiscence theory of the Platonic Dialogues, 
that everything new is really a recalling of a lost better world, all 
the way to Rousseau’s complaint of the corruption of natural man 
by the artificialities of civilization. And we see it also in the 
modern scientisms I have mentioned: in Marx’s assumption of a 
lost “social childhood of mankind where mankind unfolds in 
complete beauty,” so clearly stated in his earlier writings, an 
innocence corrupted by money, a paradise to be regained. Or in 
the Freudian emphasis on the deep-seatedness of neurosis in 
civilization and of dreadful primordial acts and wishes in both 



THE AUGURIES OF SCIENCE 


445 


our racial and individual pasts; and by inference a previous inno¬ 
cence, quite unspecified, to which we return through psychoanal¬ 
ysis. Or in behaviorism, if less distinctly, in the undocumented 
faith that it is the chaotic reinforcements of development and the 
social process that must be controlled and ordered to return man 
to a quite unspecified ideal before these reinforcements had 
twisted his true nature awry. 

I therefore believe that these and many other movements of 
our time are in the great long picture of our civilizations related 
to the loss of an earlier organization of human natures. They are 
attempts to return to what is no longer there, like poets to their 
inexistent Muses, and as such they are characteristic of these transi¬ 
tional millennia in which we are imbedded. 

I do not mean that the individual thinker, the reader of this 
page or its writer, or Galileo or Marx, is so abject a creature as to 
have any conscious articulate willing to reach either the absolutes 
of gods or to return to a preconscious innocence. Such terms are 
meaningless applied to individual lives and removed from the 
larger context of history. It is only if we make generations our 
persons and centuries hours that the pattern is clear. 

As individuals we are at the mercies of our own collective 
imperatives. We see over our everyday attentions, our gardens 
and politics, and children, into the forms of our culture darkly. 
And our culture is our history. In our attempts to communicate 
or to persuade or simply interest others, we are using and moving 
about through cultural models among whose differences we may 
select, but from whose totality we cannot escape. And it is in this 
sense of the forms of appeal, of begetting hope or interest or 
appreciation or praise for ourselves or for our ideas, that our 
communications are shaped into these historical patterns, these 
grooves of persuasion which are even in the act of communica¬ 
tion an inherent part of what is communicated. And this essay is 
no exception. 



446 Vestiges of the Bicameral Mind in the Modern World 

No exception at all. It began in what seemed in my personal 
narratizations as an individual choice of a problem with which I 
have had an intense involvement for most of my life: the prob¬ 
lem of the nature and origin of all this invisible country of 
touchless rememberings and unshowable reveries, this introcosm 
that is more myself than anything I can find in any mirror. But 
was this impulse to discover the source of consciousness what it ap¬ 
peared to me? The very notion of truth is a culturally given 
direction, a part of the pervasive nostalgia for an earlier cer¬ 
tainty. The very idea of a universal stability, an eternal firmness 
of principle out there that can be sought for through the world as 
might an Arthurian knight for the Grail, is, in the morphology of 
history, a direct outgrowth of the search for lost gods in the first 
two millennia after the decline of the bicameral mind. What was 
then an augury for direction of action among the ruins of an ar¬ 
chaic mentality is now the search for an innocence of certainty 
among the mythologies of facts. 



AFTERWORD 


I T IS NOW more than a decade since this essay first appeared in 
book form, and my publishers have encouraged me to add a post¬ 
script in which I might discuss the general reaction to this book as 
well as changes I might make if I were to rewrite it. 

A favorite practice of some professional intellectuals when at first 
faced with a theory as large as the one I have presented is to search 
for that loose thread which, when pulled, will unravel all the rest. 
And rightly so. It is part of the discipline of scientific thinking. In 
any work covering so much of the terrain of human nature and 
history, hustling into territories jealously guarded by myriad 
aggressive specialists, there are bound to be such errancies, some¬ 
times of fact but I fear more often of tone. But that the knitting of 
this book is such that a tug on such a bad stitch will unravel all the 
rest is more of a hope on the part of the orthodox than a fact in the 
scientific pursuit of truth. The book is not a single hypothesis. 

There are four main hypotheses in Books I and II. I welcome 
this opportunity to add some comments to each of them. 

l. Consciousness is based on language. Such a statement is of 
course contradictory to the usual and I think superficial views of 
consciousness that are embedded both in popular belief and in lan¬ 
guage. But there can be no progress in the science of consciousness 
until careful distinctions have been made between what is intro- 
spectable and all the hosts of other neural abilities we have come 
to call cognition. Consciousness is not the same as cognition and 
should be sharply distinguished from it. 

The most common error which I did not emphasize sufficiently 
is to confuse consciousness with perception. Recently, at a meeting 
of the Society for Philosophy and Psychology, a well-known and 



448 


Afterword 


prestigious philosopher stood up to object vociferously on this 
point. Looking at me directly, he exclaimed, “I am perceiving you 
