excerpts of them — inferences from what others tell us we are and 
from what we can tell ourselves on the basis of our own conscious- 

*3 Endel Tulving , Elements of Episodic Memory (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1983). 

‘4 Howard Jones, “-Sis Nouns in Heraclitus,” Museum Africum, 1974, 3:1-13. I 
am grateful to Professor Jones for discussion on this point. 

>5 This has been noted and emphasized by several classical scholars including Bruno 
Snell, speaking of “a new ‘mental’ concord that apparently was not possible before the 
seventh century when a new dimension of the intellect is opened.” Cited by Joseph 
Russo in “The Inner Man in Archilochus and the Odyssey,” Greek, Roman, and Byzan¬ 
tine Studies, 1974, 25:139, n. 1, who prefers an earlier date for this transformation, as 
his title indicates. 



458 


Afterword 


ness of what we have done — we come to construct or invent, on a 
continuing basis, in ourselves and in others, a self. The advantage 
of an idea of your self is to help you know what you can or can’t do 
or should or should not do. Bicameral individuals had stable iden¬ 
tities, names to which they or others could attach epithets, but such 
verbal identity is a far shallower form of behavior than the con¬ 
sciously constructed although variable, fragile, and defensive self 
that shakily pilots us through the alternatives of living consciously. 

Particularly with regard to the self, but also in all of the treach¬ 
erous terminology of mind, we must beware of the perils of poly¬ 
semy or homonymic or multireferential confusion, as I have called 
it elsewhere. This results from the historical growth and inner 
alterations of most mental terms; the referrent of a term changes 
usually with the addition of new conscious referrents until the term 
is really multireferential. “Self“ is a good example. Originally, 
the word (or corresponding word in whatever language) probably 
was simply used as an identity marker as in all its many com¬ 
pounds: self-employed, self-discipline, etc. Or as when we say a 
fly washes itself. But with the fractal-like proliferation and inten¬ 
sification of consciousness through history, particularly since the 
twelfth century A.D., a very different referrent of “self“ came into 
existence. It is the answer to the question “Who am I?” Most 
social psychologists accept that denotation of self. 

Thus, as John Locke somewhere says, 16 if we cut off a finger, 
we have not diminished the self. The body is not the self. An 
early critic of my book pointed to the well-known fact that mirrors 
were used far back into antiquity 1 ? and therefore such ancient 

16 But see Locke’s profoundly modern discussion in Essay on the Human Understand¬ 
ing, 11:10-29. 

1 7 Exactly the significance of such mirrors is a question. In the archeological museum 
in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, I have seen an ancient tombstone with the outline of a lady 
holding such a mirror. Would this be vanity? Were mirrors hand idols which were 
common in bicameral Mesopotamia? The mystery of the use of mirrors in Mayan 
iconography should also be noted, as it usually represents a god or the brightness of a 
god. See Linda Scheie and Mary Ellen Miller, The Blood of Kings (Fort Worth: 
Kimbell Art Museum, 1986). 



Afterword 


459 


peoples were conscious. But we don’t see our selves in mirrors, 
although we say so; we see our faces. The face is not the self. 

Because of the importance of this confusion and its frequency 
in misunderstanding my book, I would like here to describe a few 
other studies briefly. When presented with mirrors, most fish, 
birds, or mammals react with complete disinterest or else engage 
in social or aggressive displays or attack their mirror images. But 
humans and chimpanzees are different: they like mirrors. Human 
children go through four stages of behavior with respect to their 
mirror images. At first there is little reaction, then smiling, touch¬ 
ing, vocalizing as if it were another child, then a stage of testing 
or repetitive activity while observing the mirror image intently, 
and then, when the child is almost two years old, the adult reaction 
to the image as if it were its own. 18 The test for this final stage 
has been to smear rouge on the child’s nose and then have the child 
look in a mirror and see if the child touches its nose — which it 
readily does by age two. 1 ? 

But the real interest in this phenomenon began when Gallup 
showed that the same effect could be obtained with chimpanzees. 20 
Chimpanzees after extensive experience with mirrors were put 
under deep anesthesia. Then a conspicuous spot of red dye was 
daubed on the brow or top half of an ear. Upon awakening, the 
chimpanzees paid no attention to the markings, showing that no 
local tactile stimulation was present. But when a mirror was pro¬ 
vided, the chimpanzees, who by now were very familiar with their 
mirror images, immediately reached for the color spot to rub or 
pick it off, showing they knew the mirror images of themselves. 
Other chimpanzees that had had no experience with mirrors did 
not react in this way. Hence it was claimed that chimpanzees have 
selves and self-recognition. Or, in the words of one of the major 

18 J. C. Dixon, “Development of Self-recognition,” Journal of Genetic Psychology, 
1957, 91:251-256. 

B. K. Amsterdam, “Mirror Self-image Reactions Before Age Two,” Develop¬ 
mental Psychobiology, 1972, 5:297-305. 

20 G. G. Gallup, “Chimpanzees: Self-recognition,” Science, 1970, 167-.86-87. 



46 o 


Afterword 


senior figures in animal behavior, “the results provide clear evi¬ 
dence of self-awareness in chimpanzees.” 21 

This conclusion is incorrect. Self-awareness usually means the 
consciousness of our own persona over time, a sense of who we are, 
our hopes and fears, as we daydream about ourselves in relation to 
others. We do not see our conscious selves in mirrors, even though 
that image may become the emblem of the self in many cases. The 
chimpanzees in this experiment and the two-year-old child learned 
a point-to-point relation between a mirror image and the body, 
wonderful as that is. Rubbing a spot noticed in the mirror is not 
essentially different from rubbing a spot noticed on the body with¬ 
out a mirror. The animal is not shown to be imagining himself 
anywhere else, or thinking of his life over time, or introspecting 
in any sense — all signs of a conscious self. 

This less interesting, more primitive interpretation was made 
even clearer by an ingenious experiment done in Skinner’s labora¬ 
tory. 22 Essentially the same paradigm was followed with pigeons, 
except that it required a series of specific trainings with the mirror, 
whereas the chimpanzee or child in the earlier experiments was, of 
course, self-trained. But after about fifteen hours of such training 
when the contingencies were carefully controlled, it was found 
that a pigeon also could use a mirror to locate a blue spot on its 
body which it could not see directly, though it had never been 
explicitly trained to do so. I do not think that a pigeon because it 
can be so trained has a self-concept. 


From Affect to Emotion 

The new spatialized time in which events and experiences could 
be located, remembered, and anticipated results not only in the 


21 Donald R. Griffin, “Prospects for a Cognitive Ethology,” Behavioral and Brain 
Sciences, 1978, 4 :52 7-5 3 8. 

22 Robert Epstein, R. P. Lanza and B. F. Skinner, “ ‘Self awareness’ in the Pigeon,” 
Science, 1981, 212:695-696. 



Afterword 


461 


conscious construction of a self, but also in a dramatic alteration of 
our emotions. We share with other mammals a not very orderly 
repertoire of affects whose neural substrate was evolved long ago 
by natural selection into the limbic system deep in the brain. I 
wish here to mention three: fear, shame, and mating. And in 
doing so I wish to forewarn the reader that terminology is again 
a problem, particularly in this area — even the word affect, which 
I do not like to use because it is so often confused with effect and 
sounds strange to the nonprofessional. By affect, psychology 
means to designate a biologically organized behavior that has a 
specific anatomical expression and a specific biochemistry, one that 
dissipates with time. But with consciousness, all this is changed. 

I shall call this consciousness of a past or future affect an emo¬ 
tion, as that is how we describe it. And what I am proposing here 
is a two-tiered theory of emotions for modern human beings as 
distinguished from bicameral man and other animals . 2 3 There are 
the basic affects of mammalian life and then our emotions, which 
are the consciousness of such affects located inside an identity in a 
lifetime, past or future, and which, be it noted, have no biologically 
evolved mechanisms of stopping. 


From Fear to Anxiety 

In fear, there are a class of stimuli, usually abrupt and men¬ 
acing, which stop the animal or person from ongoing behavior, 
provoke flight, and in most social mammals produce specific bodily 
expressions and internally a rise in the level of catecholamines in 
the blood, such as adrenalin and noradrenalin. This is the well- 
known emergency response, which dissipates after a few minutes 
if the frightening object or situation is removed. 

But with consciousness in a modern human being, when we 

2 3 Julian Jaynes, “A Two-tiered Theory of Emotions,” Behavioral and Brain 
Sciences, 1982, 5:434-435, and also “Sensory Pain and Conscious Pain,” Behavioral 
and Brain Sciences, 1985,, 8:161-63. 



462 


Afterword 


reminisce about previous fears or imagine future ones, fear becomes 
mixed with the feeling of anxiety. If we wish to make echoes here 
of the James-Lange theory of the emotions, we would call anxiety 
