at this moment. Are you trying to say that I am not conscious of 
you at this moment?” A collective cognitive imperative in him 
was proclaiming in the affirmative. But actually he was being con¬ 
scious of the rhetorical argument he was making. He could have 
better been conscious of me if he had turned away from me or had 
closed his eyes. 

This type of confusion was at least encouraged back in 1921 by 
Bertrand Russell: “We are conscious of anything that we per¬ 
ceive.” 1 And as his logical atomism became fashionable in philoso¬ 
phy, it became difficult to see it any other way. And in a later book 
Russell uses as an example of consciousness “I see a table.” 2 But 
Descartes, who gave us the modern idea of consciousness, would 
never have agreed. Nor would a radical behaviorist like Watson, 
who in denying consciousness existed certainly did not mean sense 
perception. 

Just as in the case I mentioned above, I suggest Russell was not 
being conscious of the table, but of the argument he was writing 
about. In my own notation, I would diagram the situation as 


Russell thought his consciousness was the second term, but in 
reality it was the entire expression. He should have found a more 
ethologically valid example that was really true of his conscious¬ 
ness, that had really happened, such as, “I think I will rewrite the 
Pj'incipa now that Whitehead’s dead” or “How can I afford the 
alimony for another Lady Russell?” He would then have come 
to other conclusions. Such examples are consciousness in action. 
“I see a table” is not. 

Perception is sensing a stimulus and responding appropriately. 
And this can happen on a nonconscious level, as I have tried to 
describe in driving a car. Another way to look at the problem is to 

1 Bertrand Russell, Analysts of Mind (London: Allen and Unwin, 192-1). 

2 Bertrand Russell, Philosophy (New York: Norton, 1927). 



Afterword 


449 

remember the behavior of white blood cells, which certainly per¬ 
ceive bacteria and respond appropriately by devouring them. To 
equate consciousness with perception is thus tantamount to saying 
that we have six thousand conscious entities per cubic millimeter of 
blood whirling around in our circulatory system — which I think is 
a reductio ad absurdum. 

Consciousness is not all language, but it is generated by it and 
accessed by it. And when we begin to untease the fine reticulation 
of how language generates consciousness we are on a very difficult 
level of theorizing. The primordial mechanisms by which this 
happens in history I have outlined briefly and then in IL5 tried 
to show how this worked out in the development of consciousness 
in Greece. Consciousness then becomes embedded in language 
and so is learned easily by children. The general rule is: there is 
no operation in consciousness that did not occur in behavior first. 

To briefly review, if we refer to the circle triangle problem on 
page 40, in solving this struction we say, “I ‘see’ it’s a triangle,” 
though of course we are not actually seeing anything. In the struc¬ 
tion of finding how to express this solving of the problem, the 
metaphor of actual seeing pops into our minds. Perhaps there 
could be other metaphierss leading to a different texture of con¬ 
sciousness, but in Western culture ‘seeing’ and the other words 
with which we try to anchor mental events are indeed visual. And 
by using this word ‘see’, we bring with it its paraphiers, or associ¬ 
ates of actual seeing. 

In this way the spatial quality of the world around us is being 
driven into the psychological fact of solving a problem (which as 
we remember needs no consciousness). And it is this associated 
spatial quality that, as a result of the language we use to describe 
such psychological events, becomes with constant repetitions this 

3 My friend W. V. Quine strenuously objects to my metaphrand-metaphier coinage 
because they are hybrids of Latin and Greek. I have opted to keep them however for 
their connotative association with multiplicand and multiplier. He has made the inter¬ 
esting suggestion that perhaps this distinction is related to the latent-manifest distinc¬ 
tion of psychoanalysis. Are dreams metaphors? Is what Freud called the unconscious 
actually the latent metaphrand operated on by the manifest metaphier? 



450 Afterword 

functional space of our consciousness, or mind-space. Mind-space 
I regard as the primary feature of consciousness. It is the space 
which you preoptively are ‘introspecting on’ or ‘seeing’ at this very 
moment. 

But who does the ‘seeing’? Who does the introspecting? Here 
we introduce analogy, which differs from metaphor in that the 
similarity is between relationships rather than between things or 
actions. As the body with its sense organs (referred to as I) is to 
physical seeing, so there develops automatically an analog ‘I’ to 
relate to this mental kind of ‘seeing’ in mind-space. The analog 
‘I’ is the second most important feature of consciousness. It is not 
to be confused with the self, which is an object of consciousness in 
later development. The analog ‘V is contentless, related I think 
to Kant’s transcendental ego. As the bodily I can move about in 
its environment looking at this or that, so the analog ‘V learns to 
‘move about’ in mind-space, ‘attending to’ or concentrating on one 
thing or another. 

All the procedures of consciousness are based on such metaphors 
and analogies with behavior, constructing a careful matrix of con¬ 
siderable stability. And so we narratize the analogic simulation of 
actual behavior, an obvious aspect of consciousness which seems 
to have escaped previous synchronic discussions of consciousness. 
Consciousness is constantly fitting things into a story, putting a 
before and an after around any event. This feature is an analog 
of our physical selves moving about through a physical world with 
its spatial successiveness which becomes the successiveness of time 
in mind-space. And this results in the conscious conception of time 
which is a spatialized time in which we locate events and indeed 
our lives. It is impossible to be conscious of time in any other way 
than as a space. 

The basic connotative definition of consciousness is thus an ana¬ 
log ‘I’ narratizing in a functional mind-space. The denotative 
definition is, as it was for Descartes, Locke, and Hume, what is 
introspectable. 



Afterword 


451 


My list of features is not meant to be exhaustive or exclusive. 
Nor are they meant to be universal aspects of consciousness every¬ 
where. Given the great cultural differences in the world today, 
just as in the world’s past, it seems to me unreasonable to think 
that the features and emphases of consciousness would be every¬ 
where the same. 

As it stands, the list I have given is I think incomplete. At least 
two other features should be added: concentration, which is the 
analog of sensory attention/ and suppression, by which we stop be¬ 
ing conscious of annoying thoughts, the behavioral analog of repug¬ 
nance, disgust, or simply turning away from annoyances in the 
physical world. 

I would also take this opportunity of commenting on what is 
called in this book conciliation or compatibilization, which have 
perplexed some readers. At the risk of even more confusion, I 
would change this word to consilience, which is Whewell’s better 
term for my intended meaning of mental processes that make 
things compatible with each other.® While this is not so obvious 
in waking life, it becomes extremely important in dreams. Origi¬ 
nally, I had written two chapters on dreams to go in the present 
volume, but my publishers suggested that because of the length of 
the book, it seemed more reasonable to save them for the next 
volume, which I hope will appear in several years. 4 5 6 

Psychologists are sometimes justly accused of the habit of re¬ 
inventing the wheel and making it square and then calling it a first 
approximation. I would demur from agreement that that is true 
in the development that I have just outlined, but I would indeed 
like to call it a first approximation. Consciousness is not a simple 

4 It would be interesting to see experimentally if training in accurate and fast atten¬ 
tion resulted in better concentration in tasks when tested with distraction. 

5 William Whewell, Theory of Scientific Method (1858), ed. R. E. Butts (Pitts¬ 
burgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1968). 

6 For readers who would like an abstract of how this theory translates into dreams, 
I would suggest that they read my Bauer Symposium lecture in Canadian Psychology, 
1986, 27:128-182, particularly pages 146 and 147. 



452 Afterword 

matter and it should not be spoken of as if it were. Nor have I 
mentioned the different modes of conscious narratization such as 
verbal (having imaginary conversations — certainly the most com¬ 
mon mode in myself), perceptual (imagining scenes), behavioral 
(imagining ourselves doing something), physiological (monitor¬ 
ing our fatigue or discomfort or appetite), or musical (imagining 
music), all of which seem quite distinct, with properties of their 
own. Such modes have obviously different neural substrates, indi¬ 
cating the complexity of any possible neurology of consciousness. 

2. The bicameral mind. The second main hypothesis is that 
preceding consciousness there was a different mentality based on 
verbal hallucinations. For this I think the evidence is overwhelm¬ 
ing. Wherever we look in antiquity, there is some kind of evidence 
that supports it, either in literary texts or in archeological artifacts. 
Apart from this theory, why are there gods? Why religions? 
Why does all ancient literature seem to be about gods and usually 
heard from gods? 

And why do we have verbal hallucinations at all? Before the 
publication of this book, verbal hallucinations were not paid much 
attention to, except as the primary indicator of schizophrenia. But 
since that time, a flurry of studies have shown that the incidence of 
verbal hallucinations is far more widespread than was thought 
previously. Roughly one third of normal people hear halluci¬ 
nated voices at some time. Children hear voices from their imagi¬ 
nary or we should say hallucinated playmates. It has recently 
been discovered that congenital quadriplegics who have never in 
their lives spoken or moved, and are often regarded as “vegeta¬ 
bles," not only understand language perfectly but also hear voices 
they regard as God.7 The importance I put on these studies taken 
together is that they clearly indicate to me that there is a genetic 

7 John Hamilton, “Auditory Hallucinations in Nonverbal Quadriplegics,” Psychiatry, 
1985, 48’.382-392. For other work on verbal hallucinations, see my “Verbal Halluci¬ 
nations and Preconscious Mentality,” in Manfred Spitzer and Brendan H. Maher, eds., 
Philosophy and Psychofathology (New York: Springer Verlag, 1990), pp. 157-170. 
