the knowledge of our fear. We see a bear, run away in fear, and 
have anxiety. But anxiety as a rehearsal of actual fear partially 
occasions the emergency response at least weakly. It is man’s new 
capacity for conscious imagery that can keep an analog of the 
frightening situation in consciousness with a continuing response 
to it. And how to turn off this response with its biochemical basis 
was and I think still is a problem for conscious human beings, par¬ 
ticularly with the resulting increase in catecholamine levels and 
all its long-term effects. I would ask you here to consider what it 
was like for an individual back in the first millennium B.C. to have 
these anxieties that did not have their own built-in mechanism of 
cessation and before human beings learned conscious mechanisms 
of thought for doing so. 

This is demonstrated in the famous incident described by He¬ 
rodotus of the very first tragedy performed in Athens. It was 
performed only once. The play was The Fall of Miletus by 
Phrynicus, describing the sack of that Ionian city by the Persians 
in 494 B.C., a disaster that had happened the previous year. The 
reaction of the audience was so extreme that all Athens could not 
function for several days. Phrynicus was banished, never to be 
heard of again, and his tragedy burnt. 


From Shame to Guilt 

The second biological affect I wish to consider here is shame. 
Because it is a socially evoked affect, it has rarely been studied 
experimentally, in either animals or humans. It is a complicated 
affect whose occasioning stimuli often have to do with maintaining 
hierarchical relationships in highly social animals, and is the sub¬ 
missive response to rejection by the hierarchical group. While 
such biological shame is apparent as a controlling mechanism in 



Afterword 


463 


carnivore groups, it is much more obvious among the primates, and 
particularly in human beings. We seem to be ashamed to talk 
about shame, and, indeed, as adults, we have been so shaped by 
shame in the past, so confined to a narrow band of socially accept¬ 
able behavior, that it is rarely occasioned. 

But when we think back to our childhoods, the piercing, throb¬ 
bing trauma of being rejected by our peer groups, the fear of 
inappropriately crossing over from the private domain into the 
public countenance, the agony when we do, particularly in relation 
to sexual and excretory functions, toilet accidents of others or our¬ 
selves, but also in a milder form, in wanting to be dressed the same 
as other children, to receive as many valentines, and to be pro¬ 
moted with the rest, or have parents equal in wealth, health, or 
promise to the parents of others, or not to be beaten up or teased 
by others, sometimes even to be average in schoolwork when one 
is really superior — anything to be sure that one is snugly sunk 
deeply into one’s cohort — these are some of the most powerful 
and profound influences on our development. We should remem¬ 
ber here that as we grow older, our cohort is less and less our 
immediate peer group and more and more our family tradition, 
race, religion, union, or profession, et cetera. 

The physiological expression of shame or humiliation involves 
of course blushing, dropping of the eyes and of the head, and the 
behavioral one of simply hiding from the group. Unfortunately, 
nothing is known about its biochemical or neurological basis. 

If you wish to feel shame in its pure form, this stepping outside 
what is expected of you, simply stand out in a busy street and 
shout out the time in minutes and seconds over the heads of every¬ 
one who passes by, and do it for five minutes — or until you are 
taken away. This is shame, but not guilt, because you have done 
nothing your society has taught you to call wrong. 

And now consider what conscious reminiscence and imagery of 
the future bring to this affect. And particularly consider this in 
the milieu of ethical right and wrong that developed as markers 



464 Afterword 

for behavior after the breakdown of the bicameral mind with its 
certainty of gods’ directives. Wrongs, or by another word, sins, 
or indeed anything that would eject us from society if it were 
known or seem to eject us from society can be reminisced about 
out of the past and worried about for the future. And this we call 
guilt. No one before 1000 B.C. ever felt guilt, even while shame 
was the way groups and societies were held together. 

To indicate the evidence that guilt as opposed to shame is a new 
emotion at this time, I would cite a single bit of evidence, and one 
that is well known . 2 4 This is the story of Oedipus. It is referred 
to in two lines of the Iliad and two lines in the Odyssey which I 
think we can take as indicating the true story, as it came down from 
bicameral times. The story seems to be about a man who killed 
his father and then unwittingly married his mother and so became 
King of Thebes, proceeding to have several children-siblings by 
his mother, then discovering what he had done, certainly feeling 
shame since incest had always been a taboo, but evidently recover¬ 
ing from that shame, living a happy life thereafter with his wife- 
mother, and dying with royal honors sometime later. This was 
written down around 800 B.C., but the story comes from several 
centuries before that. 

And then, only four hundred years later, we have the great 
trilogy of Sophocles on the subject, a play about unknown guilt, 
guilt so extreme that a whole city is in famine because of it, so con¬ 
vulsive that the culprit when he discovers his guilt is not worthy to 
look upon the world again and stabs his eyes into darkness with 
the brooches clutched from his mother-wife’s breasts, and is led 
away by his sister-daughters into a mystical death at Colonus. 

And again, there is no biological mechanism for getting rid of 
guilt. How to get rid of guilt is a problem which a host of learned 
social rituals of reacceptance are now developed: scapegoat cere¬ 
monies among the Hebrews (the word for sending away translates 

2 4 E. R. Dodds, The Greeks and the Irrational (Berkeley: University of California 
Press, 1951). 



Afterword 


465 


now as “forgiveness”), the similar pharmakos among the Greeks 
(again the word aphesis for sending the pharmakos away becomes 
the Greek for “forgiveness”), “purification” ceremonies of many 
sorts, baptism, the taurobolium, the haj, confession, the tashlik, the 
mass, and of course the Christian cross, which takes away the sins 
of the world (note the metaphors and analogies in all this). Even 
changing the nature of God to a forgiving father. 

And I would also have you note here that while the affects are 
usually discrete, and evoked in very specific kinds of situations for 
specific kinds of responses, the emotions in consciousness are not 
discrete, can meld and evoke each other. Pve just said that in guilt 
we can have worry about future shameful experiences, which in¬ 
deed is anxiety, and we thus have two emotions, anxiety and guilt, 
coming together as an even more powerful emotion. 


From Mating to “Sex” 

The third example I would consider here is the affect of mating. 
It is similar in some respects to other affects but in other ways 
quite distinct. Animal studies show that mating, contrary to what 
the popular mind thinks, is not a necessary drive that builds up 
like hunger or thirst (although it seems so because of conscious¬ 
ness), but an elaborate behavior pattern waiting to be triggered 
off by very specific stimuli. Mating in most animals is thus con¬ 
fined to certain appropriate times of the year or day as well as to 
certain appropriate sets of stimuli as in another’s behavior, or 
pheromones, light conditions, privacy, security, and many other 
variables. These include the enormous variety of extremely com¬ 
plicated courtship procedures that for rather subtle evolutionary 
advantages seem in many animals almost designed to prevent 
mating rather than to encourage it, as one might expect from an 
oversimplified idea of the workings of natural selection. Among 
the anthropoid apes, in contrast to other primates, mating is so 
rare in the natural habitat as to have baffled early ethologists as to 



466 Afterword 

how these most human-like species reproduced at all. So too per¬ 
haps with bicameral man. 

But when human beings can be conscious about their mating 
behavior, can reminisce about it in the past and imagine it in the 
future, we are in a very different world, indeed, one that seems 
more familiar to us. Try to imagine what your “sexual life” would 
be if you could not fantasize about sex. 

What is the evidence for this change? Scholars of the ancient 
world, I think, would agree that the murals and sculptures of 
what I’m calling the bicameral world, that is, before 1000 B.C., 
are chaste; depictions with sexual references are scarcely existent, 
although there are exceptions. The modest, innocent murals from 
bicameral Thera now on the second floor of the National Museum 
in Athens are good examples. 

But with the coming of consciousness, particularly in Greece, 
where the evidence is most clear, the remains of these early Greek 
societies are anything but chastens Beginning with seventh cen¬ 
tury B.C. vase paintings, with the depictions of ithyphallic satyrs, 
new, semidivine beings, sex seems indeed a prominent concern. 
And I mean to use the word concern, for it does not at first seem 
to be simply pornographic excitement. For example, on one island 
in the Aegean, Delos, is a temple of huge phallic erections. 

Boundary stones all over Attica were in the form of what are 
called herms: square stone posts about four feet high, topped 
with a sculptured head usually of Hermes and, at the appropriate 
height, the only other sculptured feature of the post, a penile 
erection. Not only were these herms not laughter-producing, as 
they certainly would be to children of today, they were regarded 
as serious and important, since in Plato’s Symposium “the mutila¬ 
tion of the herms” by the drunken general Alcibiades, in which 
he evidently knocked off these protuberances with his sword around 
the city of Athens, is regarded as a sacrilege. 


2 s Most of this information and references can be found in Hans Licht, Sexual Life 
in Ancient Greece (London: Routledge, 1931), or in G. Rattray Taylor, Sex in His¬ 
tory (New York: Vanguard Press, 1954). 



Afterword 


