


Afterword 


453 

basis for such hallucinations in us all, and that it was probably 
evolved into the human genome back in the late Pleistocene, and 
then became the basis for the bicameral mind. 

3. The dating. The third general hypothesis is that conscious¬ 
ness was learned only after the breakdown of the bicameral mind. 
I believe this is true, that the anguish of not knowing what to do 
in the chaos resulting from the loss of the gods provided the social 
conditions that could result in the invention of a new mentality to 
replace the old one. 

But actually there are two possibilities here. A weak form of 
the theory would state that, yes, consciousness is based on lan¬ 
guage, but instead of its being so recent, it began back at the begin¬ 
ning of language, perhaps even before civilization, say, about 
12,000 B.C., at about the time of the beginning of the bicameral 
mentality of hearing voices. Both systems of mind then could 
have gone on together until the bicameral mind became unwieldy 
and was sloughed off, leaving consciousness on its own as the me¬ 
dium of human decisions. This is an extremely weak position 
because it could then explain almost anything and is almost 
undisprovable. 

The strong form is of greater interest and is as I have stated 
it in introducing the concept of the bicameral mind. It sets an 
astonishingly recent date for the introduction into the world of 
this remarkable privacy of covert events which we call conscious¬ 
ness. The date is slightly different in different parts of the world, 
but in the Middle East, where bicameral civilization began, the 
date is roughly 1000 B.C. 

This dating I think can be seen in the evidence from Mesopo¬ 
tamia, where the breakdown of the bicameral mind, beginning 
about 1200 B.C., is quite clear. It was due to chaotic social dis¬ 
organizations, to overpopulation, and probably to the success of 
writing in replacing the auditory mode of command. This break¬ 
down resulted in many practices we would now call religious which 
were efforts to return to the lost voices of the gods, e.g., prayer, 



Afterword 


454 

religious worship, and particularly the many types of divination I 
have described, which are new ways of making decisions by sup¬ 
posedly returning to the directions of gods by simple analogy. 

I would not now make as much of the Thera explosion as I did 
in II.3. But that it did cause the disruption of theocracy in the 
Near East and hence the conditions for the learning of a non- 
hallucinatory mentality is I think valid. But in the general case, I 
would rather emphasize that the success of a theocratic agricul¬ 
tural civilization brings with it overpopulation and thus the seeds 
of its own breakdown. This is suggested at least among the civili¬ 
zations of Mesoamerica, where the relative rapidity of the rise and 
fall of civilizations with the consequent desertion of temple com¬ 
plexes contrasts with the millennia-long civilizations in the older 
parts of the world. 

But is this consciousness or the concept of consciousness? This 
is the well-known use-mention criticism which has been applied 
to Hobbes and others as well as to the present theory. Are we not 
confusing here the concept of consciousness with consciousness 
itself? My reply is that we are fusing them, that they are the 
same. As Dan Dennett has pointed out in a recent discussion of the 
theory, 8 there are many instances of mention and use being iden¬ 
tical. The concept of baseball and baseball are the same thing. Or 
of money, or law, or good and evil. Or the concept of this book. 

4. The double brain. When in any discussion or even in our 
thinking we can use spatial terms, as in “locating” a problem or 
“situating” a difficulty in an argument, as if everything in existence 
were spread out like land before us, we seem to get a feeling of 
clarity. This pseudo-clarity, as it should be called, is because of 
the spatial nature of consciousness. So in locating functions in dif¬ 
ferent parts of the brain we seem to get an extra surge of clarity 
about them—justified or not. 

At the time I was writing that part of the book in the 1960s, 

8 Daniel Dennett, “Julian Jaynes” Software Archeology,” Canadian Psychology, 
1986, 27:149-154. 



Afterword 


455 


there was little interest in the right hemisphere. Even as late as 
1964, some leading neuroscientists were saying that the right 
hemisphere did nothing, suggesting it was like a spare tire. But 
since then we have seen an explosion of findings about right hemi¬ 
sphere function, leading, I am afraid, to a popularization that 
verges on some of the shrill excesses of similar discussions of 
asymmetrical hemisphere function in the latter part of the nine¬ 
teenth century 9 and also in the twentieth century. 10 

But the main results, even conservatively treated, are generally 
in agreement with what we might expect to find in the right hemi¬ 
sphere on the basis of the bicameral hypothesis. The most signifi¬ 
cant such finding is that the right hemisphere is the hemisphere 
which processes information in a synthetic manner. It is now well 
known from even more studies that the right hemisphere is far 
superior to the left in fitting together block designs (Kohs Block 
Design Test), parts of faces, or musical chords, 11 and such syn¬ 
thetic functions were indeed those of the admonitory gods in fitting 
together civilizations. 

The reader has by now guessed that a somewhat crucial experi¬ 
ment is possible. Since I have supposed that the verbal hallucina¬ 
tions heard by schizophrenics and others are similar to those once 
heard by bicameral people, could we not test out this cerebral loca¬ 
tion in the right temporal lobe of the voices by one of the new 
brain imaging techniques, using patients as they are hallucinating? 
This has recently been tried using cerebral glucography with posi¬ 
tron tomography, a very difficult procedure. Indeed, the results 
demonstrated that there was more glucose uptake (showing more 

9 Anne Harrington, “Nineteenth Century Ideas on Hemisphere Differences and 
‘Duality of Mind,’ ” Behavioural and Brain Sciences, 1985, 8:517—659, or her excel¬ 
lent enlarged study, Medicine, Mind, and the Double Brain (Princeton: Princeton 
University Press, 1987). 

10 S. J. Segalowitz, Two Sides of the Brain (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 
! 98 3 ). 

11 M. P. Bryden, Laterality: Functional Asymmetry in the Intact Brain (New York: 
Academic Press, 1982). 



456 Afterword 

activity) in the right temporal lobe when the patient was hearing 
voices. 12 

I wish to emphasize that these four hypotheses are separable. 
The last, for example, could be mistaken (at least in the simplified 
version I have presented) and the others true. The two hemi¬ 
spheres of the brain are not the bicameral mind but its present 
neurological model. The bicameral mind is an ancient mentality 
demonstrated in the literature and artifacts of antiquity. 

The last line of Book III sounds indeed like a ponderous finality 
of judgment. It is. But it is also the beginning, the opening up of 
human nature as we know it and feel it profoundly because con¬ 
sciously in ourselves, with all its vicissitudes, clarities, and obscuri¬ 
ties. Because of the documentation, we can see this most clearly in 
Greece in the first half of the first millennium B.C., where the 
change can truly be called 

The Cognitive Explosion. 

With consciousness comes an increased importance of the spa- 
tialization of time and new words for that spatialization, like 
chronos. But that is to put it too mildly. It is a cognitive explosion 
with the interaction of consciousness and the rest of cognition pro¬ 
ducing new abilities. Whereas bicameral beings knew what fol¬ 
lowed what and where they were, and had behavioral expectancies 
and sensory recognitions just as all mammals do, now conscious, 
humans can ‘look’ into an imagined future with all its potential of 
terror, joy, hope, or ambition, just as if it were already real, and 
into a past moody with what might have been, or savoring what 
did, the past emerging through the metaphier of a space through 

12 M. S. Buchsbaum, D. H. Ingvar, R. Kessler, R. N. Waters, J. Cappelletti, D. P. 
van Kammen, A. C. King, J. L. Johnson, R. G. Manning, R. W. Flynn, L. S. Mann, 
W. E. Bunney, and L. Sokoloff, “Cerebral Glucography with Positron Tomography: 
Use in Normal Subjects and in Patients with Schizophrenia,” Archives of General Psy¬ 
chiatry, 1982, 39:251-259. 



Afterword 


457 

whose long shadows we may move in a new and magical process 
called remembrance or reminiscence. 

Reminiscent memory (or episodic memory, as it is sometimes 
called),^ in sharp contrast to habit retention (or semantic mem¬ 
ory), is new to the world with consciousness. And because a 
physical space in the world can always be returned to, so we feel 
irrationally, somehow certain, impossibly certain, that we should 
be able to return again to some often unfinished relationship, some 
childhood scene or situation or regretted outburst of love or temper 
or to undo some tragic chance action back in the imagined inexis- 
tent space of the past. 

We thus have conscious lives and lifetimes and can peer through 
the murk of tomorrow toward our own dying. With the prod¬ 
ding of Heraclitus in the sixth century B.C.,' 4 we invent new 
words or really modifications of old words to name processes or 
symbolize actions over time by adding the suffix sis and so be con¬ 
scious of them, words in Greek like gnosis, a knowing; genesis, a 
beginning; emphasis, a showing in; analysis, a loosening up; or 
particularly phronesis, which is variously translated as intellection, 
thinking, understanding, or consciousness. These words and the 
processes they refer to are new in the sixth and seventh cen¬ 
turies B.C. 15 

The Self 

Along this new lifetime, putting together similar occurrences or 
