467 


Erect phalli of stone or other material have been found in large 
numbers in the course of excavations. There were amulets of 
phalli. Vase paintings show naked female dancers swinging a 
phallus in a Dionysian cult. One inscription describes the mea¬ 
sures to be taken even in times of war to make sure that the phallus 
procession should be led safely into the city. Colonies were obliged 
to send phalli to Athens for the great Dionysian festivals. Even 
Aristotle refers to phallic farces or satyr plays which generally 
followed the ritual performances of the great tragedies. 

If this were all, we might be able to agree with older Victorian 
interpretations that this phallicism was merely an objective fer¬ 
tility rite. But the evidence from actual sexual behavior following 
the advent of conscious fantasy speaks otherwise. Brothels, sup¬ 
posedly instituted by Solon, were everywhere and of every kind 
by the fourth century B.C. Vase paintings depict every possible 
sexual behavior from masturbation to bestiality to human three¬ 
somes, as well as homosexuality in every possible form. 

The latter indeed began only at this time, due, I suggest, in part 
to the new human ability to fantasize. Homosexuality is utterly 
absent from the Homeric poems. This is contrary to what some 
recent Freudian interpretations and even classical references of this 
period (particularly after its proscription by Plato in The Laws as 
being contrary to physis, or nature), seeking authorization for 
homosexuality in Homer, having projected into the strong bond¬ 
ing between Achilles and Patroclus. 

And again I would have you consider the problem twenty-five 
hundred years ago, when human beings were first conscious and 
could first fantasize about sex, of how they learned to control sex¬ 
ual behavior to achieve a stable society. Particularly because erec¬ 
tile tissue in the male is more prominent than in the female, and 
that feedback from even partial erections would promote the con¬ 
tinuance of sexual fantasy (a process called recruitment), we might 
expect that this was much more of a male problem than a female 
one. Perhaps the social customs that came into being for such 
control resulted in the greater social separation of the sexes (which 



468 


Afterword 


was certainly obvious by the time of Plato) as well as an enhanced 
male dominance. We can think of modern orthodox Muslim so¬ 
cieties in this respect, in which an exposed female ankle or lock of 
hair is punishable by law. 

I certainly will admit that there are large vacant places in the 
evidence for what I am saying. And of course there are other 
affects, like anger becoming our hatred, or more positive ones like 
excitement with the magical touch of consciousness becoming joy, 
or affiliation consciousized into love. I have chosen anxiety, guilt, 
and sex as the most socially important. Readers of a Freudian 
persuasion will note that their theorizing could begin here. I hope 
that these hypotheses can provide historians more competent than 
myself with a new way of looking at this extremely important 
period of human history, when so much of what we regard as 
modern psychology and personality was being formed for the first 
time. 

There is so much more to do, so many more bays and inlets of 
history and theory to explore. The tracking of ancient mentalities 
is an ongoing process that is leading to new insights and discov¬ 
eries. Since I do not know Chinese, I could not address that part 
of the data in the book. But I am pleased that my associate 
Michael Carr, an expert in ancient Chinese texts, is making up 
for that lack in a series of definitive papers. 26 The dating here is 
approximately the same as in Greece, which has led some his¬ 
torians to call this period the “axial age.” 

Several scholars have explored the ramifications of the theory 
in literature, particularly Judith Weissman, whose book with the 
working title of Vision, Madness, and Morality, Poetr^y and the 
Theory of the Bicameral Mind is being completed as I am writ¬ 
ing. 27 Thomas Posey is continuing his studies of verbal halluci- 

26 Michael Carr, “Sidelights on Xin 'Heart, Mind’ in the Sfri/zrcgabstract in Pro¬ 
ceedings of the 31st CISHAAN, Tokyo and Kyoto, 1983, 824-825, and his “Persona¬ 
tion of the Dead in Ancient China,” Computational Analyses of Asian and African 
Languages, 1985, 1-107. 

2 7 The title also of one of her papers: “Vision, Madness, and Morality: Poetry and 



Afterword 


469 


nations, Ross Maxwell is doing further historical studies, and 
many others, such as D. C. Stove, 28 I also thank for their support 
and encouragement, 


PRINCETON UNIVERSITY, 1990 


the Theory of the Bicameral Mind,” Georgia Review, 1979, 35:118-158. See also 
her “Somewhere in Earshot: Yeats’ Admonitory Gods,” Pequod, 1982, 74:16-31. 

28 D. C. Stove, “The Oracles and Their Cessation: A Tribute to Julian Jaynes,” 
Encounter, April 1989, pp. 30-38. 




THE DRAWINGS 


On pages 40, 101, 104, 120 by the author; on page 142 by Christiane 
Gillieron after a photograph by J. Perrot; on page 152 from J. Mellaart, 
Earliest Civilizations of the Near East (London: Thames and Hudson, 
1965); on page 154 by kind permission of Ekrem Akurgal; on page 168 
after Mellaart; on pages 170, 171, 224 by Susan Hockaday; on page 199 
by Carol Goldenberg; on page 172 by kind permission of Francis Robicsek; 
on page 192 redrawn from Henri Frankfort, Kingship and the Gods 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1948). 

The lines of verse on page 378 are from William Empson’s “Doctrinal 
Point” and “The Last Pain,” in Collected Poems of William Empson. 
Reprinted by permission of Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. 



Julian Jaynes was born in West Newton, Massachusetts, in 1920. 
He attended Harvard University and received his bachelors de¬ 
gree from McGill University and his master’s and doctoral degrees 
in psychology from Yale University. Dr. Jaynes lectured in the 
psychology department at Princeton University from 1966 to 1990. 
He published articles widely, focusing during the early part of his 
career on the study of animal behavior. He later redirected the 
scope of his thinking and energy to the study of human conscious¬ 
ness, culminating in his groundbreaking and only published book, 
The Origin of Consciousness in the Breakdown oftheBicameralMind, 
which was nominated for the National Book Award in 1978. The 
book is considered by many to be one of the most significant and 
controversial books of the twentieth century. Dr. Jaynes suffered a 
fatal stroke on November 21,1997. 



At the heart of this seminal work is the revolutionary idea that human 
consciousness did not begin far back in animal evolution hut was a learned 
process that emerged, through cataclysm and catastrophe, from a halluci¬ 
natory mentality only three thousand years ago and that is still developing. 
The implications of this scientific paradigm extend into virtually every 
aspect of our psychology, our history, our culture, our religion — indeed 
our future. In the words of one reviewer, it is “a humbling text, the kind 
that reminds most of us who make our livings through thinking, how 
much thinking there is left to do.” 

“When Julian Jaynes . . . speculates that until late in the second millennium 
B.C. men had no consciousness hut were automatically obeying the voices 
of gods, we are astounded but compelled to follow this remarkable thesis 
through all the corroborative evidence.” — John Updike, The New Yorker 

“This books and this mans ideas may he the most influential, not to say 
controversial, of the second half of the twentieth century. It renders whole 
shelves of books obsolete.” — William Harrington, Columbus Dispatch 

“Having just finished The Origin of Consciousness,! myself feel something 
like Keats’ Cortez staring at the Pacific, or at least like the early reviewers 
of Darwin or Freud. I’m not quite sure what to make of this new ter¬ 
ritory; hut its expanse lies before me and I am startled by its power.” 

— Edward Profitt, Commonweal 

“He is as startling as Freud was in The Intei-pretation of Dreams, and Jaynes 
is equally adept at forcing a new view of known human behavior.” 

— Raymond Headlee, American Journal of Psychiatry 

“The weight of original thought in [this book] is so great that it makes 
me uneasy for the author’s well-being: the human mind is not built to 
support such a burden.”— D. C. Stove, Encounter 


PSYCHOLOGY/SELF-HELP/$l8.00 
MAR r R BOOKS / HOUGHTON MIFFLIN COMPANY 

