Fifth  Edition 

With  Preface  by  Robert  P.  Pula 

SCIENCE 

AND 

SANITY 

AN  INTRODUCTION  TO 
NON-ARISTOTELIAN  SYSTEMS  AND 
GENERAL  SEMANTICS 

BY 

ALFRED  KORZYBSKI 

AUTHOR,  Manhood  of  Humanity 
FOUNDER,  INSTITUTE  OF  GENERAL  SEMANTICS 

INSTITUTE  OF  GENERAL  SEMANTICS 

“The  progress  of  modem  science,  including  the  new  science  of  man  as  a  time-binder , 
has  been  due  uniquely  to  the  freedom  of  scientists  to  revise  their  fundamental 
assumptions ,  terminologies,  undefined  terms,  which  involve  hidden  assumptions,  etc., 
underlying  our  reflections,  a  freedom  prohibited  in  ‘primitive  sciences’  and  also  in 
dictatorships,  past  and  present.” 

From  Manhood  of  Humanity 

“The  aim  of  the  work  of  Aristotle  and  the  work  of  the  non-aristotelians  is  similar,  except 
for  the  date  of  our  human  development  and  the  advance  of  science.  The  problem  is 
whether  we  shall  deal  with  science  and  scientific  methods  of  350  B.C.  or  of  [today].  In 
general  semantics,  in  building  up  a  non-aristotelian  system,  the  aims  of  Aristotle  are 
preserved  yet  scientific  methods  are  brought  up  to  date.” 

From  the  author’s  Introduction  to  the  2nd  Edition 

“General  semantics  is  not  any  ‘philosophy’,  or  ‘psychology’,  or  ‘logic’,  in  the  ordinary 
sense.  It  is  a  new  extensional  discipline  which  explains  and  trains  us  how  to  use  our 
nervous  systems  most  efficiently.  It  is  not  a  medical  science,  but  like  bacteriology,  it  is 
indispensable  for  medicine  in  general  and  for  psychiatry,  mental  hygiene,  and  education 
in  particular.  In  brief,  it  is  the  formulation  of  a  new  non-aristotelian  system  of 
orientation  which  affects  every  branch  of  science  and  life.  The  separate  issues  involved 
are  not  entirely  new;  their  methodological  formulation  as  a  system  which  is  workable, 
teachable  and  so  elementary  that  it  can  be  applied  by  children,  is  entirely  new.” 

From  the  author’s  Introduction  to  the  2nd  Edition 

Information  on  the  Institute  and  its  programs  and  publications  available  from: 

Institute  of  General  Semantics 
86  85th  Street 

Brooklyn,  New  York  11209-4208 
USA 

Phone:  718-921-7093 
Fax:  718-921-4276 
Email:  Institute@General-Semantics.org 
Web:  www.General-Semantics.org 

Leading  A  Revolution  in  Human  Evaluating ™ 

ISBN  0-937298-01 -8 

9  780937  298015 

9  0  0  0  0  > 

“I  must  stress  that  I  give  no  panaceas,  but  experience 
shows  that  when  the  methods  of  general  semantics  are 
applied ,  the  results  are  usually  beneficial,  whether  in 
business,  management,  etc.,  medicine,  law,  education  on 
all  levels,  or  personal  inter-relationships,  be  they  in 
family,  national  or  international  fields.  If  they  are  not 
applied,  but  merely  talked  about,  no  results  can  be 
expected. 

“In  general  semantics  we  are  concerned  with  the  sanity  of 
the  race,  including  particularly  methods  of  prevention; 
eliminating  from  home,  elementary,  and  higher  education 
inadequate  aristotelian  types  of  evaluation  which  too 
often  lead  to  the  un-sanity  of  the  race,  and  building  up  for 
the  first  time  a  positive  theory  of  sanity,  as  a  workable 
non-aristotelian  system. 

“The  task  ahead  is  gigantic  if  we  are  to  avoid  more 
personal,  national,  and  even  international  tragedies  based 
on  unpredictability,  insecurity,  fears,  anxieties,  etc., 
which  are  steadily  disorganizing  the  functioning  of  the 
human  nervous  system.  Only  when  we  face  these  facts 
fearlessly  and  intelligently  may  we  save  for  future 
civilizations  whatever  there  is  left  to  save,  and  build  from 
the  ruins  of  a  dying  epoch  a  new  and  saner  society. 

“A  non-aristotelian  re-orientation  is  inevitable;  the  only 
problem  today  is  when,  and  at  what  cost.” 

From  the  author’s  Preface  to  the  Third  Edition  and 
Introduction  to  the  Second  Edition 

“ . . .  Korzybski  was  not  only  a  bold  innovator,  but  also  a 
brilliant  synthesizer  of  available  data  into  a  coherent 
system.  This  system,  when  internalized  and  applied,  can 
create  a  saner  and  more  peaceful  world,  justifying  the  title 
of  this  book,  Science  and  Sanity 

From  the  Preface  to  the  Fifth  Edition  by  Robert  P.  Pula 

SCIENCE 

AND 

SANITY 

KORZYBSKI 

5™ 

Edition 

_ A _ 

INSTITUTE  OF  GENERAL  SEMANTICS 

THE  INSTITUTE  OF  GENERAL  SEMANTICS  was  founded 
in  1938  in  Chicago  and  is  now  located  in  Brooklyn,  New  York. 
The  seminar  training  program  continues  to  be  carried  on,  and 
an  increasing  number  of  universities,  colleges,  secondary  and 
elementary  schools  offer  courses  in  general  semantics,  or 
integrate  the  methodology  in  the  teaching  of  other  courses. 

ALFRED  KORZYBSKI 
belonged  to  an  old  Polish 
family  which  had  produced 
mathematicians,  engineers, 
scientists,  etc.  for 
generations.  Bom  in  Warsaw 
in  1879,  he  was  trained  as  an 
engineer,  and  during  the  First 
World  War  was  attached  to 
the  General  Staff  Intelligence 
Department  of  the  Second 
Russian  Army.  Later  he 
served  in  various  military 
capacities  in  this  country  and 
Canada.  After  the  publication  of  Manhood  of  Humanity  in 
1921,  he  remained  in  the  United  States  and  developed  the 
methodology  by  which  his  new  theory  of  time-binding  could 
be  applied.  These  studies  culminated  in  Science  and  Sanity  in 
1933.  He  was  the  Founder  and  Director  of  the  Institute  of 
General  Semantics,  established  in  1938  as  the  center  for 
training  in  his  work,  and  continued  to  lecture  and  write  until 
his  death  in  1950. 

ALSO  BY  THE  AUTHOR 

Manhood  of  Humanity ,  1921;  2nd  Ed.  Institute  of 
General  Semantics,  1950. 

Time-Binding:  The  General  Theory.  Two  Papers,  1924- 
1926. 

“The  Role  of  Language  in  the  Perceptual  Processes.”  Topic 
IX,  Clinical  Psychology  Symposium  1949-1950  in 
Perception:  An  Approach  to  Personality.  Ronald 
Press,  New  York,  1951. 

Alfred  Korzyhski:  Collected  Writings,  1920-1950 ,  Coll.  & 

Arr.  by  M.  Kendig.  F‘  Ed.  Institute  of  General 
Semantics,  1990. 

INTERNATIONAL  NON-ARISTOTELIAN  LIBRARY 

INSTITUTE  OF  GENERAL  SEMANTICS 

SCIENCE  AND  SANITY 

International  Non-Aristotelian  Library 

Founder:  Alfred  Korzybski  Executive  Editor:  Charlotte  S.  Read 

VOLUMES  ALREADY  PUBLISHED 

Published  or  Distributed  by  the  Institute  of  General  Semantics 

Manhood  of  Humanity:  The  Science  and  Art  of  Human  Engineering. 

E.  P.  Dutton,  New  York,  1921;  2nd  Ed., 

Institute  of  General  Semantics  (IGS),  Distributors,  1950  . by  A.  Korzybski 

Time-Binding:  The  General  Theory,  1924-1926  . . by  A.  Korzybski 

Science  and  Sanity . by  A.  Korzybski 

Selections  From  Science  and  Sanity,  1948,  by  A.  Korzybski .  Compiled  by  G.  E.  Janssen 

General  Semantics  Seminar  1937:  Transcription  of  Notes  from  Lectures 

in  General  Semantics  Given  at  Olivet  College . by  A.  Korzybski 

Papers  from  the  First  American  Congress  on  General  Semantics,  1938 . Ed.  by  H.  Baugh 

Papers  from  the  Second  American  Congress  on  General  Semantics:  Non- Aristotelian 

Methodology  (Applied)  for  Sanity  in  Our  Time,  1943  .  Ed.  by  M.  Kendig 

Introductory  Lectures  on  General  Semantics,  1944  . by  Francis  P.  Chisholm 

Levels  of  Knowing  and  Existence:  Studies  in  General  Semantics.  Harper, 

New  York,  1959;  2nd  Ed.,  IGS,  1973  .  by  Harry  L.  Weinberg 

Words  and  What  They  Do  to  You:  Beginning  Lessons  in  General 
Semantics  for  Junior  and  Senior  High  School.  Row,  Peterson, 

Evanston,  1953;  2nd  Ed.,  IGS,  1965  .  by  Catherine  Minteer 

General  Semantics  Monographs  III,  A  Theory  of  Meaning  Analyzed,  1942 

Foreword .  by  A.  Korzybski  and  M.  Kendig 

Three  Separate  Papers .  by  T.  C.  Pollock,  J.  G.  Spaulding  and  Allen  Walker  Read 

General  Semantics  Monographs  IV,  Scientific  Epistemologic  Backgrounds  of  General 

Semantics,  1959  . by  Marjorie  Swanson 

Alfred  Korzybski:  Collected  Writings,  1920-1950, 1990  . Coll,  and  Arr.  by  M.  Kendig 

Graduate  Research  in  General  Semantics,  1992 .  Comp,  by  Kenneth  Johnson 

Thinking  CreAtically,  1991  . Ed.  by  Kenneth  Johnson 

General  Semantics  Bulletin: 

Journal  of  the  Institute  of  General  Semantics  . Ed.  by  James  D.  French 

By  Other  Publishers 

Language  Habits  in  Human  Affairs:  An  Introduction  to  General  Semantics.  Harper 
New  York,  1941;  2nd  Ed.  by  Sanford  Berman,  Ed.,  1994,  International  Society 

for  General  Semantics  (ISGS)  .  by  Irving  J.  Lee 

People  In  Quandaries:  The  Semantics  of  Personal  Adjustment. 

Harper,  New  York,  1946;  7™  Printing,  ISGS,  1996  . by  Wendell  Johnson 

How  to  Develop  Your  Thinking  Ability. 

McGraw  Hill,  New  York,  1950  . by  Kenneth  S.  Keyes,  Jr. 

The  Art  of  Awareness.  Wm.  C.  Brown,  Dubuque,  1966;  3rd  Ed.  1978  . by  J.S.  Bois 

Teaching  General  Semantics.  ISGS,  1969  . Ed.  by  Mary  Morain 

Making  Sense:  Exploring  Semantics  and  Critical 

Thinking.  Globe,  New  York,  1974  .  by  Robert  Potter 

Classroom  Exercises  in  General  Semantics.  ISGS,  1980  . Ed.  by  Mary  Morain 

Drive  Yourself  Sane:  Using  the  Uncommon  Sense  of  General  Semantics,  2nd  Ed., 

Extensional  Publishing,  Pasadena,  2001.  by  Susan  Presby  Kodish  and  Bruce  I.  Kodish 

VOLUMES  IN  PREPARATION 

General  Semantics  in  Psychotherapy . Ed.  by  Isabel  Caro  and  Charlotte  S.  Read 

Knowledge,  Uncertainty  and  Courage:  Selected  General  Semantics  Writings  of  Robert  P. 

Pula  .  by  Robert  P.  Pula 

The  Non-Identifying  Person:  Personal  Self-Restructuring  for  the  Extra-Planetary  Era 

.  by  Robert  P.  Pula 

Time-Binding:  A  Revolutionary  Approach  to  Human  Evaluating  by  Jeffrey  A.  Mordkowitz 

SCIENCE  AND  SANITY 

AN  INTRODUCTION  TO 
NON-ARISTOTELIAN  SYSTEMS  AND 
GENERAL  SEMANTICS 

BY 

ALFRED  KORZYBSKI 

AUTHOR,  MANHOOD  OF  HUMANITY 
FOUNDER,  INSTITUTE  OF  GENERAL  SEMANTICS 

FIFTH  EDITION 

With  Preface  by  ROBERT  P.  PULA 
and  revised  and  expanded  index 

INSTITUTE  OF  GENERAL  SEMANTICS 

International  Non-Aristotelian  Library 

INSTITUTE  OF  GENERAL  SEMANTICS 

Brooklyn,  New  York,  USA 

Copyright,  1933, 1941,  1948  by  Alfred  Korzybski 
Copyright,  1958  by  Charlotte  Schuchardt  Read 

Diagrams  on  Pages:  388,  391,  393,  396,  398, 414, 427,  471  Copyright  1924, 
1926, 1933,  1941, 1948  by  Alfred  Korzybski 

Copyright,  1958  by  Charlotte  Schuchardt  Read 

Preface  to  Fifth  Edition  and  Index  to  Fifth  Edition  Copyright  Institute  of  General  Semantics, 

All  International  Rights  Reserved 

First  Edition  1933 
Second  Edition  1941 
Third  Edition  1948 
Fourth  Edition  1958 
Fifth  Edition  1994 
Second  Printing  2000 

ISBN  0-937298-01-8 

Information  on  the  Institute  of  General  Semantics  and  its 
programs  and  publications  available  from; 

Institute  of  General  Semantics 

Leading  A  Revolution  in  Human  Evaluating ™ 

1994 

Library  of  Congress  Catalog  Card  Number  58-6260 

TO  THE  WORKS  OF 

Aristotle 

Cassius  J.  Keyser 

M.  Faraday 

C.  Judson  Herrick 

Ludwig  Wittgenstein 

WHICH  HAVE  GREATLY  INFLUENCED  MY  ENQUIRY, 
THIS  SYSTEM  IS  DEDICATED 

,,  A  T  my  alighting,  I  was  surrounded  with  a  crowd  of  people ;  but  those 
who  stood  nearest  seemed  to  be  of  better  quality.  They  beheld  me 
n  with  all  the  marks  and  circumstances  of  wonder,  neither,  indeed, 
was  I  much  in  their  debt ;  having  never,  till  then,  seen  a  race  of  mortals  so 
singular  in  their  shapes,  habits,  and  countenances.  Their  heads  were  all 
reclined  either  to  the  right  or  the  left ;  one  of  their  eyes  turned  inward,  and 
the  other  directly  up  to  the  zenith.  Their  outward  garments  were  adorned 
with  the  figures  of  suns,  moons,  and  stars,  interwoven  with  those  of  fiddles, 
flutes,  harps,  trumpets,  guitars,  harpsicords,  and  many  other  instruments 
of  music,  unknown  to  us  in  Europe.  I  observed,  here  and  there,  many  in 
the  habit  of  servants,  with  a  blown  bladder  fastened  like  a  flail  to  the  end 
of  a  short  stick,  which  they  carried  in  their  hands.  In  each  bladder  was  a 
.mall  quantity  of  dried  pease,  or  little  pebbles  (as  I  was  afterwards  in¬ 
formed).  With  these  bladders  they  now  and  then  flapped  the  mouths  and 
ears  of  those  who  stood  near  them,  of  which  practice  I  could  not  then  con¬ 
ceive  the  meaning ;  it  seems,  the  minds  of  these  people  are  so  token  up  with 
intense  speculations,  that  they  neither  can  speak,  nor  attend^  to  the  dis¬ 
courses  of  others,  without  being  roused  by  some  external  taction  upon  the 
organs  of  speech  and  hearing;  for  which  reason,  those  persons,  who  are 
able  to  afford  it  always  keep  a  flapper  (the  original  is  clitnenole)  in  their 
family,  as  one  of  their  domestics,  nor  ever  walk  abroad,  or  make  visits, 
without  him.  And  the  business  of  this  officer  is,  when  two  or  three  more 
persons  are  in  company,  gently  to  strike  with  his  bladder  the  mouth  of  him 
who  is  to  speak,  and  the  right  ear  of  him  or  them  to  whom  the  speaker 
addresseth  himself.  This  flapper  is  likewise  employed  diligently  to  attend 
his  master  in  his  walks,  and,  upon  occasion,  to  give  him  a  soft  nap  on  his 
eyes,  because  he  is  always  so  wrapped  up  in  cogitation  that  he  is  m  mani¬ 
fest  danger  of  falling  down  every  precipice,  and  bouncing  his  head  against 
every  post  ;  and  in  the  streets,  of  jostling  others,  or  being  jostled  himself, 

into  jj?^^ecessary  tQ  gjve  the  reader  this  information,  without  which  he 
would  be  at  the  same  loss  with  me,  to  understand  the  proceedings  of  these 
people,  as  they  conducted  me  up  the  stairs  to  the  top  of  the  island,  mid  from 
thence  to  the  royal  palace.  While  we  were  ascending,  they  forgot  several 
times  what  they  were  about,  and  left  me  to  myself,  till  their  memories  were 
again  roused  by  their  flappers;  for  they  appeared  altogether  unmoved  by 
the  sight  of  my  foreign  habit  and  countenance,  and  by  the  shouts  of  the 
vulgar,  whose  thoughts  and  minds  were  more  disengaged.  > 

And  although  they  are  dextrous  enough  upon  a  piece  of  paper  in 
the  management  of  the  rule,  the  pencil,  and  the  divider,  yet,  in  the  common 
actions  and  behaviour  of  life,  I  have  not  seen  a  more  clumsy,  awkward, 
and  unhandy  people,  nor  so  slow  and  perplexed  in  their  conceptions  upon 
all  other  subjects,  except  those  of  mathematics  and  music.  They  are  very 
bad  reasoners,  and  vehemently  given  to  opposition,  unless  when  they  happen 
to  be  of  the  right  opinion,  which  is  seldom  their  case.  Imagination,  fancy, 
and  invention  they  are  wholly  strangers  to,  nor  have  any  words  m  their 
language  by  which  those  ideas  can  be  expressed;  die  whole  compass  of  their 
thoughts  and  mind  being  shut  up  within  the  two  forementioned  sciences. 

Jonathan  Swift  ( Gulliver's  Travels ,  A  Voyage  to  Laputa) 

PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION  1933  . lxxxix 

PREFACE  TO  THE  FIFTH  EDITION,  1993 

Six  decades  have  passed  since  this  book  appeared  in  1933.  In  the  interim 
many  thousands,  in  varying  degrees  of  breadth  and  depth,  have  interacted  with 
the  formulations  first  presented  herein.  As  of  these  hours  of  writing,  people 
in  every  continent  (save,  perhaps,  Antarctica)  are  studying  and  applying 
general  semantics. 

Those  who  have  been  attracted  to  and  worked  with  Korzyb ski’s 
formulations  have  largely  come  from  the  evaluationally  energetic  and  self- 
selecting  segment  of  our  populations.  They  have  tended  to  be  leaders  or  those 
training  to  be  leaders  in  a  broad  range  of  interests  and  disciplines.  Through 
their  efforts  as  teachers,  managers,  researchers,  etc.,  Korzyb  ski’s  formulations 
have  explicitly  and  implicitly  reached  many  thousands  more. 

Some  aspects  of  general  semantics  have  so  permeated  the  (American) 
culture  that  behaviors  derived  from  it  are  common;  e.g.,  wagging  fingers  in  the 
air  to  put  ‘quotes’  around  spoken  terms  which  are  deemed  suspect.  Original 
korzybskian  terms  are  seen  used  without  attribution,  as  if  part  of  the  general 
vocabulary;  e.g.,  a  paragraph-long  explanation  of  “time-binding”  appearing  in 
a  high  school  social  studies  text. 

Some  of  Korzybski’s  coinages,  particularly  “neuro-linguistic,”  are  now 
common  coin  and  have  extended  the  subset  of  English  with  the  “neuro”  prefix. 
(The  Random  House  Dictionary  of  the  English  Language ,  2nd  Edition,  p. 
1291,  mistakenly  gives  “1960-65”  as  the  dates  of  origin  for  “neuro-linguistic” 
and  the  offspring  terms,  “neuro-linguistics”  and  “neuro-linguist.”) 

During  the  depth  of  the  recent  “Cold  War”  an  interview  about 
Korzybski’s  work  was  broadcast  by  Harry  Maynard  and  Wladyslaw  Marth  to 
Poland  over  Radio  Free  Europe.  A  new  study  by  a  Polish  scholar,  Karol 
Janicki,  credits  Korzybski  with  being  a  precursor  of  what  Janicki  calls  Non- 
Essentialist  Sociolinguistics. 1 

Science  and  Sanity  has  by  now  spawned  a  whole  library  of  works  by  other 
time-binders.  Some  of  them  have  been  listed  in  previous  editions.  Since  the 
publication  of  the  Fourth  Edition,  this  ‘parenting5  has  continued.  Books, 
doctoral  dissertations,  masters  theses,  scholarly  papers,  essays  and  journal 
articles  abound.  The  primary  journals  for  on-going  discussion  and 
development  of  general  semantics  are  the  General  Semantics  Bulletin , 
published  by  the  Institute  of  General  Semantics,  and  ETC.:  A  Review  of 
General  Semantics ,  published  by  the  International  Society  for  General 
Semantics.  Other  journals,  popular  and  scholarly,  publish  general  semantics 
materials,  pro  and  con. 

I;or  a  sampling  of  books  dealing  with  general  semantics  published  since 
1 970,  see  the  Bibliographic  Note.2  My  choices  do  not  reflect  my  evaluations 

PREFACE  TO  THE  FIFTH  EDITION 

of  the  books  listed.  They  are  included  to  indicate  the  continued  growth, 
discussion  of  and  influence  of  general  semantics.  Books  critical  of 
Korzybski/general  semantics  are  included.  They  are  tagged  thus:  (critique). 

I  consider  Korzybski’s  Collected  Writings  1920-1950  perhaps  the  most 
important  publication  in  general  semantics  since  Science  and  Sanity .3  This 
book  brings  together  all  of  Korzybski’s  known  published  writings  other  than 
his  major  books  and  a  set  of  seminar  lectures  given  at  Olivet  College  in  1 937 . 
The  940  page  book  is  a  'must5  for  anyone  undertaking  a  serious  study  of 
general  semantics. 

Three  works  scheduled  for  publication  in  1 993  and  1 994  include  those  of 
Susan  Presby  Kodish  and  Bruce  I.  Kodish,  Drive  Yourself  Sane!  Using  the 
Uncommon  Sense  of  General  Semantics,  Robert  P.  Pula,  Knowledge , 
Uncertainty  and  Courage:  The  Collected  General  Semantics  Writings  of 
Robert  P.  Pula ,  and  General  Semantics  in  Psychotherapy ,  edited  by  Isabel 
Caro  and  Charlotte  S.  Read. 

The  Institute  of  General  Semantics  remains  the  primary  center  for  training 
in  general  semantics.  Seminar-workshops,  weekend  seminars  and  colloquia 
continue.  An  Advanced  Studies  and  Teacher  Certification  Program  for 
training  leaders  and  teachers  in  general  semantics  has  been  established. 

The  distinguished  annual  Alfred  Korzybski  Memorial  Lecture  series, 
begun  in  1952,  continues  to  present  highly  regarded  speakers  whose  work 
directly  reflects  or  complements  korzybskian  orientations.  These  lecturers 
have  been  outstanding  in  the  fields  of  anthropology,  philosophy,  physics, 
chemistry,  physiology,  embryology,  medicine,  neurology,  surgery,  education, 
sociology,  linguistics,  psychology,  management,  library  science,  law, ...  etc.4 
Their  participation  bespeaks  the  growing  regard  for  Korzybski’s  contributions 
and  the  importance  of  general  semantics  as  a  major  twentieth  century  system. 

The  Index  to  this  Fifth  edition  has  been  enhanced  to  facilitate  general 
study  and  formulation  searches.  Grateful  thanks  are  due  to  Bruce  I.  Kodish 
and  Milton  Dawes  for  their  work  in  updating  the  Index,  and  to  Bruce  I.  Kodish 
and  Stuart  Mayper  for  creating  the  Index  of  Diagrams.  Grateful  thanks  also 
are  due  to  Marjorie  Zelner,  Executive  Secretary  of  the  Institute  of  General 
Semantics,  for  her  work  as  production  editor  of  this  Fifth  Edition. 
