
This  briefly  reviews  the  activities  in  the  field  of  general  semantics  and 
shows  that,  as  with  any  system  that  represents  a  challenge  to  its  own  culture, 
there  remains  much  work  to  be  done,  but  also  that  this  work  proceeds 
vigorously. 

In  the  sixty  years  since  Korzybski  offered  the  first  (not  the  last)  non- 
aristotelian  system  in  Science  and  Sanity  public  reaction  has  been  both 
enthusiastic  and  critical.  What  about  Korzybski’s  work  continues  to  generate 
such  interest  and  activity?  If  it  were  so,  as  some  critics  have  asserted,  that  "all’ 
he  did  was  to  organize  scattered  insights,  formulations  and  data  into  a  system. 

PREFACE  TO  THE  FIFTH  EDITION 

that  alone  would  have  constituted  a  major  achievement  worthy  of  the  gratitude 
of  succeeding  time-binders  for  centuries  to  come.  Korzybski  did  that.  He 
enunciated  a  system,  incorporating  aspects  of  but  going  beyond  its 
predecessors,  and  proposed  a  methodology  for  making  his  system  a  living  tool: 
general  semantics  (the  name  he  selected),  the  first  non-aristotelian  system 
applied  and  made  teachable. 

In  addition,  I  can  list  here  the  following  selected  formulations  and  points 
of  view ,  emphases ,  etc.,  which  I  consider  to  be  original  with  Korzybski.5 

1 .  Time-binding ;  time-binding  ethics.  Rejecting  both  theological  and 
zoological  definitions,  Korzybski  adopted  a  natural  science,  operational 
approach  and  defined  humans  by  what  they  can  be  observed  doing  which 
differentiates  them  from  other  classes  of  life;  he  defined  them  as  the  time¬ 
binding  class  of  life,  able  to  pass  on  knowledge  from  one  generation  to  another 
over  Time.’6 

Derived  from  this  definition,  which  evaluates  humans  as  a  naturally 
cooperative  class  of  life  (the  mechanisms  of  time-binding  are  descriptively 
social,  cooperative),  Korzybski  postulated  time-binding  'ethics’  —  modes  of 
behavior,  choices  appropriate  to  time-binding  organisms. 

2.  Korzybski  recognized  that  language  {symbolizing  in  general) 
constitutes  the  basic  tool  of  time-binding.  Others  before  him  had  noted  that 
language ,  in  the  complex  human  sense,  was  one  of  the  distinguishing  features 
of  humans.  WhatKotzybski  fully  recognized  was  the  central,  defining  role  of 
language.  No  language,  no  time-binding.  If  so,  then  structures  of  languages 
must  be  determinative  for  time-binding. 

3.  The  neurologically  focused  formulation  of  the  process  of 
abstracting .  No  one  before  Korzybski  had  so  thoroughly  and  unflinchingly 
specified  the  process  by  which  humans  build  and  evolve  theories,  do  their 
mundane  evaluating,  thrill  to  'sunsets’,  etc.  Korzybski’s  formulating  of 
abstracting,  particularly  in  the  human  realm,  can  constructively  serve  as  a 
guide  to  on-going  neuroscientific  research. 

4.  Asa  function  of  the  above,  but  deserving  separate  mention  with  the 
rigorously  formulated  notion  of  orders  of  abstracting,  is  the  concurrent 
admonition  that  we  should  not  confuse  (identify)  them.  Given  the  hierarchical, 
sequential  character  of  the  nervous  system  (allowing,  too,  for  horizontally 
related  structures  and  parallel  processing),  it  is  inevitable  that  results  along  the 
way  should  manifest  as  (or  'at’)  differing  orders  or  levels  of  abstracting.  These 
results  are  inevitable.  That  they  would  be  formulated  at  a  given  historical 
moment  is  not  inevitable.  Korzybski  did  it  in  the  1920’s,  publishing  his 
descriptions  in  their  mature  form  in  1933. 

5.  Consciousness  of  abstracting.  If  human  organisms-as-a-whole-cum- 
nervous  systems/brains  abstract  as  claimed  above  and  described  herein  (pp. 
369-45 1  and  passim ),  surely  consciousness  of  these  events  must  be  crucial  for 

xvi  PREFACE  TO  THE  FIFTH  EDITION 

optimum  human  functioning.  Animals  (non-time-binders)  abstract;  but,  so  far 
as  we  know  (1993),  they  do  not  know  that  they  abstract.  Indeed,  many  humans 
don’t  either  —  but  they  have  the  potentiality  to  do  so.  Korzybski  recognized 
this,  realized  that  consciousness  of  abstracting  is  essential  for  “fully 
functioning”  humans,  and  made  of  it  a  primary  goal  of  general  semantics 
training. 

6.  The  structure  of  language.  Among  Korzybski *s  most  original 
formulations  was  the  multiordinal  character  of  many  of  the  terms  we  most 
often  use.  He  insisted  that,  with  multiordinal  terms,  the  ‘meaning’  is  strictly 
a  function  of  the  order  or  level  of  abstraction  at  which  the  term  is  used  and  that 
its  ‘meaning’  is  so  context-driven  that  it  doesn’t  ‘mean’  anything  definite  until 
the  context  is  specified  or  understood. 

7.  Structure  as  the  only  ‘content*  of  knowledge.  This  represents  the 
height/depth  of  non-elementalism;  that  what  used  to  be  designated  as  ‘form’ 
(structure)  and  ‘content’  are  so  intimately  related  as  to  be,  practically  speaking, 
fused,  that  structure  and  ‘content’  are  functions  of  ‘each  other’.  Further,  and 
more  deeply,  all  we  can  ever  know  expresses  a  set  or  sets  of  relationships  and, 
most  fundamentally,  a  relationship  (‘singular’)  between  the  ‘known’  and  the 
knowing  organism:  the  famous  joint  product  of  the  observer-observed 
structure.  “Structure  is  the  only  ‘content’  of  knowledge”  may  qualify  as 
Korzybski’ s  deepest  expression  of  anti-essentialism.  We  can  not  know 
‘essences’,  things  in  themselves ;  all  we  can  know  is  what  we  know  as 
abstracting  nervous  systems .  Although  we  can  on-goingly  know  more,  we 
can  not  ‘transcend’  ourselves  as  organisms  that  abstract. 

8.  Semantic  reactions;  semantic  reactions  as  evaluations.  Growing  out 
of  his  awareness  of  the  transactive  character  of  human  evaluating  and  wishing 
to  correct  for  the  elementalistic  splitting  involved  in  such  terms  as  ‘meaning’, 
‘mental’,  ‘concept’,  ‘idea’  and  a  legion  of  others,  Korzybski  consciously, 
deliberately  formulated  the  term  semantic  reaction.  It  is  central  to  his  system. 

9.  The  mathematical  notion  of  function  as  applied  to  the  brain- 
language  continuum.  Boldly  grasping  the  neurophysiology  of  his  day, 
Korzybski  formulated  what  research  increasingly  finds:  language  is  a  function 
of  (derives  from,  is  invented  by)  brain;  reciprocally,  as  a  function  of  feedback 
mechanisms,  brain  is  a  function  of  (is  modified  by  the  electro-chemical 
structuring  called)  language. 

10.  Neuro-semantic  environments  as  environments.  The  neuro- 
semantic  environment  constitutes  a  fundamental  environmental  issue  unique 
to  humans. 

1 1 .  Non-aristotelian  system  as  system.  Korzybski  had  non-aristotelian 
predecessors,  as  he  well  knew.  What  distinguishes  his  non-aristotelian  stance 
is  the  degree  of  formulational  consciousness  he  brought  to  it,  and  the 

PREFACE  TO  THE  FIFTH  EDITION 

energetic  courage  with  which  he  built  it  into  a  system  —  offered  to  his  fellow 
humans  as  a  better  way  to  orient  themselves. 

12.  The  Structural  Differential  as  a  model  of  the  abstracting  process 
and  a  summary  of  general  semantics.  Korzybski  realized  the  importance  of 
visualization  for  human  understanding.  He  knew,  then,  that  to  make  some  of 
the  higher  order,  overarching  relationships  of  his  system  accessible,  visible , 
he  must  make  a  diagram,  a  model,  a  map ,  that  people  could  see  and  touch. 
Thus  the  Structural  Differential,  a  device  for  differentiating  the  structures  of 
abstracting.  As  far  as  I  know,  this  is  the  first  structurally  appropriate  model 
of  the  abstracting  process. 

1 3 .  Languages,  formulational  systems,  etc . ,  as  maps  and  only  maps  of 
what  they  purport  to  represent .  This  awareness  led  to  the  three  premises 
(popularly  expressed)  of  general  semantics: 

the  map  is  not  the  territory 

no  map  represents  all  of  ‘its’  presumed  territory 

maps  are  self-reflexive,  i.e.,  we  can  map  our  maps  indefinitely.  Also, 

every  map  is  at  least,  whatever  else  it  may  claim  to  map,  a  map  of  the 

map-maker:  her/his  assumptions,  skills,  world-view,  etc. 

By  ‘maps’  we  should  understand  everything  and  anything  that  humans 
formulate  —  including  this  book  and  my  present  contributions,  but  also 
including  (to  take  a  few  in  alphabetical  order),  biology.  Buddhism, 
Catholicism,  chemistry.  Evangelism,  Freudianism,  Hinduism,  Islam,  Judaism, 
Lutheranism,  physics,  Taoism,  etc.,  etc., ...! 

14.  AUness/non-allness  as  clear,  to  be  dealt  with,  formulations.  If  no 
map  can  represent  all  of  ‘its’  presumed  territory,  we  need  to  eschew  habitual 
use  of  the  term  ‘all’  and  its  ancient  philosophical  correlates,  absolutes  of 
various  kinds. 

15.  Non-identity  and  its  derivatives,  correlates,  etc.  At  every  turn  in 
Korzybski ’s  formulating  we  encounter  his  forthright  challenge  to  the  heart  of 
uristotelianism  —  and  its  non-Westem,  equally  essentialist  counterparts. 
“Whatever  you  say  a  thing  is,  it  is  not”  This  rejection  of  the  Taw  of  identity’ 
(’everything  is  identical  with  itself)  may  be  Korzybski ’s  most  controversial 
formulation.  After  all,  Korzybski’s  treatment  directly  challenges  the  ‘Laws  of 
Thought*,  revered  for  over  two  thousand  years  in  the  West  and,  differently 
expressed,  in  non-Westem  cultures.  Korzybski’s  challenge  is  thus  planetary. 
Wc  ‘Westerners’  can’t  (as  some  have  tried)  escape  to  the  ‘East’. 
Identifications,  confusions  of  orders  of  abstracting,  are  common  to  all  human 
nervous  systems  we  know  of 

16.  Extension  of  Cassius  Keyser's  " Logical  Fate”:  from  premises, 
conclusions  follow,  inexorably.  Korzybski  recognized  that  conclusions 
constitute  behaviors ,  consequences,  doings ,  and  that  these  are  not  merely 
logical  derivatives  but  psycho-logical  inevitabilities.  If  we  want  to  change 

xviii 

PREFACE  TO  THE  FIFTH  EDITION 

behaviors ,  we  must  first  change  the  premises  which  gave  birth  to  the 
behaviors.  Korzyb ski’s  strong  version  of  Keyser’s  restrictedly  iogicaF 
formulation  was  first  adumbrated  in  Korzybski’s  paper,  “Fate  and  Freedom” 
of  1 923  and  received  its  full  expression  in  the  “Foreword”  (with  M.  Kendig) 
to  A  Theory  of  Meaning  Analyzed  in  1942,  both  available  in  the  Collected 
Writings.  Both  expressions  well  antedate  Thomas  Kuhn’s  “paradigm  shifts” 
and,  more  pointedly  than  Kuhn,  formulate  the  behavioral  implications  of 
logical  and  philosophical  systems. 

17.  The  circularity  of  knowledge  (spiral-character-in- ‘time’). 
Korzybski  noted  that  our  most  ‘abstract’  formulations  are  actually  about  non¬ 
verbal  processes/events,  and  that  how  we  formulate  about  these  at  a  given  date, 
how  we  talk  to  ourselves,  through  neural  feedback  mechanisms,  relatively 
determines  how  we  will  subsequently  abstract-formulate:  healthfully  if  our 
abstracting  is  open,  non-finalistic  (non-absolute);  pathologically  if  not. 

18.  Electro-colloidal  (macro-molecular-biological)  and  related 
processes.  Korzybski  emphasized  awareness  of  these  as  fundamental  for 
understanding  neuro-linguistic  systems/organisms. 

19.  Non-elementalism  applied  to  human  organisms-as-a-whole-in-an- 
environment.  Some  of  Korzybski’s  predecessors  in  the  study  of  language  and 
human  error  may  have  pointed  to  what  he  labeled  ‘elementalism  (verbally 
splitting  what  cannot  be  split  empirically)  as  a  linguistically-embedded  human 
habit,  but  none  I  know  of  had  so  thoroughly  built  against  it  and  recommended 
replacing  it  with  habitual  non-elementalism.  Korzybski  s  practical  insistence 
that  adopting  non-elementalistic  procedures  and  terms  would  benefit  the 
humans  (including  scientists)  who  adopt  them  is  original  and,  for  him,  urgent. 

20.  Extensions  of  logics  (plural)  as  subsets  of  non-aristotelian 
evaluating,  including  the  limited  usefulness  (but  usefulness )  of  aristotelian 
logic.7 

21.  Epistemology  as  centered  in  neuro-linguistic ,  neuro-semantic 
issues.  Korzybski  built  squarely  on  the  neuroscience  of  his  day  and  affirmed 
the  fundamental  importance  of  epistemology  (the  study  of  how  we  know  what 
we  say  we  know)  as  the  sine  qua  non  for  any  sound  system  upon  which  to 
organize  our  interactions  with  our  children,  students,  friends,  lovers,  bosses, 
trees,  animals,  government  —  the  ‘universe’.  Becoming  conscious  of 
abstracting  constitutes  applied  epistemology:  general  semantics. 

22.  The  recognition  of  and formulation  of  extensional  and  intensional 
orientations  as  orientations.  Here  we  see  Korzybski  at  his  most  diagnostic 
and  prognostic.  Realizing  that  a  person’s  epistemological-evaluational  style , 
a  person’s  habitual  way  with  evaluating  determines  how  life  will  go,  he 
recommends  adoption  of  an  extensional  orientation,  with  its  emphasis  on 
4 facts’.  If  a  person  is  over-committed  to  verbal  constructs,  definitions, 
formulae,  'conventional  wisdom*,  etc.,  that  person  may  be  so  trapped  in  those 

PREFACE  TO  THE  FIFTH  EDITION 

a  priori  decisions  as  to  be  unable  to  appropriately  respond  to  new  data  from 
the  non-verbal,  not-yet-anticipated  world.  By  definition,  the  extensionally 
oriented  person,  while  remaining  as  articulate  as  any  of  her/his  neighbors,  is 
habitually  open  to  new  data,  is  habitually  able  to  say,  “I  don’t  know;  let’s 
see.”  As  an  aid  toward  this  more  healthy  orientation,  Korzybski  formulated  the 
“extensional  devices”  explained  in  his  Introduction  to  the  Second  Edition 
herein. 

23.  Neuro-linguistic  and  neuro-semantic  factors  applied  to 
psychotherapeutic  procedures  and  to  the  prevention  of  psycho-logical 
problems. 

24.  Mathematics.  Korzybski ’s  use  of  mathematical  formulations  and 
point  of  view  qualifies  as  one  of  his  most  daring  contributions. 

25.  Science  and  mathematics  as  human  behaviors.  Perhaps  showing 
some  korzybskian  influence  (much  of  it  has  come  to  be  ‘in  the  air’),  writers  on 
science  and  mathematics  are  increasingly  addressing  the  human  being  who 
does  science  and/or  mathematics.  But  Korzybski  seems  the  first,  to  the  degree 
that  he  did,  to  point  to  understanding  these  human  behaviors  as  a  necessary 
prerequisite  or  accompaniment  to  fully  understanding  science  and  mathematics 
as  such.  As  Gaston  Bachelard  observed. 

The  psychological  and  even  physiological  conditions  of  a 
non-Aristotelian  logic  have  been  resolutely  faced  in  the 
great  work  of  Count  Alfred  Korzybski,  Science  and 
Sanity .8 

26.  Limitations  of  subject-predicate  languages  (modes  of 
representation)  when  employed  without  consciousness  of  abstracting. 
Korzybski  addresses  this  central  formulation  fully  in  his  book. 

27 .  Insistence  on  relative  ‘ invariance  under  transformation  ’ .  Korzybski 
was  concerned  that  invariance  of  relations  not  be  confused  with  ‘invariance’ 
of  processes. 

28.  General  uncertainty  (all  statements  merely  probable  in  varying 
degrees)  as  an  inevitable  derivative  of  korzybskian  abstracting ,  non-identity , 
etc.  Korzybski,  drawing  partly  on  his  Polish  milieu,  anticipated  and  exceeded 
Heisenberg’s  mid-nineteen-twenties  formulation  of  (restricted)  uncertainty. 

29.  The  mechanism/machine-ism  distinction .  This  may  seem  too  simple 
to  list  as  an  ‘original’  or  even  major  point.  Yet  it  is  vital,  indicating  as  it  does 
Korzyb ski’s  strong  commitment  to  finding  out  how  something  works  as 
opposed  to  vague,  ‘spiritual’  explanations. 

Korzybski  and  some  of  his  Institute  successors  who  have  worked  to 
present  korzybskian  general  semantics  have  sometimes  met  this  resistance: 
"I’m  not  a  machine!”  People  trained  in  the  myriad  ‘intellectual’,  ‘mystical’  in 
varying  degrees  systems/traditions  they  bring  to  seminars  often  react  as  if  they 
fear  to  lose  their  ‘humanity’  by  being  asked  to  consider  the  mechanisms  which 

PREFACE  TO  THE  FIFTH  EDITION 

underpin  or  constitute  their  functioning.  Korzybski  took  pains  to  explain  that 
mechanism  should  not  be  confused  with  ‘machine-ism’.  His  concern  for 
investigations  at  this  level  was  bracing  and  central  to  his  approach. 

30.  ‘Infinite ’-valued  evaluating  and  semantic  methods  of  science  ( not 
‘content’  of  science  or  non-professional  behavior  of  scientists  at  a  given  date) 
as  methods  for  sanity.  Thus  the  title  of  his  book.  General  semanticists  are 
obliged  to  evaluate ,  to  analyze,  criticize  and  sometimes  reject  the  products  of 
‘science’  at  a  given  date.  The  approach  is  scientific,  not  scientistic. 

31.  Predictability  as  the  primary  measure  of  the  value  of  an 
epistemological formulation .  Korzybski  was  by  no  means  an  ‘anti-aesthete’. 
He  was  deeply  sensitive  to  (and  knowledgeable  about)  music,  married  a 
portrait  painter,  read  literature  (Conrad  was  a  favorite)  including  poetry,  and 
even  liked  to  relax  with  a  good  detective  story.  But  he  insisted  that,  for  life 
issues,  beauty  or  cleverness  or  mere  consistency  (logical  coherence,  etc.)  were 
not  enough. 

Korzybski  offered  his  non-aristotelian  system  with  general  semantics  as 
its  modus  operandi  as  an  on-going  human  acquisition,  negentropic,  ordering 
and  self-correcting  through  and  through,  since  it  provides,  self-reflexively,  for 
its  own  reformulation,  and  assigns  its  users  responsibility  to  do  so  should  the 
need  arise. 

The  above  considerations  have  led  me  to  the  conclusion  that  Korzybski 
was  not  only  a  bold  innovator,  but  also  a  brilliant  synthesizer  of  available  data 
into  a  coherent  system.  This  system,  when  internalized  and  applied,  can  create 
a  saner  and  more  peaceful  world,  justifying  the  title  of  this  book.  Science  and 
Sanity. 

Robert  P.  Pula 

September  1993 

END  NOTES 

1 .  Karol,  Janicki,  Toward  Non-Essentialist  Sociolinguistics.  Berlin  and  New 

York:  Mouton  de  Gruyter,  1990. 

2.  Bibliographic  Note:  sample  of  books  since  1970. 

J.  Samuel  Bois,  Breeds  of  Men:  Toward  the  Adulthood  of  Humankind, 
Harper  and  Row,  1970 

Lee  Thayer,  ed..  Communication:  General  Semantics  Perspectives , 
Spartan/Macmillan,  1970  (critique) 

William  Youngren,  Semantics,  Linguistics,  and  Criticism ,  Random 
House,  1972  (critique) 

Kenneth  G.  Johnson,  ed.,  Research  Designs  in  General  Semantics , 
Gordon  and  Breach,  1974 

PREFACE  TO  THE  FIFTH  EDITION 

xxi 

Donald  E.  Washburn  and  Dennis  R.  Smith,  eds..  Coping  With  Increasing 
Complexity :  Implications  of  General  Semantics  and  General 
Systems  Theory ,  Gordon  and  Breach,  1 974 
Kenneth  G.  Johnson,  Lineamenti  di  Semantica  Generate,  Roma:  Editore 
Armando  Armando,  1978 

Ross  Evans  Paulson,  Language ,  Science ,  and  Action :  Korzybski's 
General  Semantics  — A  Study  in  Comparative  Intellectual  History , 
Greenwood  Press,  1 983  (critique) 

Harold  L.  Drake,  General  Semantics  Views ,  Millersville,  PA:  Millersville 
State  College,  1 983 

Mary  Morain,  ed.,  Bridging  Worlds  Through  General  Semantics , 
International  Society  for  General  Semantics,  1 984;  and  Enriching 
Professional  Skills  Through  General  Semantics ,  International 
Society  for  General  Semantics,  1 986 
Gerard  I.  Nierenberg,  Workable  Ethics ,  Nierenberg  and  Zeif,  1 987 
Sanford  I.  Berman,  ed.,  Logic  and  General  Semantics :  Writings  of  Oliver 
Reiser  and  Others ,  International  Society  for  General  Semantics, 
1989 

Karol  Jamcki,  Toward Non-Essentialist  Sociolinguistics,  Berlin:  Mouton 
de  Gruyter,  1990 

Kenneth  G.  Johnson,  ed..  Thinking  Creatically :  A  Systematic , 
Interdisciplinary  Approach  to  Creative-Critical  Thinking , 
“Foreword”  by  Steve  Allen,  Institute  of  General  Semantics,  1991 
D.  David  Bourland,  Jr.  and  Paul  Dennithome  Johnston,  eds..  To  Be  or 
Not:  An  E-Prime  Anthology ,  International  Society  for  General 
Semantics,  1991 

3.  Korzybski,  Alfred,  Collected  Writings:  1920-1950.  Collected  and  arranged 

by  M.  Kendig.  Final  editing  and  preparation  for  printing  by  Charlotte 
Schuchardt  Read,  with  the  assistance  of  Robert  Pula.  Englewood,  NJ: 
Institute  of  General  Semantics,  1 990. 

4.  The  following  have  delivered  lectures  in  the  series  (listed  chronologically): 

William  Vogt,  M.  F.  Ashley  Montagu,  F.  J.  Roethlisberger,  F.  S.  C. 
Northrop,  Buckminster  Fuller,  Clyde  Kluckhohn,  Abraham  Maslow, 
Russell  Meyers  (twice),  Warren  S.  McCulloch,  Robert  R.  Blake,  Harold 
G.  Cassidy,  Henri  Laborit,  Joost  A.  M.  Meerloo,  Henry  Lee  Smith,  Jr., 
Alvin  M.  Weinberg,  Jacob  Bronowski,  Alastair  M.  Taylor,  Lancelot  Law 
White,  Gregory  Bateson,  Heniy  Margenau,  George  Steiner,  Harley  C. 
Shands,  Roger  W.  Wescott,  Ben  Bova,  Elwood  Murray,  Don  Fabun, 
Barbara  Morgan,  Thomas  Sebeok,  Robert  R.  Blake  and  Jane  Srygley 
Mouton,  Allen  Walker  Read,  Karl  H.  Pribram,  George  F.  F.  Lombard, 
Richard  W.  Paul,  Jerome  Bruner,  William  V.  I  laney,  Warren  M.  Robbins, 
Albert  Ellis,  Steve  Allen,  and  William  Lutz.  The  following  have 

XXII 

PREFACE  TO  THE  FIFTH  EDITION 

participated  in  colloquia  in  the  series:  William  J.  Fry,  James  A.  Van  Allen, 
Charles  M.  Pomerat,  Jesse  H.  Shera,  Allen  Kent,  Paul  Ptacek,  J.  Samuel 
Bois,  Elton  S.  Carter,  Walter  Probert,  Kenneth  G.  Johnson  and  Neil 
Postman. 

5.  For  Korzybski  as  a  system-builder,  see  Dr.  Stuart  A.  Mayper,  “The  Place  of 

Aristotelian  Logic  in  Non-Aristotelian  Evaluating:  Einstein,  Korzybski 
and  Popper,”  General  Semantics  Bulletin  No.  47,  1980,  pp.  106-110. 
For  discussions  of  the  continuing  appropriateness  of  ‘ Korzybski’ s 
science’,  see  Stuart  A.  Mayper,  “Korzybski’ s  Science  and  Today’s 
Science,”  General  Semantics  Bulletin,  No.  51,1 984,  pp.  6 1  -67  ;  Barbara 
E.  Wright,  “The  Heredity-Environment  Continuum:  Holistic  Approaches 
at  ‘One  Point  in  Time’  and  ‘All  Time’,”  General  Semantics  Bulletin  No. 
52,  1985,  pp.  36-50;  Russell  Meyers,  MD,  “The  Potentials  of  Neuro- 
Semantics  for  Modem  Neuropsychology”  (The  1 985  Alfred  Korzybski 
Memorial  Lecture),  General  Semantics  Bulletin,  No.  54,  1989,  pp.  13-59, 
and  Jeffrey  A.  Mordkowitz,  “Korzybski,  Colloids  and  Molecular  Biology: 
A  View  from  1985,”  General  Semantics  Bulletin ,  No.  55,  1990,  pp.  86- 
89.  For  a  detailed  updating  in  the  neurosciences  by  a  non-general- 
semanticist  which  shows  Korzybski ’s  1933  formulations  as  consistent 
with  1 993  formulations,  see  “Part  I”  of  Patricia  Smith  Churchland’s 
Neurophilosophy.  Toward  a  Unified  Science  of  the  Mind/Brain,  MIT 
Press,  1986,  pp.  14-235.) 

6.  Korzybski,  Alfred,  Manhood  of  Humanity. 

7.  See  Dr.  Mayper ’s  paper:  “The  Place  of  Aristotelian  Logic  in  Non- 
Aristotelian  Evaluating...,”  listed  above,  and  his  earlier  “Non-Aristotelian 
Foundations:  Solid  or  Fluid?”  ETC.:  A  Review  of  General  Semantics,  Vol. 
XVIII,  No.  4,  Feb.,  1962,  pp.  427-443. 

8.  Bachelard,  Gaston,  The  Philosophy  of  No.  Translated  from  the  French  by 

G.  C.  Waterson.  New  York:  Orion  Press,  1968,  p.  108. 

PREFACE  TO  THE  FOURTH  EDITION  1958 

A  quarter  of  a  century  has  now  elapsed  since  the  first  edition  of 
Alfred  Korzybski’s  principal  work,  Science  and  Sanity ,  appeared.  The 
second  edition  was  published  in  1941  and  the  third  was  prepared  in  1948, 
two  years  before  the  author’s  death.  Although  the  second  and  third  edi¬ 
tions  provided  clarification  and  amplification  of  certain  aspects  of  the 
non-aristotelian  orientation  originally  proposed  by  the  author,  and  while 
they  cited  important  new  data  illustrating  the  rewards  accruing  to  cer¬ 
tain  fields  of  human  endeavor  (e.g.,  psychotherapy)  in  consequence  of 
the  utilization  of  the  orientations  earnestly  espoused  by  him,  they  repre¬ 
sented  no  important  departures  from  the  first  edition  in  respect  of  basic 
principles  at  theoretic  and  pragmatic  levels.  Nor,  in  serious  retrospec¬ 
tion,  did  any  such  appear  to  have  been  indicated. 

Considering  that  the  author  himself,  in  applying  the  formulation  of 
‘the  self -reflexive  map’  to  his  own  work,  asserted  on  more  than  one  occa¬ 
sion  that  perceptible  revisions  of  his  formulations  must  be  anticipated 
and  that  such  would  very  likely  prove  fairly  compelling  within  a  period 
estimated  at  twenty-five  years,  it  comes  as  something  of  a  surprise  that 
as  the  1958  reprinting  of  Science  and  Sanity  goes  to  press  no  major  al¬ 
terations  seem  as  yet  to  be  required.  In  this  modern  world  of  rapid 
change — in  which  Man  has  acquired  information  regarding  the  intra-  and 
extraorganic  realms  of  his  Universe  at  an  unprecedented  exponential 
rate ;  in  which  the  Atomic  Age  has  come  into  actual  being ;  in  which  con¬ 
quests  of  space  that  were  but  fanciful  dreams  only  yesteryear  have  be¬ 
come  astonishing  realities;  in  which  new  specialties,  bridging  freely 
across  the  gaps  of  the  unknown  between  conventional  scientific  disci¬ 
plines,  have  sprung  into  life  and  become  full-fledged  within  a  matter  of 
months;  and  in  which  far-seeing  men  of  good  will  have  organized  their 
endeavors  to  unify  the  sciences,  arts  and  humanitarian  pursuits-at-large 
and  appear  as  never  before  determined  (despite  recalcitrant  and  reac¬ 
tionary  private  interests)  to  implement  a  One  World  such  as  might  befit 
the  dignity  of  humanity  in  its  manhood — the  continuing  substantiality  of 
Korzybski’s  1933  formulations  must  be  regarded  as  a  tribute  to  his  vision 
and  integrative  genius.  Now  that  we  are  able  to  stand  a  little  apart  from 
historical  developments  and  view  his  life’s  work  in  some  perspective,  it 
can  hardly  be  doubted  that  he  grasped,  as  few  had  done  before  him  and 
certainly  none  had  so  systematically  and  comprehensively  treated,  the 
abiding  significance  of  linguistic  habits  and  the  communicative  processes- 

xxiii 

XXIV 

PREFACE  TO  THE  FOURTH  EDITION 

in-general  to  all  of  Man’s  thinking-and-doing,  from  his  loftiest  metaphysi¬ 
cal,  epistemological  and  mathematical  efforts  to  the  most  casual,  trivial 
and  mundane  performances  of  his  everyday  living. 

Like  a  skillful  diagnostician,  Korzybski  penetrated  deeply  into  the 
etiologic  and  pathologic  substrates  of  what  he  perceived  to  be  the  more 
serious  deterrents  to  current  human  endeavors  and  there  succeeded  in 
identifying  certain  grave  strictures  imposed  upon  Man’s  creative  poten¬ 
tials  and  problem-solving  proclivities  by  one  of  the  least  suspected  of  all 
possible  agencies,  namely,  the  academically-revered  and  ubiquitously- 
exercised  aristotelian  formulations  of  logic.  This  diagnostic  act  was,  of 
course,  the  analogical  equivalent  of  finding  a  positive  Wasserman  reac¬ 
tion  in  the  blood  serum  of  some  long  honored  and  beloved  patriarch.  Its 
disclosure  promised  and,  in  point  of  fact,  proved  to  be  no  more  popular. 
In  this  sense,  Korzybski’s  position  was  wholly  comparable  to  that  of 
Copernicus  and  Galileo,  who  had  been  impelled  by  their  private  inquiries 
during  the  early  Renaissance  to  challenge  the  popular  ptolemaic  cos¬ 
mology  and  aristotelian  mechanics  of  their  day.  It  required  an  uncom¬ 
mon  personal  integrity,  an  unusual  brand  of  courage  and  a  plenum  of 
physical  energy  to  spell  out  the  overt  and  covert  effects  produced  by 
these  widely-pervading,  pathologic  neuro-semantic  processes  in  the  com¬ 
munity  of  humans.  Korzybski  was,  as  we  now  know,  quite  up  to  this 
formidable  task. 

