To  have  made  the  diagnosis  constituted-in  itself  an  intellectual  triumph. 
But  Korzybski  did  more  than  this.  His  analyses  enabled  him  to  write 
effective  prescriptions  for  both  the  prevention  and  treatment  of  the  dis¬ 
orders  he  encountered  round  about  and  within  the  community  of  humans. 
These  disorders,  including  cultural  and  institutional  as  well  as  personal 
misevaluations  and  delusions,  he  regarded  as  essentially  those  of  inept 
semantic  reactions.  They  were  for  him  the  unmistakable  marks  of  un¬ 
sanity,  however  ‘normal’  they  might  appear  to  be  in  a  statistical  sense. 

The  side-effects  of  Korzybski’s  formulations  were  hardly  less  sig¬ 
nificant  than  the  prophylactic  and  therapeutic  devices  engendered  by 
them.  Among  other  things,  they  cast  much  needed  light  on  the  psychol¬ 
ogy  of  perception,  child  psychology,  education,  the  cultural  theories  of 
modern  anthropology,  scientific  method  and  operational  ethics.  As  of 
the  time  of  writing  this  introduction,  a  revolution  in  neurology,  psy¬ 
chology,  psychiatry  and  related  disciplines,  comparable  in  every  way  to 
that  which  broke  upon  the  discipline  of  physics  in  the  early  years  of  the 
present  century,  appears  both  imminent  and  inevitable.  The  stirrings  to¬ 
ward  such  appear  to  have  been  derived  largely  from  a  general  semantic 
orientation,  which  lias  sufficiently  influenced  advanced  investigators  in 

PREFACE  TO  THE  FOURTH  EDITION 

XXV 

these  areas  to  make  its  impact  apparent  in  their  writings  and  in  the  char¬ 
acter  of  their  researches.  The  old  dichotomies  which  have  been  for,  lo ! 
these  many  years  the  bed-rock  terms  of  intellectual  discourse,  to  which 
others  referred  and  from  which  they  derived  their  meanings — e.g.,  mental 
and  physical,  conscious  and  unconscious,  thought  and  speech,  structure 
and  function,  intellect  and  emotion,  heredity  and  environment,  organic 
and  functional,  reality  and  unreality,  male  and  female,  autonomic  and 
cerebrospinal,  pyramidal  and  extrapyramidal,  motor  and  sensory,  idio¬ 
pathic  and  symptomatic,  voluntary  and  involuntary,  etc. — have  exhibited 
visible  signs  of  disintegration.  New  and  operationally  verifiable  formu¬ 
lations  are  beginning  to  emerge  in  their  place  and  field  theory,  commen-  *  ^  page  xii 
surate  wth  that  now  being  developed  in  the  realm  of  nuclear  physics,  be¬ 
gins  to  accommodate  data  heretofore  considered  unconnected.  Nowhere 
is  it  more  apparent  than  in  neurology,  psychology  and  closely  related 
disciplines  that  ‘the  word  is  not  the  thing.’ 

It  would  be  a  mistake,  of  course,  for  the  reader  to  suppose  that, 
because  no  major  alterations  in  or  additions  to  Korzybski’s  methodologic 
and  applied  formulations  have  appeared  necessary  up  to  the  present,  his 
students  and  others  who  find  his  views  empathetic  with  their  own  em¬ 
brace  the  inordinate  faith  that  such  will  not  eventually  be  required. 

Quite  to  the  contrary.  They  are  persuaded  that  modifications,  major  as 
well  as  minor,  must  come  as  newly  acquired  information  necessitates ; 
and  they  have  deliberately  provided  for  them.  From  its  very  inception, 
the  discipline  of  general  semantics  has  been  such  as  to  attract  persons 
possessing  high  intellectual  integrity,  independence  from  orthodox  com¬ 
mitments,  and  agnostic,  disinterested  and  critical  inclinations.  On  the 
whole,  they  have  been  persons  little  impressed  with  intellectual  authority 
immanent  within  any  individual  or  body  of  individuals.  For  them,  au¬ 
thority  reposes  not  in  any  omniscient  or  omnipresent  messiah,  but  solely 
in  the  dependability  of  the  predictive  content  of  propositions  made  with 
reference  to  the  non-verbal  happenings  in  this  universe.  They  apply 
this  basic  rubric  as  readily  to  korzybskian  doctrine  as  to  all  other  ab¬ 
stract  formulations  and  theories  and,  like  good  scientists,  they  are  pre¬ 
pared  to  cast  them  off  precisely  as  soon  as  eventualities  reveal  them  to  be 
incompetent,  i.e.,  lacking  in  reliable  predictive  content.  This  circum¬ 
stance  in  itself  should  abrogate  once  and  for  all  the  feckless  charges 
sometimes  made  by  ill-informed  critics  that  general  semantics  is  but  one 
more  of  a  long  succession  of  cults,  having  its  divine  master,  its  disciples, 
a  bible,  its  own  mumbo-jumbo  and  ceremonial  .rites.  For,  if  there  is  any 
one  denominator  that  can  be  regarded  as  common  to  all  such  cults,  it  is 
the  self-sealing  character  of  their  dogmas,  which  a  priori  must  stand  as 

XXVI 

PREFACE  TO  THE  FOURTH  EDITION 

eternal  verities,  regardless  of  the  advent  of  incompatible  experiences.  In 
antithetic  contrast,  general  semanticists  are  fully  sensible  of  the  man- 
fashioned  origin  of  general  semantics  and  have  taken  pains  to  keep  its 
structure  open-ended.  Far  from  being  inclined  to  repel  changes  that 
appear  to  menace  the  make-up  of  general  semantics,  they  actively  antici¬ 
pate  them  and  are  prepared  to  foster  those  that  seem  to  promise  better 
predictions,  better  survival  and  better  adaptation  to  the  vicissitudes  of 
this  earthly  habitat. 

One  cannot  help  but  be  aware,  in  1958,  that  there  is  far  less  suspicion 
and  misgiving  among  intellectuals  concerning  general  semantics  and  gen¬ 
eral  semanticists  than  prevailed  ten  and  twenty  years  ago.  Indeed,  a 
certain  receptivity  is  noticeable.  The  term  ‘semantics'  itself  is  now  fre¬ 
quently  heard  on  the  radio,  TV  and  the  public  speaking  platform  and  it 
appears  almost  as  frequently  in  the  public  print.  It  has  even  found  a 
recent  ‘spot'  in  a  Hollywood  movie  and  it  gives  some  promise  of  becom¬ 
ing  an  integral  part  of  our  household  jargon.  This  in  no  sense  means 
that  all  such  users  of  the  term  have  familiarized  themselves  with  the 
restricted  meaning  of  the  term  ‘semantics,’  much  less  that  they  have  inter¬ 
nalized  the  evaluative  implications  and  guiding  principles  of  action  sub¬ 
sumed  under  general  semantics.  A  comparable  circumstance  obtains,  of 
course,  in  the  layman’s  use  of  other  terms,  such  as  ‘electronics.’ 

But  more  palpable  gains  than  these  can  be  counted.  We  have  alluded 
to  some  of  these  as  they  bear  on  psychology,  anthropology  and  the  medical 
sciences.  The  years  since  the  close  of  World  War  II  have  similarly 
witnessed  the  access  of  general  semantics  not  only  to  academic  curricula 
of  the  primary,  secondary  and  collegiate  levels  of  the  North  and  South 
American  continents,  parts  of  Western  Europe,  Britain,  Australia  and 
Japan,  but  to  the  busy  realms  of  commerce,  industry  and  transportation : 
of  military  organization  and  civil  administration ;  of  law,  engineering,  soci- 
ology,  economics  and  religion.  These  constitute  no  negligible  extensions 
of  general  semantics  into  the  world  of  ‘practical’  affairs.  Large  business 
enterprises,  looking  toward  the  improvement  of  intra-  and  extramural 
relations,  more  satisfying  resolutions  of  the  complicated  problems  that 
arise  between  labor  and  management,  and  the  enhancement  of  service  to 
their  immediate  constituents  and  fellow  men  in  general  have  found  it 
rewarding,  in  many  instances,  to  reorganize  their  entire  structure  so  as  to 
assure  the  incorporation  of  general  semantic  formulations.  Several 
organizations  now  in  existence  make  it  their  sole  business  to  advise  and 
provide  help  in  the  implementation  of  such  changes.  The  core  of  their 
prescriptions  consists  in  the  appropriate  application  of  general  semantics. 
It  is  becoming  a  routine  for  the  high  and  intermediate  level  executives  of 

PREFACE  TO  THE  FOURTH  EDITION  xxvii 

certain  industries,  advertising  agencies,  banking  establishments  and  the 
like  to  retreat  for  several  days  at  a  time  while  they  receive  intensive  in¬ 
struction  and  participate  in  seminar-workshops  designed  to  indoctrinate 
them  with  the  principles  of  general  semantics.  Comparable  courses  of 
instruction  have  been  provided  within  recent  years  for  the  officers  of 
the  U.S.  Air  Academy,  the  traffic  officers  of  the  Chicago  Police  Depart¬ 
ment  and  the  sales  forces  of  several  large  pharmaceutical  and  biochemical 
houses.  These  innovations  in  business  procedure  entail,  of  course, 
enormous  outlays  of  time,  energy  and  money.  They  must  in  time  pay 
perceptible  dividends  or  suffer  abandonment.  That  they  are  steadily 
on  the  increase  appears  to  offer  eloquent  testimony  of  their  effectiveness. 

Other  evidences  of  the  growth  and  widening  sphere  of  influence  can 
be  pointed  to.  Membership  in  the  two  major  organizations  concerned 
with  the  development,  teaching  and  utilization  of  general  semantics, 
namely,  the  Institute  of  General  Semantics  located  at  Lakeville,  Connect¬ 
icut  and  the  International  Society  for  General  Semantics,  with  its  central 
office  at  Chicago,  has  slowly  but  steadily  increased  over  the  years  and, 
gratifyingly,  has  generally  avoided  the  ‘lunatic  fringe'  that  appears  ever 
ready  to  attach  itself  to  convenient  nuclei.  The  two  current  publications 
of  these  organizations,  the  General  Semantics  Bulletin  and  ETC.:  A 
Review  of  General  Semantics ,  continue  to  provide  cogent  original  articles 
and  synopses  of  progress  in  the  field.  Their  subscription  lists  now  in¬ 
clude  libraries  scattered  over  the  entire  globe. 

In  1949,  the  Third  American  Congress  on  General  Semantics  was 
held  at  the  University  of  Denver.  This  turned  out  to  be  the  last  occa¬ 
sion  at  which  Alfred  Korzybski  made  a  public  appearance.  During 
these  stimulating  sessions  he  had  the  satisfaction  of  hearing  numerous 
reports  of  investigations  by  his  former  students  and  others  who  had 
profited  roundly  from  their  familiarity  with  the  non-aristotelian  formu¬ 
lations.  Many  of  these  papers,  representing  a  wide  and  eclectic  coverage 
of  human  interests,  were  subsequently  published  in  the  General  Seman¬ 
tics  Bulletin.  Two  additional  conferences  of  national  scope  have  been 
held  in  the  interim — one  in  Chicago  in  1951  and  another  in  St.  Louis  in 
1954.  Another  conference  of  international  scope  is  planned  for  August, 
1958.  Meanwhile,  numerous  sectional  conferences  have  been  held  in 
various  cities  each  year  and  the  number  of  courses  sought  and  offered  in 
general  semantics  is  definitely  on  the  increase. 

All  in  all,  then,  a  healthy  state  of  affairs  appears  to  prevail  in  respect 
of  general  semantics.  The  impact  of  Korzybski's  work  on  Western  cul¬ 
ture  is  now  unmistakable  and  there  is  every  reason  to  be  optimistic  that 
his  precepts  will  be  read  by  ever-widening  circles  of  serious  students 

XXV111 

PREFACE  TO  THE  FOURTH  EDITION 

and  that  the  latter,  in  their  turn,  must  deeply  influence  generations  of 
students  yet  to  come.  It  remains  to  be  seen  what  effects  the  regular  im¬ 
plementation  of  these  precepts  will  bring  to  mankind.  Many  of  us  are 
convinced  that  they  will  prove  highly  salutary. 

Russell  Meyers,  M.D. 

Division  of  Neurosurgery 
College  of  Medicine 
State  University  of  Iowa 
Iowa  City,  Iowa 
October,  1957 

BIBLIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE,  1958 

In  the  second  edition  of  this  book,  published  in  1941,  a  short  list  of  re¬ 
prints  and  monographs  available  at  the  Institute  of  General  Semantics  was 
included — almost  the  only  literature  then  on  general  semantics  since  Science 
and  Sanity  first  appeared.  (See  page  lxxxvi  in  this  volume.)  Since  that 
date  the  number  of  books,  papers,  and  reviews  has  grown  profusely,  and  no 
attempt  is  made  here  to  record  them  fully. 

The  principal  articles  in  the  field  have  appeared  in  Papers  From  the 
Second  American  Congress  on  General  Semantics ,  M.  Kendig,  Editor 
(1943),  in  the  General  Semantics  Bulletin  and  other  materials  published  by 
the  Institute  for  its  Members,  and  in  ETC.:  A  Review  of  General  Semantics , 
the  official  organ  of  the  International  Society  for  General  Semantics. 

The  General  Semantics  Bulletin ,  founded  and  edited  by  M.  Kendig,  is  the 
official  journal  of  the  Institute  of  General  Semantics,  published  since  1949 
‘for  information  and  inter-communication  among  workers  in  the  non-aris- 
totelian  discipline  formulated  by  Alfred  Korzybski.’  It  contains  papers  on 
many  aspects  of  general  semantics,  theoretical  and  practical,  as  well  as  re¬ 
ports,  discussions,  news,  book  comments,  etc.  Numbers  One  &  Two  through 
Eighteen  &  Nineteen  have  been  issued  to  date. 

Some  of  the  articles  distributed  by  the  Institute,  1947-1949,  previous  to 
the  founding  of  the  Bulletin  are  listed  below : 

Korzybski,  Alfred,  General  Semantics:  An  Introduction  to  Non-aristote- 
lian  Systems,  1947. 

-  ‘Author’s  Note’  introducing  Selections  from  Science  and  Sanity, 

1948. 

- Understanding  of  Human  Potentialities,  Key  to  Dealing  with  Soviet 

Union,  1948.  Summary  of  an  address,  and  introduction  by  Stuart  Chase. 

-  General  Semantics :  Toward  a  New  General  System  of  Evaluation 

and  Predictability  in  Solving  Human  Problems.  American  People's 
Encyclopedia,  1949  edition. 

English,  Earl,  A  General  Semantics  Course  in  4he  School  of  Journalism, 
University  of  Missouri,  1949. 

Kelley,  Douglas  M.,  The  Use  of  General  Semantics  and  Korzybskian 
Principles  as  an  Extensional  Method  of  Group  Psychotherapy  in 
Traumatic  Neuroses.  The  Journal  of  Nervous  and  Mental  Disease, 
Vol.  114,  No.  3,  1951. 

La  Brant,  Lou,  A  Genetic  Approach  to  Language,  1951. 

Loomis,  William  F.,  A  Non-aristotelian  Presentation  of  Embryology, 
Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology,  1949. 

Newton,  Norman  T.,  A  Non-aristotelian  Approach  to  Design.  Introduc¬ 
tory  lectures  in  a  course,  School  of  Architecture,  Harvard  University, 
1948. 

Kead,  Allen  Walker,  An  Account  of  the  Word  ‘Semantics’.  WORD, 
August  1948. 

Skynner,  Robin,  Choice  and  Determinism.  Distributed  to  Institute  Mem¬ 
bers  1948;  published  in  Rationalist  Annual  (England),  1949. 

XXIX 

XXX 

BIBLIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE 

Also  bv  Korzybski  and  others,  not  included  elsewhere : 

Pollock,  Thomas  C.,  A  Theory  of  Meaning  Analyzed:  Critique  of  I.  A. 
Richards'  Theory  of  Language,  and  Spaulding,  J.  Gordon,  Elemental- 
ism  :  The  Effect  of  an  Implicit  Postulate  of  Identity  on  I.  A.  Richards' 
Theory  of  Poetic  Value.  With  a  supplementary  paper  by  Allen 
Walker  Read,  The  Lexicographer  and  General  Semantics.  Foreword 
by  Alfred  Korzybski  and  M.  Kendig.  General  Semantics  Monographs 
No.  Ill,  1942. 

Korzybski,  Alfred,  The  Role  of  Language  in  the  Perceptual  Processes, 
Chapter  7  in  Perception:  An  Approach  to  Personality  Ed.  by  Robert  R. 
Blake  and  Glenn  V.  Ramsey,  Ronald  Press,  1951. 

PREFACE  TO  THE  THIRD  EDITION  1948 

If  thinkers  will  only  be  persuaded  to  lay  aside  their  prejudices  and  apply 
themselves  to  studying  the  evidences  ...  I  shall  be  fully  content  to  await 
the  final  decision.  (402)  Charges  S.  Peirce 

For  the  mass  of  mankind  ...  if  it  is  their  highest  impulse  to  be  intellec¬ 
tual  slaves,  then  slaves  they  ought  to  remain.  (402)  Charles  S.  Peirce 

In  spite  of  the  fact  that  since  1933  a  great  many  new  discoveries  in 
sciences  have  been  made,  to  be  analysed  in  a  separate  publication,  the 
fundamental  methodological  issues  which  led  even  to  the  release  of 
nuclear  energy  remain  unaltered,  and  so  this  third  edition  requires  no 
revision  of  the  text. 

Soon  after  the  publication  of  the  second  edition  in  1941,  the  Second 
American  Congress  on  General  Semantics  was  held  at  the  University 
of  Denver.  The  papers  presented  there  have  been  compiled  and  edited 
by  M.  Kendig1  and  show  applications  in  a  wide  variety  of  fields.  A  third 
congress,  international  in  scope,  is  being  planned  for  1949.  Students 
of  our  work  who  have  made  applications  in  their  fields  of  interest  are 
invited  to  submit  papers  to  the  Institute.  The  rapid  spread  of  interest, 
by  now  on  all  continents,  has  indicated  the  need  for  the  new  methods 
set  forth  here,  and  many  study  groups  have  been  formed  here  and  abroad. 

As  the  center  for  training  in  these  non-aristotelian  methods,  the 
Institute  of  General  Semantics  was  incorporated  in  Chicago  in  1938. 
In  the  summer  of  1946  the  Institute  moved  to  Lakeville,  Connecticut, 
where  its  original  program  is  being  carried  on. 

I  must  stress  that  I  give  no  panaceas,  but  experience  shows  that  when 
the  methods  of  general  semantics  are  applied ,  the  results  are  usually 
beneficial,  whether  in  law,  medicine,  business,  etc.,  education  on  all  levels, 
or  personal  inter-relationships,  be  they  in  family,  national,  or  international 
fields.  If  they  are  not  applied,  but  merely  talked  about,  no  results  can  be 
expected.  Perhaps  the  most  telling  applications  were  those  on  the  battle¬ 
fields  of  World  War  II,  as  reported  by  members  of  the  armed  forces, 
including  psychiatrists  on  all  fronts,  and  especially  by  Dr.  Douglas  M. 
Kelley ,*  formerly  Lieutenant  Colonel  in  the  Medical  Corps,  who  reports 
in  part  as  follows: 

General  semantics,  as  a  modern  scientific  method,  offers  techniques 
which  are  of  extreme  value  both  in  the  prevention  and  cure  of  such 
f  pathological]  reactive  patterns.  In  my  experience  with  over  seven  thou¬ 
sand  cases  in  the  European  Theater  of  Operations,  these  basic  principles 

*  Chief  Consultant  in  Clinical  Psychology  and  Assistant  Consultant  in  Psychiatry 
to  the  European  Theater  of  Operations;  also  Chief  Psychiatrist  in  charge  of  the 
prisoners  at  Nuremberg.  Author  of  22  Cells  in  Nuremberg ,  Greenberg,  New  York, 
1047. 

XXXI 

xxxii  PREFACE  TO  THE  THIRD  EDITION 

were  daily  employed  as  methods  of  group  psychotherapy  and  as  methods 
of  psychiatric  prevention.  It  is  obvious  that  the  earlier  the  case  is  treated 
the  better  the  prognosis,  and  consequently  hundreds  of  battalion-aid 
surgeons  were  trained  in  principles  of  general  semantics.  These  principles 
were  applied  (as  individual  therapies  and  as  group  therapies)  at  every 
treatment  level  from  the  forward  area  to  the  rear-most  echelon,  in  front¬ 
line  aid  stations,  in  exhaustion  centers  and  in  general  hospitals.  That 
they  were  employed  with  success  is  demonstrated  by  the  fact  that  psychiat¬ 
ric  evacuations  from  the  European  Theater  were  held  to  a  minimum. 

The  origin  of  this  work  was  a  new  functional  definition  of  man ,  as 
formulated  in  1921, 3  based  on  an  analysis  of  uniquely  human  poten¬ 
tialities;  namely,  that  each  generation  may  begin  where  the  former  left 
off.  This  characteristic  I  called  the  ‘time-binding’  capacity.  Here  the 
reactions  of  humans  are  not  split  verbally  and  elementalistically  into  sep¬ 
arate  ‘body’,  ‘mind’,  ‘emotions’,  ‘intellect’,  ‘intuitions’,  etc.,  but  are  treated 
from  an  organism-as-a-whole-in-an-environment  (external  and  internal) 
point  of  view.  This  parallels  the  Einstein-Minkowski  space-time  integra¬ 
tion  in  physics,  and  both  are  necessitated  by  the  modern  evolution  of 
sciences. 

This  new  definition  of  ‘man’,  which  is  neither  zoological  nor  mytho¬ 
logical,  but  functional  and  extensional  (factual),  requires  a  complete 
revision  of  what  we  know  about  humans.  If  we  would  judge  human 
reactions  by  statistical  data  of  psychiatric  patients,  or  many  other  special 
groups,  our  understanding  of  ‘human  nature’  must  be  completely  twisted. 
Both  the  zoological  and  mythological  assumptions  must  limit  human 
society  to  animalistic  biological,  instead  of  time-binding  psycho-biological 
evaluations,  which  involve  socio-cultural  responsibilities  and  thus  may 
mark  a  new  period  of  human  development.* 

In  Manhood  of  Humanity  I  stressed  the  general  human  unique  char¬ 
acteristic  of  time-binding,  which  potentially  applies  to  all  humans,  leav¬ 
ing  no  place  for  race  prejudices.  The  structure  of  science  is  interwoven 
with  Asiatic  influences,  which  through  Africa  and  Spain  spread  over 
the  continent  of  Europe,  where  it  was  further  developed.  Through  the 
discovery  of  factors  of  sanity  in  physico-mathematical  methods,  science 

*  Some  readers  do  not  like  what  I  said  about  Spengler.  It  is  perhaps  because 
they  did  not  read  carefully.  Spengler,  the  mathematician  and  historian,  dealt  with 
the  spasms  of  periods  of  human  evolution  which  paralleled  the  development  of 
science  and  mathematics,  and  his  erudition  must  be  acknowledged.  In  my  honest 
judgment,  he  gave  'a  great  description  of  the  childhood  of  humanity*,  which  he 
himself  did  not  outgrow.  In  1920  Sir  Auckland  Geddes  said,  ‘In  Europe,  we  know 
that  an  age  is  dying/  And  in  1941  I  wrote,  ‘The  terrors  and  horrors  we  are  wit¬ 
nessing  in  the  East  and  the  West  are  the  deathbed  agonies  of  that  passing  epoch.' 
With  Spengler’s  limitations,  no  wonder  the  Nazis  joined  hands  with  him.  Thej 
made  good  death-bedfellows,  demonstrating  empirically  the  ‘Decline  of  the  West*. 

PREFACE  TO  THE  THIRD  EDITION 

XXXlll 

and  sanity  became  linked  in  a  structurally  non-aristotelian  methodology, 
which  became  the  foundation  of  a  science  of  man . 

We  learned  from  anthropology  that  the  degrees  of  socio-cultural 
developments  of  different  civilizations  depend  on  their  capacity  to  pro¬ 
duce  higher  and  higher  abstractions,  which  eventually  culminate  in  a 
general  consciousness  of  abstracting ,  the  very  key  to  further  human 
evolution,  and  the  thesis  of  this  book.  As  Whitehead  justly  said,  ‘A 
civilisation  which  cannot  burst  through  its  current  abstractions  is  doomed 
to  sterility  after  a  very  limited  period  of  progress.’ 

In  mankind’s  cultural  evolution  its  current  abstractions  became 
codified  here  and  there  into  systems,  for  instance  the  aristotelian  system, 
our  main  concern  here.  Such  systematizations  are  important,  for,  as  the 
Talmud  says,  'Teaching  without  a  system  makes  learning  difficult.’  In 
analysing  the  aristotelian  codifications,  I  had  to  deal  with  the  two-valued, 
‘either-or’  type  of  orientations.  I  admit  it  baffled  me  for  many  years, 
that  practically  all  humans,  the  lowest  primitives  not  excluded,  who 
never  heard  of  Greek  philosophers,  have  some  sort  of  'either-or*  type 
of  evaluations.  Then  I  made  the  obvious  'discovery’  that  our  relations 
to  the  world  outside  and  inside  our  skins  often  happen  to  be,  on  the  gross 
level,  two-valued.  For  instance,  we  deal  with  day  or  night,  land  or  water, 
etc.  On  the  living  level  we  have  life  or  death,  our  heart  beats  or  not, 
we  breathe  or  suffocate,  are  hot  or  cold,  etc.  Similar  relations  occur 
on  higher  levels.  Thus,  we  have  induction  or  deduction,  materialism  or 
idealism,  capitalism  or  communism,  democrat  or  republican,  etc.  And 
so  on  endlessly  on  all  levels. 

In  living,  many  issues  are  not  so  sharp,  and  therefore  a  system  which 
posits  the  general  sharpness  of  ‘either-or*,  and  so  objectifies  ‘kind*, 
is  unduly  limited;  it  must  be  revised  and  made  more  flexible  in  terms 
of  'degree'.  This  requires  a  physico-mathematical  'way  of  thinking’, 
which  a  non-aristotelian  system  supplies. 

Lately  the  words  ‘semantics’  and  'semantic’  have  become  widely  used, 
and  generally  misused,  even  by  important  writers,  thus  leading  to  hope¬ 
less  confusion.  ‘Semantics’  is  a  name  for  an  important  branch  of 
philology,  as  complex  as  life  itself,  couched  in  appropriate  philological 
terms,  and  as  such  has  no  direct  application  to  life  problems.  The 
‘signifies’  of  Lady  Welby  was  closer  to  life,  but  gave  no  techniques  for 
application,  and  so  did  not  relate  linguistic  structures  to  the  structures 
of  non-verbal  levels  by  which  we  actually  live.  In  modem  times,  with 
their  growing  complexities,  a  theory  of  values,  with  extensional  tech- 

by  exposing  in  the  dramatic  finale  the  prevailing  outworn,  unrevised,  now  patho¬ 
logical,  doctrines  to  which  unfortunately  most  of  the  politicians  of  the  world  still 
subscribe. 

xxxiv  PREFACE  TO  THE  THIRD  EDITION 

niques  for  educational  guidance  and  self-guidance,  became  imperative. 
Such  a  theory,  the  first  to  my  knowledge,  required  a  modern  scientific 
approach,  and  this  was  found  in  physico-mathematical  methods  (space- 
time)  and  the  foundations  of  mathematics.  It  originated  in  1921  in 
Manhood  of  Humanity,  was  formulated  in  a  methodological  outline  in 
my  papers  in  1924,  1925,  and  1926,  and  in  1933  it  culminated  in  the 

present  volume.  , 

My  work  was  developed  entirely  independently  of  semantics, 

‘signifies’,  ‘semiotic’,  ‘semasiology’,  etc.,  although  I  know  today  and 
respect  the  works  of  the  corresponding  investigators  in  those  fields,  who 
explicitly  state  they  do  not  deal  with  a  general  theory  of  values.  Those 
works  do  not  touch  my  field,  and  as  my  work  progressed  it  has  become 
obvious  that  a  theory  of  ‘meaning’  is  impossible  (page  xv  ff.),  and 
‘signifies’,  etc.,  are  unworkable.  Had  I  not  become  acquainted  with 
those  accomplishments  shortly  before  publication  of  this  book,  I  would 
have  labelled  my  work  by  another  name,  but  the  system  would  have 
remained  fundamentally  unaltered.  The  original  manuscript  did  not  con¬ 
tain  the  word  ’semantics’  or  ‘semantic’,  but  when  I  had  to  select  some 
terms,  from  a  time-binding  point  of  view  and  in  consideration  of  the 
efforts  of  others,  I  introduced  the  term  ‘General  Semantics’  for  the  modus 
operandi  of  this  first  non-aristotelian  system.  This  seemed  appropriate 
for  historical  continuity.  A  theory  of  evaluation  appeared  to  follow 
naturally  in  an  evolutionary  sense  from  1)  ‘meaning’  to  2)  significance 
to  3)  evaluation.  General  Semantics  turned  out  to  be  an  empirical  natural 
science  of  non-elementalistic  evaluation,  which  takes  into  account  the 
living  individual,  not  divorcing  him  from  his  reactions  altogether,  nor 
from  his  neuro-linguistic  and  neuro-semantic  environments,  but  allocat¬ 
ing  him  in  a  plenum  of  some  values,  no  matter  what. 

The  present  theory  of  values  involves  a  clear-cut,  workable  discipline, 
limited  to  its  premises,  a  fact  which  is  often  disregarded  by  some  readers 
and  writers.  They  seem  also  often  unaware  of  the  core  of  the  inherent 
difficulties  in  these  age-old  problems,  and  the  solutions  available  through 
changing  not  the  language,  but  the  structure  of  language,  achieved  by  the 
habitual  use  of  the  extensional  devices  in  our  evaluational  reactions. 

For  instance,  in  Ten  Eventful  Years,  an  Encyclopaedia  Britannka 
publication,  appears  an  article  on  ‘Semantics,  General  Semantics’,  which 
considerably  increases  the  current  confusions  concerning  these  subjects. 
It  is  not  even  mentioned  that  ‘semantics’  is  a  branch  of  philology,  nor 
is  there  any  clarifying  discrimination  made  between  the  noun  ‘semantics’ 
and  the  adjective  ‘semantic’.  Moreover  it  has  many  misstatements  and 
even  falsifications  of  my  work  and  the  work  of  others,  and  some  state¬ 
ments  make  no  sense.  Fortunately  there  is  another  popular  publication, 

PREFACE  TO  THE  THIRD  EDITION 

XXXV 

the  American  People’s  Encyclopedia,  which  is  publishing  a  reliable 
article  on  general  semantics. 

It  is  not  generally  realized  that  with  human  progress,  the  complexities 
and  difficulties  in  the  world  increase  following  an  exponential  function 
of  ‘time’,  with  indefinitely  accelerating  accelerations.  I  am  deeply  con¬ 
vinced  that  these  problems  cannot  be  solved  at  all  unless  we  boldly  search 
for  and  revise  our  antiquated  notions  about  the  'nature  of  man*  and 
apply  modern  extensional  methods  toward  their  solution. 

Fortunately  at  present  we  have  an  international  body,  the  United 
Nations  Educational,  Scientific  and  Cultural  Organization,4  which  with 
its  vast  funds,  has  the  services  of  the  best  men  in  the  world,  and  a 
splendid  program.  It  is  true  that  they  are  very  handicapped  by  depend¬ 
ence  on  translations,  which  seldom  convey  the  same  implications  in  differ¬ 
ent  languages.  Yet  this  need  not  be  a  handicap,  for  the  methods  of  exact 
sciences  disregard  national  boundaries,  and  so  the  extensional  methods 
and  devices  of  general  semantics  can  be  applied  to  all  existing  languages, 
with  deep  psycho-logical  effects  on  the  participants  and  through  them 
on  their  countrymen.  Thus  the  world  would  gain  an  international  com¬ 
mon  denominator  for  inter-communication,  mutual  understanding,  and 
eventual  agreement.  I  would  suggest  that  students  of  general  semantics 
write  on  this  subject.  The  activities  of  this  international  body  after  all 
affect  all  of  us. 
