
We  need  not  blind  ourselves  with  the  old  dogma  that  'human  nature 
cannot  be  changed’,  for  we  find  that  it  can  be  changed .  We  must  begin 
to  realize  our  potentialities  as  humans,  then  we  may  approach  the  future 
with  some  hope.  We  may  feel  with  Galileo,  as  he  stamped  his  foot  on 
the  ground  after  recanting  the  Copernican  theory  before  the  Holy 
Inquisition,  eEppur  si  muove /’  The  evolution  of  our  human  development 
may  be  retarded,  but  it  cannot  be  stopped. 

A.  K. 

I  ^ikeville,  Connecticut 
<  Jctober,  1947 

REFERENCES 

I.  Kendig,  M.,  Editor.  Papers  from  the  Second  American  Congress  on  General 
Semantics.  Institute  of  General  Semantics,  1943. 

£  Korzybski,  A.  A  Veteran's  Re- Adjustment  and  Extensional  Methods.  ETC.: 
A  Review  of  General  Semantics,  Vol.  Ill,  No.  4.  See  also 

Saunders,  Captain  James,  USN  (Ret.).  Memorandum.  Training  of  Offi¬ 
cers  for  the  Naval  Service:  Hearings  Before  the  Committee  on  Naval 
Affairs,  United  States  Senate ,  June  12  and  13,  1946,  pp.  55-57.  U.  S.  Gov¬ 
ernment  Printing  Office,  Washington,  D.  C.,  1946. 

,1  Korzybski,  A.  Manhood  of  Humanity:  The  Science  and  Art  of  Human 
Engineering.  E.  P.  Dutton,  New  York,  1921 ;  2nd  ed.,  Institute  of  General 
Semantics,  Lakeville,  Conn.,  Distributors,  1950. 

4.  Huxley,  Julian,  UNESCO:  Its  Purpose  and  Its  Philosophy.  Public  Affairs 
Press,  Washington,  D.  G,  1947. 

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 

1941 

There  is  what  may  perhaps  be  called  the  method  of  optimism,  which 
leads  us  either  willfully  or  instinctively  to  shut  our  eyes  to  the  possibility 
of  evil.  Thus  the  optimist  who  treats  a  problem  in  algebra  or  analytic 
geometry  will  say ,  if  he  stops  to  reflect  on  what  he  is  doing ;  *1  know  I 
have  no  nght  to  divide  by  zero;  but  there  are  so  many  other  values  which 
by  w*“®h  1  am  dividing  might  have  that  I  will  assume  that 
the  isvil  One  has  not  thrown  a  zero  in  my  denominator  this  time.1 

MAXIMS  BdCHER* 

God  may  forgive  you  your  sins, 
but  your  nervous  system  toon’s. 

Old  Maxim. 

When  in  perplexity,  read  on. 

Old  Maxim. 

Section  A .  Recent  developments  and  the  founding  of  the  Institute  of 
General  Semantics. 

Science  and  Sanity:  An  Introduction  to  Non-aristotelian  Systems 
and  General  Semantics,  first  published  in  October,  1933,  was  intended  to 
be  a  textbook  showing  how  in  modern  scientific  methods  we  can  find 
factors  of  sanity,  to  be  tested  empirically.  Although  a  great  many  scien¬ 
tific  discoveries  have  been  made  since  the  first  publication,  it  did  not  seem 
necessary  to  revise  the  text  for  this  second  edition  because  the  method- 
ological  data  given,  important  for  our  purpose,  have  not  rha«ig»d  How¬ 
ever,  the  list  of  books  in  preparation  for  the  Non-aristotelian  Library 
has  been  revised,  and  in  this  introduction  I  indicate  some  new  develop¬ 
ments  in  general  semantics  and  include  a  short  new  bibliography,  supple¬ 
menting  the  bibliography  of  619  titles  given  on  page  767  ff. 

In  1935  I  began  to  conduct  seminar  courses  in  general  semantics  in 
schools,  colleges  and  universities,  and  before  various  groups  of  edu¬ 
cators,**  scientists,  and  physicians,  including  psychiatrists.  In  the 
year  a  group  of  students  of  Science  and  Sanity  organized  the  First  Amer- 

*  Congress  of  Arts  and  Science,  St  Louis,  1904,  Vol.  I,  p.  472. 

**I  the  word  'educator'  in  its  standard  English  sense;  namely,  'one  who  or 
that  which  educates’.  I  use  ‘educate’  in  the  sense  of:  “to  rear  .  .  .  king  19  from 
childhood,  so  as  to  form  habits,  manners,  mental  and  physical  aptitudes  ...  To 
provide  schooling  for  .  .  .  train  generally  .  .  .  train  so  as  to  develop  some  special 
aptitude,  taste,  or  disposition.’  Etc.  (The  Shorter  Oxford  English  Dictionary  on 
Historical  Principles,  Oxford,  at  the  Clarendon  Press,  1933.)  In  this  any 
teacher  from  nursery  school  through  university  professors  are  ‘educators’.  From  a 
life  point  of  view  this  would  include  even  parents,  nurses,  etc. 

xxxvu 

xxxviii  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 

ican  Congress  on  General  Semantics  at  the  Washington  College  of  Edu¬ 
cation  at  Ellensburg,  where  a  number  of  papers  from  various  fields  were 
presented.  The  present  writer  delivered  three  addresses  on  the  applica¬ 
tion  of  general  semantics  to  education  and  medicine,  which  are  printed 
in  the  proceedings  of  the  Congress.*  The  Second  American  Congress 
on  General  Semantics  will  be  held  at  the  University  of  Denver  in  August, 
1941.  This  Congress  is  organized  by  Professor  El  wood  Murray  of  the 
University  and  M.  Kendig,  Educational  Director  of  the  Institute. 

In  1938  the  Institute  of  General  Semantics  was  incorporated  in  Chi¬ 
cago  for  neuro-linguistic,  neuro-epistemologic,  scientific  research  and 
education.  Since  that  date,  as  director  of  the  Institute,  my  major  efforts 
have  been  concentrated  on  further  research  and  co-ordination  of  rapidly 
accumulating  empirical  data,  along  with  the  conduct  of  seminar  courses 
to  train  in  the  new  extensional  methods  for  application  in  personal  adjust¬ 
ment,  and  in  the  respective  special  fields  of  the  students.  At  present 
several  universities  are  offering  accredited  courses  in  general  semantics, 
and  in  a  number  of  other  universities  and  colleges  general  semantics  is 
incorporated  in  the  presentation  of  other  courses. 

From  scientific  necessity  this  book  was  written  inductively ;  the  semi¬ 
nar  courses  are  presented  deductively,  and  so  the  two  complement  each 
other.  The  seminars  include  much  illustrative  empirical  material  accu¬ 
mulated  in  the  five  years  of  application  of  the  system  by  my  co-workers 
and  myself,  together  with  the  pertinent,  factual,  newest  findings  of  other 
sciences. 

The  non-aristotelian  system  presented  here  has  turned  out  to  be  a 
strictly  empirical  science,  as  predicted,  with  results  which  have  greatly 
surpassed  even  my  expectations.  General  semantics  is  not  any  ‘philos¬ 
ophy*,  or  ‘psychology*,  or  ‘logic’,  in  the  ordinary  sense.  It  is  a  new 
extensional  discipline  which  explains  and  trains  us  how  to  use  our  ner¬ 
vous  systems  most  efficiently.  It  is  not  a  medical  science,  but  like  bac¬ 
teriology,  it  is  indispensable  for  medicine  in  general,  and  for  psychiatry, 
mental  hygiene,  and  education  in  particular.  In  brief,  it  is  the  formula¬ 
tion  of  a  new  non-aristotelian  system**  of  orientation  which  affects  every 

*  Distributed  by  the  Institute  of  General  Semantics,  Lakeville,  Connecticut. 

-**  The  terms  ‘era',  ‘epoch'  and  ‘system'  will  frequently  appear  here,  and  to  avoid 
confusion  it  may  be  advisable  to  indicate  in  what  sense  these  terms  are  used.  1)  Era: 
‘A  date  or  an  event,  which  begins  a  new  period  in  the  history  of  anything;  an  impor¬ 
tant  date.  ...  A  period  marked  by  the  prevalence  of  some  particular  state  of 
things.'  Etc.  2)  Epoch:  *.  .  .  a  period  of  history  defined  by  the  prevalence  of  some 
particular  state  of  things.  ...  A  period  ...  in  the  history  of  a  process.'  Etc.  3) 
System:  ‘A  set  or  assemblage  of  things  connected,  associated,  or  interdependent,  so 

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION  xxxix 

branch  of  science  and  life.  The  separate  issues  involved  are  not  entirely 
new;  their  methodological  formulation  os  a  system  which  is  workable, 
teachable  and  so  elementary  that  it  can  be  applied  by  children,  is  entirely 
new. 

The  experience  of  my  co-workers,  mostly  educators  and  psychiatrists, 
and  my  own,  shows  that  about  ninety  per  cent  of  those  who  train  them¬ 
selves  seriously  in  the  new  extensional  methods  definitely  benefit  in 
various  degrees,  and  in  ways  so  varied  as  to  be  unpredictable. 

Theory  and  empirical  results  show  that  these  new  methods  involve 
psychosomatic  factors  which  help  the  balancing  and  integration  of  the 
functions  of  the  nervous  system,  while  the  prevalent  and  traditional  in- 
tensional  methods  of  evaluation  tend  to  disintegrate  these  functions.  The 
nervous  mechanisms  involved  work  automatically  one  way  or  another, 
harmfully  or  beneficially,  depending  on  the  methods  with  which  we  utilize 
them.  This  has  not  been  fully  realized  before. 

The  new  methods  eliminate  or  alleviate  different  semantogenic  block¬ 
ages;  many  ‘emotional  disturbances*,  including  even  some  neuroses  and 
psychoses;  various  learning,  reading,  or  speech  difficulties,  etc.;  and 
general  maladjustments  in  professional  and/or  personal  lives.  These 
difficulties  result  to  a  large  extent  from  the  failure  to  use  ‘intelligence* 
adequately  so  as  to  bring  about  proper  evaluation. 

It  is  well  known  that  many  psychosomatic  symptoms  such  as  some 
heart,  digestive,  respiratory,  and  ‘sex*  disorders,  some  chronic  joint  dis¬ 
eases,  arthritis,  dental  caries,  migraines,  skin  diseases,  alcoholism,  etc.,  to 
mention  a  few,  have  a  semantogenic,  and  therefore  neuro-semantic  and 
neuro-linguistic  origin.  In  general  semantic  training  we  do  not  go  into 
the  medical  angle  as  such.  We  eliminate  the  harmful  semantogenic 
factors,  and  in  most  cases  the  corresponding  symptoms  disappear _ pro¬ 

vided  the  student  is  willing  to  work  at  himself  seriously. 

Section  B .  Some  difficulties  to  be  surmounted . 

1.  THE  ATTITUDES  OF  ' PHILOSOPHERS ,  ETC. 

‘Philosophers*,  ‘psychologists’,  ‘logicians’,  mathematicians,  etc.,  are 
somehow  unable  to  comprehend  that  their  work  is  the  product  of  the 

si  to  form  a  complex  unity;  a  whole  composed  of  parts  in  orderly  arrangement  accord¬ 
ing  to  some  scheme  or  plan.  ...  A  set  of  principles,  etc. ;  a  scheme,  method.  The 
let  of  corollated  principles  ...  or  statements  belonging  to  some  department  of 
knowledge  ...  a  department  of  knowledge  .  .  .  considered  as  an  organized  whole; 
a  comprehensive  body  of  doctrines,  conclusions  ...  An  organized  scheme  or  plan 
of  action ;  an  orderly  or  regular  method  of  procedure.  ...  A  formal,  definite  or 
established  scheme  or  method  .  .  .  systematic  form  or  order.’  Etc.  ( The  Shorter 
Oxford  Rtujlish  Dictionary  on  Historical  Principles .) 

xl 

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 

working  of  their  own  nervous  systems.  For  most  of  them  it  is  only  de¬ 
tached  verbalism  such  as  we  often  find  in  hospitals  for  ‘mentally'  ill.  For 
instance,  a  very  gifted,  well-minded  mathematician  and  professor  of  ‘phi¬ 
losophy*  wrote  to  me :  ‘I  do  not,  however,  think  that  neuro-psychology  is 
relevant  to  the  analysis  of  the  nature  of  meaning.  ...  I  do  not  believe 
in  confusing  logic  with  neuro-psychology*.  These  professionals  would  be 
shocked  if  they  would  study  the  many  volumes  of  verbal  rationalizations 
by  patients  in  hospitals.  They  would  find  very  quickly  that  the  words 
interplay  with  the  other  words  somehow,  but  they  have  very  little,  if  any, 
connection  with  the  facts,  and  that  is  one  reason  why  the  patients  are  con¬ 
fined.  Why  speculate  on  academic  verbal  definitions  instead  of  investi¬ 
gating  facts  in  such  hospitals,  where  patients  also  pay  no  attention  to  the 
functioning  of  their  own  nervous  systems  ?  Even  a  gramophone  record 
undergoes  some  physical  changes  before  words  or  noises  can  be  ‘stored' 
and/or  reproduced.  Is  it  so  very  difficult  to  understand  that  the  extremely 
sensitive  and  highly  complex  human  nervous  system  also  undergoes  some 
electro-colloidal  changes  before  words,  evaluations,  etc.,  are  stored,  pro¬ 
duced,  or  reproduced?  In  the  work  of  general  semantics  we  deal  with 
the  living  wewro-semantic  and  neuro-linguistic  reactions,  not  mere  de¬ 
tached  verbal  chatter  in  the  abstract.  In  our  experience  we  have  found 
that  even  seriously  maladjusted  persons  benefit  considerably  if  we  can 
succeed  in  making  them  ‘think*  about  themselves  in  neurological  electro- 
colloidal  terms  (see  chapter  IX). 

Most  ‘philosophers'  who  reviewed  this  book  made  particularly  shock¬ 
ing  performances.  Average  intelligent  readers  can  understand  this  book, 
as  they  usually  have  some  contact  with  life.  It  is  not  so  with  those  who 
indulge  in  mere  verbalism.  I  can  give  here  only  a  classical  example  of 
some  ‘philosophical*  performances.  A  reviewer  in  the  Journal  of  Philos¬ 
ophy,  February  1,  1934,  writes: 

‘Except  for  his  stimulating  discussion  of  the  mathematical  infinite 
(p.  206)  and  his  hints  on  the  nature  of  theory  (p.  253),  he  contributes 
nothing  to  the  clarification  of  meanings  by  definite  analyses  of  special 
problems.  Indeed,  he  only  adds  to  the  confusion  when  he  declares  that 
hypotheses  contrary  to  the  fact  are  meaningless  (e.g.,  p.  168)  ;  if  his  views 
were  correct,  science  would  come  to  an  end.  His  theory  of  meaning,  like 
his  theory  of  social  causation,  is  very  naive,  to  say  the  least.* 

I  suggest  that  the  reader  verify  whether  on  page  168  there  is  such  a 
statement,  or  even  a  hint  at  such  a  notion,  which  I  could  not  possibly  have. 
Besides,  I  do  not  give  any  theories  of  ‘meaning*  or  of  ‘social  causation* ! 

Most  ‘philosophers',  ‘logicians*,  and  even  mathematicians  look  at  this 
non-aristotelian  system  of  evaluation  as  some  system  of  formal  non-aris- 

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 

xli 

totelian  'logic',  which  is  not  the  case.  They  are  somehow  not  able  to  take 
the  natural  science  point  of  view  that  all  science,  mathematics,  ‘logic*, 
‘philosophy*,  etc.,  are  the  product  of  the  functioning  of  the  human  nervous 
system,  involving  some  sort  of  internal  orientations,  or  evaluations,  which 
are  not  necessarily  formalized.  The  analysis  of  such  living  reactions  is 
the  sole  object  of  general  semantics  as  a  natural  empirical  science. 

These  ‘philosophers*,  etc.,  seem  unaware,  to  give  a  single  example, 
that  by  teaching  and  preaching  ‘identity*,  which  is  empirically  non-existent 
in  this  actual  world,  they  are  neurologically  training  future  generations  in 
the  pathological  identifications  found  in  the  ‘mentally*  ill  or  maladjusted. 
As  explained  on  page  409,  and  also  Chapter  XXVI,  whatever  we  may 
say  an  object  (iss,  it  is  not ,  because  the  statement  is  verbal,  and  the  facts 
are  not. 

It  is  pathetic,  if  not  tragic,  that  society  should  invest  millions  of  dol¬ 
lars  to  support  such  specialists  who  train  future  generations  in  malad¬ 
justments  just  because  they  disregard  the  unavoidable  neuro-linguistic 
and  neuro-semantic  effects  of  their  teachings  on  the  lives  of  their  pupils. 

Most  scientists  and  educators  are  either  entirely  innocent  of  these 
problems,  or  indifferent  and  passive,  or  even  negativistic.  Like  some 
animals  that  can  outwit  humans  because  of  their  keen  observations,  the 
cunning,  often  pathological,  thoroughly  ignorant  present  day  totalitarian 
leaders  are  not  unaware  of  the  academic  shortcomings  based  on  inertia, 
verbalism,  etc.,  and  openly  proceed  to  utilize  these  human  nervous  weak¬ 
nesses  destructively,  with  very  telling  results.  Nazism,  wars  of  and  on 
nerves,  wars  of  verbal  distortion,  etc.,  with  their  following  disasters  are 
in  1941  only  too  obvious  examples.  I  will  return  to  this  subject  at  the 
end  of  this  introduction. 

The  terms  ‘philosophy*,  ‘system*,  etc.,  as  ordinarily  used,  stand  for 
too  broad  generalizations.  Different  ‘philosophies*  represent  nothing  but 

methods  of  evaluation,  which  may  lead  to 
empirical  mis-evaluation  if  science  and 
empirical  facts  are  disregarded.  Different 
systems  may  be  very  broad  and  general, 
such  as,  say,  the  aristotelian  system  (A) 
(see  Fig.  1),  within  which  is  a  more  lim¬ 
ited  and  less  general  system  such  as 
‘Christianity*  (C),  within  which  is,  for 
instance,  the  leibnitzian  system  (L),  and 
within  which  there  are  individual,  per¬ 
sonal  systems  (P).  Every  Smith*  has  an 
Individual  interpretation  of  broader  systems,  and  so  in  actuality  has  a 

Fio.  1 

xlii 

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 

system  of  his  own .  As  a  rule,  personal  systems  are  a  part  of,  and  in¬ 
fluenced  by,  larger  systems,  which  in  turn  are  influenced  by  still  more 
general  systems.  Such  problems  can  be  handled  at  present  only  by  the 
methods  of  general  semantics  and  by  topological  methods.* 

‘Mental’  illness  and  every  form  of  maladjustment  are  to  be  considered 
as  mis-evaiuations,  involving  some  ‘philosophies’,  public  or  individual, 
one  within  the  other,  as  usual.  ‘Philosophers’,  etc.,  who  wish  to  become 
aware  of  such  dangers,  would  do  well  to  study  the  verbalizations  and 
mis-evaluations  of  the  ‘mentally’  ill  in  hospitals. 

2.  PERPLEXITIES  IN  THEORIES  OF  ' MEANING ' 

There  is  a  fundamental  confusion  between  the  notion  of  the  older 
‘semantics’  as  connected  with  a  theory  of  verbal  ‘meaning*  and  words  de¬ 
fined  by  words,  and  the  present  theory  of  ‘general  semantics’  where  we 
deal  only  with  n^wro-semantic  and  neuro-linguistic  living  reactions  of 
Smithi,  Smiths,  etc.,  as  their  reactions  to  neuro-semantic  and  neuro-lin¬ 
guistic  environments  as  environment . 

The  present  day  theories  of  ‘meaning*  are  extremely  confused  and 
difficult,  ultimately  hopeless,  and  probably  harmful  to  the  sanity  of  the 
human  race.  Of  late  in  the  United  States  some  members  of  the  progres¬ 
sive  education  movement  have  written  much  on  ‘referents’  and  ‘opera¬ 
tional*  methods,  in  the  abstract,  based  on  verbalism.  Let  us  consider 
some  facts,  and  how  the  theories  of  referents  and  operational  methods  fit 
human  evaluations .  Here  is,  for  instance,  Smithi  who,  through  family, 
social,  economic,  political,  etc.,  conditions  has  become  ‘insane*.  Smithi 
finally,  in  ordinary  parlance,  kills  Smith2.  From  a  human  point  of  view 
it  is  a  very  complex  and  tragic  situation.  Let  us  account  for  it  in  terms  of 
referents  and  operations.  The  body  and  the  heart  of  Smith2,  the  hand  of 
Smithi,  the  knife,  etc.,  are  perfectly  good  referents.  The  grabbing  of  the 
knife  by  Smithi  and  plunging  it  in  the  heart  of  Smith2,  the  falling  down 
on  the  ground  by  Smith*  and  the  kicking  of  his  legs  are  perfectly  good 
operations.  However,  where  is  human  evaluation?  Where  is  concern 
with  ‘sanity*  and  ‘insanity*?  Here  we  deal  with  some  of  the  deepest 
human  and  social  tragedies  which,  in  this  case,  involve  not  only  the  killing 
of  Smith2  by  Smithi,  but  the  sick,  unhappy,  twisted  life  of  Smithi,  affect¬ 
ing  all  his  life  connections,  and  with  which  we  must  be  concerned  if  we 
are  to  be  human  beings  and  different  from  apes. 

*  Lewin,  Kurt.  Principles  of  Topological  Psychology.  McGraw-Hill,  New 
York,  1936. 

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION  xliii 

Such  an  example  is  of  course  extreme  and  over-simplified,  although 
it  illustrates  the  principles.  However,  officially  teaching  such  methods 
which  are  inadequate  to  handle  evaluation,  and  so  human  values,  has  a 
definite  sinister  effect,  among  others,  on  the  ‘sex’  life  of  the  students. 
Many  of  them  are  taught  to  orient  themselves  generally  by  referents  and 
operations  only ;  and  so  mere  physiological  performance  is  often  identified 
with  mature  love  life,  etc.,  and  is  a  causative  factor  in  the  wide-spread 
marital  unhappiness,  promiscuity  and  other  lowerings  of  human  cultural 
and  ethical  standards. 

Thus,  theories  of  'meaning*  or  still  worse,  ‘meaning  of  meaning*,  based 
on  ‘referents*  and  ‘operational*  methods  are  thoroughly  inadequate  to 
account  for  human  values,  yet  they  do  affect  the  nervous  systems  of 
humans.  We  must,  therefore,  work  out  a  theory  of  evaluation  which  is 
based  on  the  optimum  electro-colloidal  action  and  reaction  of  the  nervous 
system. 

There  is  no  doubt  that  a  civilized  society  needs  some  mature  ‘morals*, 
‘ethics*,  etc.  In  a  general  theory  of  evaluation  and  sanity  we  must  con¬ 
sider  seriously  such  problems,  if  we  are  to  be  sane  humans  at  all.  Theory 
and  practice  show  that  healthy,  well-balanced  people  are  naturally  ‘moral* 
and  ‘ethical*,  unless  their  educations  have  twisted  their  types  of  evalua¬ 
tions.  In  general  semantics  we  do  not  ‘preach*  ‘morality*  or  ‘ethics*  as 
such,  but  we  train  students  in  consciousness  of  abstracting,  consciousness 
of  the  multiordinal  mechanisms  of  evaluation,  relational  orientations,  etc., 
which  bring  about  cortico-thalamic  integration,  and  then  as  a  result  ‘mor¬ 
ality’,  ‘ethics*,  awareness  of  social  responsibilities,  etc.,  follow  automati¬ 
cally.  Unfortunately  our  educational  systems  are  unaware  of,  or  even 
negativistic  toward,  such  newro -semantic  and  neuro-linguistic  issues. 
These  are  sad  observations  to  be  made  about  our  present  educational 
systems. 

May  I  suggest  that  readers  consult  Apes,  Men  and  Morons  and  Why 
Men  Behave  Like  Apes  by  Earnest  A.  Hooton;  The  Mentality  of  Apes 
by  W.  Kohler,  The  Social  Life  of  Apes  and  Monkeys  by  S.  Zuckerman, 
and  many  other  studies  of  this  kind.  They  might  then  more  clearly  un¬ 
derstand  how  the  aristotelian  type  of  education  leads  to  the  humanly 
harmful,  gross,  macroscopic,  brutalizing,  biological,  animalistic  types  of 
orientations  which  are  shown  today  to  be  humanly  inadequate .  These 
breed  such  ‘ftihrers*  as  different  Hitlers,  Mussolinis,  Stalins,  etc.,  whether 
In  political,  financial,  industrial,  scientific,  medical,*  educational,  or  even 
publishing,  etc.,  fields,  fancying  that  they  represent  ‘all*  of  the  human 

*  See  Carrel's  Man  The  Unknown. 

xliv  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 

world!  Such  delusions  must  ultimately  be  destructive  to  human  culture, 
and  responsible  for  the  tragic  ‘cultural  lag’,  stressed  so  much  today  by 
social  anthropologists. 

Existing  theories  of  ‘meaning*  of  any  school  do  not  take  into  consider¬ 
ation  that  any  definition  of  words  by  words  must  be  based  ultimately  on 
undefined  terms.  To  the  best  of  my  knowledge  this  problem  is  not  con¬ 
sidered  at  all  in  present  day  educational  systems,  outside  of  some  sci¬ 
ences,  and  so  the  existing  theories  run  in  a  vicious  circle,  just  like  a  dog 
chasing  his  tail,  and  are  bound  to  be  ineffective,  if  not  harmful. 

As  Professor  Key ser  aptly  formulates  the  problem:  ‘If  he  contend,  as 
sometimes  he  will  Contend,  that  he  has  defined  all  his  terms  and  proved 
all  his  propositions,  then  either  he  is  a  performer  of  logical  miracles  or 
he  is  an  ass ;  and,  as  you  know,  logical  miracles  are  impossible/* 

Similarly  the  theorists  in  the  ‘theory  of  meaning*  as  described  above 
disregard  the  inadequacy  for  human  orientation  of  the  subject-predicate 
form  of  representation.  I  must  refer  the  reader  to  my  chapter  on  rela¬ 
tions,  page  188  ff.,  for  further  information. 

In  principle,  a  type  of  orientation  which  restricts  formally  everything 
to  subject-predicate  forms  of  representation  can  account  only  for  sym¬ 
metrical  relations,  and  we  may  beat  in  the  bush  about  ‘meaning’ ;  in  prin¬ 
ciple,  however,  a  theory  of  evaluation  is  then  impossible.  Evaluation 
must  be  based  on  asymmetrical  relations  such  as  ‘more’  or  ‘less’,  etc., 
which  cannot  be  dealt  with  at  all  adequately  if  restricted  formally  to  sub¬ 
ject-predicate  forms  of  representation,  that  harmfully  affect  our  orien¬ 
tations. 

What  I  have  said  here  is  correct  in  principle ;  however,  in  practice,  in 
the  neuro-semantic  and  neuro-linguistic  development  of  the  white  race  we 
had  to  invent,  by  living  necessity,  some  asymmetrical  relations  such  as 
‘more’  or  ‘less’,  etc.  The  difficulty  lies  in  the  fact  that  these  methods  of 
escape  from  a  subject-predicate  grammatical  structure  of  language  were 
used  only  haphazardly,  and  not  formulated  generally  into  a  workable 
system  based  on  asymmetrical  relations,  which  would  be  teachable . 

Similarly  with  the  problem  of  intensional  orientation  by  verbal  defi¬ 
nitions  and  extensional  orientation  by  facts  (see  p.  173)  ;  there  is  also 
confusion  about  it.  ‘Pure’  extension  is  humanly  impossible ;  ‘pure’  inten¬ 
sion  is  possible,  and  is  often  found  in  hospitals  for  ‘mentally*  ill,  and  in 
some  chairs  of  ‘philosophy*.  These  issues  and  problems  are  seriously 
confusing  to  the  average  person  because  they  have  not  been  formulated 
before  in  a  methodological  system. 

*  Keyser,  Cassius  J.  Mathematical  Philosophy.  E.  P.  Dutton,  New  York, 
1922,  p.  152. 

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 

xlv 

3.  INADEQUACY  OF  FORMS  OF  REPRESENTATION  AND  THEIR 
STRUCTURAL  REVISION 

It  is  not  generally  realized  what  serious  difficulties  an  inadequate, 
unduly  limited  form  of  representation  or  theory  brings  about  This  is 
well  known  in  science.  Thus,  for  instance,  the  euclidean  and  newtonian 
systems  cannot  deal  successfully  with  electricity  and  so  it  was  imperative 
to  produce  non-euclidean  and  non-newtonian  systems,  which  do  apply  to 
the  sub-microscopic  electrical  levels  and  also  to  the  macroscopic  gross 
levels.  Similarly  in  life,  the  two-valued  aristotelian  system  could  not 
deal  adequately  with  the  electro-colloidal  sub-microscopic  levels  of  the 
functioning  of  our  nervous  systems,  on  which  sanity  depends.  Thus  the 
formulation  of  the  present  infinite-valued  non-aristotelian  system  became 
also  an  imperative  necessity. 

I  must  stress  that  as  the  older  systems  are  only  special  limitations  of 
the  new  more  general  ‘non’  systems  (see  p.  97),  it  would  be  incorrect  to 
interpret  a  'non'  system  as  an  ‘anti*  system. 

Such  a  non-aristotelian  system  is  long  overdue.  It  was  retarded  be¬ 
cause  of  persecution  by  the  church  and  other  influential  bodies,  the  gen¬ 
eral  belief  that  ‘Aristotle  said  the  last  word*,  etc.,  and  particularly  because 
of  the  inherent  difficulties  of  such  a  revision. 

The  problem  of  inadequacy  in  the  forms  of  representation  has  handi¬ 
capped  science  and  life  a  great  deal  until  relatively  adequate  systems 
were  produced.  In  life  the  situation  is  much  more  aggravated,  for  if  our 
orientations  and  evaluations  are  inadequate,  our  predictability  is  impaired, 
and  we  feel  with  the  poet  Housman,  T,  a  stranger  and  afraid,  in  a  world 
I  never  made’.  If  we  have  a  more  adequate  or  proper  evaluation,  we 
would  have  more  correct  predictability,  etc.,  (see  p.  58  ff.  and  p.  750  ff.). 
We  would  then  feel,  ‘We  are  not  strangers,  and  not  afraid,  in  this  human 
mess  you  and  I  have  made'. 

Another  of  the  main  difficulties  is  that  a  language  or  a  system  of  a 
given  structure  can  be  somewhat  altered  from  within,  but  cannot  be 
revised  structurally  without  going  outside  the  former  system.  For  in¬ 
stance,  all  the  attempts  to  revise  the  structure  of  the  euclidean  and  new¬ 
tonian  systems  from  within  were  ineffective.  Those  who  revised  these 
systems  structurally  had  to  go  outside  the  systems  first,  after  which  they 
were  able  to  produce  different,  independent,  new  systems.  Only  then  did 
an  effective  evaluation  of  the  former  systems  become  possible. 

Similarly  the  aristotelian,  two-valued,  intensional  system  can  be  re¬ 
viled  structurally  and  evaluated  properly  only  by  building  independently 
a  non-aristotelian,  infinite-valued,  extensional  system.  This  verifies  the 
contention  of  Bertrand  Russell  made  in  1922  that  there  is  a  ‘possibility' 

xlvi  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 

that  ‘every  language  has  ...  a  structure  concerning  which,  in  the  lan¬ 
guage,  nothing  can  be  said,  but  that  there  may  be  another  language  deal¬ 
ing  with  the  structure  of  the  first  language,  and  having  itself  a  new  struc¬ 
ture’.*  What  Russell  calls  a  ‘possibility*  becomes  a  fact  once  a  system  of 
different  structure  is  built.  Then  the  issues  become  dear. 
