
Russell  limits  himsdf  to  the  structure  of  a  language,  and  disregards 
the  fact  that  this  limitation  is  artificial,  and  that  any  language  involves 
structural  assumptions  which  build  up  a  system  of  orientations  that  may 
be  racial,  national,  personal,  etc. 

4.  IDENTIFICATIONS  AND  MIS-E VALUATI ONS 

The  problem  of  general  identification  is  a  major  problem  which  does 
not  seem  to  be  understood  at  all  even  by  specialists.  Psychiatrists  know 
professionally  the  tragic  consequences  of  identifications  in  their  patients. 
But  what  even  psychiatrists  do  not  realize  is  that  identifications  in  daily 
life  are  extremely  frequent  and  bring  about  every  kind  of  difficulties. 

As  a  matter  of  fact  we  live  in  a  world  in  which  non-identity  is  as  en¬ 
tirely  general  as  gravitation,  and  so  every  identification  is  bound  to  be  in 
some  degree  a  mis-evaluation.  In  a  four-dimensional  world  where  every 
geometrical  point  has  a  date’,  even  an  ‘electron’  at  different  dates  is  not 
identical  with  itself,  because  the  sub-microscopic  processes  actually  going 
on  in  this  world  cannot  empirically  be  stopped  but  only  transformed. 
We  can,  however,  through  extensional  and  four-dimensional  methods 
translate  the  dynamic  into  the  static  and  the  static  into  the  dynamic,  and 
so  establish  a  similarity  of  structure  between  language  and  facts,  which 
was  impossible  by  aristotelian  methods.  Unfortunately  even  some  mod¬ 
ern  physicists  are  unable  to  understand  these  simple  facts. 

To  communicate  to  my  classes  what  I  want  to  convey  to  my  readers 
here,  the  following  procedure  has  been  useful.  In  my  seminars  I  pick  a 
young  woman  student  and  pre-arrange  with  her  a  demonstration  about 
which  the  class  knows  nothing.  During  the  lecture  she  is  called  to  the 
platform  and  I  hand  her  a  box  of  matches  which  she  takes  carelessly  and 
drops  on  the  desk.  That  is  the  only  ‘crime’  she  has  committed.  Then 
I  begin  to  call  her  names,  etc.,  with  a  display  of  anger,  waving  my  fists 
in  front  of  her  face,  and  finally  with  a  big  gesture,  I  slap  her  face  gently. 
Seeing  this  ‘slap’,  as  a  rule  ninety  per  cent  of  the  students  recoil  and 
shiver ;  ten  per  cent  show  no  overt  reactions.  The  latter  have  seen  what 
they  have  seen,  but  they  delayed  their  evaluations.  Then  I  explain  to  the 
students  that  their  recoil  and  shiver  was  an  organismal  evaluation  very 

*  Wittgenstein,  Ludwig.  Tractatus  Logic  o-Philosophicus,  with  an  introduction 
by  Bertrand  Russell.  Harcourt,  Brace,  New  York,  1022,  p.  23. 

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION  xlvii 

harmful  in  principle,  because  they  identified  the  seen  facts  with  their 
judgements,  creeds,  dogmas,  etc.  Thus  their  reactions  were  entirely 
unjustified,  as  what  they  have  seen  turned  out  to  be  merely  a  scientific 
demonstration  of  the  mechanism  of  identification,  which  identification  I 
expected. 

Such  identifications  are  very  common.  The  late  Dr.  Joshua  Rosett, 
formerly  Professor  of  Neurology  in  Columbia  University,  and  Scientific 
Director,  Brain  Research  Foundation,  New  York,  gives  an  example 
from  his  own  experience.  ‘A  vivid  picture  on  the  cinema  screen  repre¬ 
sented  a  boy  and  a  girl  pulling  down  hay  from  a  stack  for  bedding.  I 
sneezed — from  the  dust  of  the  hay  shown  on  the  screen/* 

The  problem  of  identification  in  values  is  neurologically  strictly  con¬ 
nected  with  the  pathological  reversal  of  the  natural  order  of  evaluation, 
which  is  found  in  different  degrees  in  the  maladjusted,  neurotics,  psy- 
chotics,  and  even  in  some  'normal'  persons.  Thus,  the  supposedly  inno¬ 
cent  'shiver'  and  the  sneezing  in  the  examples  above,  or  the  attack  of  hay 
fever  when  paper  roses  are  shown  (see  p.  128),  etc.,  may  as  well  in  other 
cases  end  in  a  sudden  death  or  in  a  neurosis  or  psychosis.  The  neuro¬ 
logical  mechanisms  are  similar,  involving  identifications  in  values  of 
different  orders  of  abstractions,  and  therefore  the  very  common  reversal 
of  the  natural  order  of  evaluation. 

In  the  evolution  of  the  human  race  and  language  there  was  a  natural 
order  of  evaluation  established ;  namely,  the  life  facts  came  first  and  labels 
(words)  next  in  importance.  Today,  from  childhood  up,  we  inculcate 
words  and  language  first,  and  the  facts  they  represent  come  next  in  value, 
another  pathologically  reversed  order,  by  which  we  are  unconsciously 
being  trained  to  identify  words  with  ‘facts'.  Even  in  medicine  we  much 
too  often  evaluate  by  the  definitions  of  'diseases'  instead  of  dealing  with 
an  individual  sick  patient,  whose  illness  seldom  fits  textbook  definitions. 

The  foregoing  considerations  deal  directly  with  aristotelian  orienta¬ 
tions  by  intension,  or  verbal  definitions,  where  verbiage  comes  first  in 
importance,  and  facts  next.  By  non-aristotelian  methods  we  train  in  the 
natural  order ;  namely,  that  first  order  empirical  facts  are  more  important 
than  definitions  or  verbiage.  It  should  be  noticed  that  the  average  child 
Is  born  extensional,  and  then  his  evaluations  are  distorted  as  the  result 
of  intensional  training  by  parents,  teachers,  etc.,  who  are  unaware  of  the 
heavy  neurological  consequences. 

These  are  key  problems  involved  in  the  passing  from  aristotelian  to 
non-aristotelian  orientations,  which  affect  our  future  personal,  national 

•  Rosett,  Joshua.  The  Mechanism  of  Thought,  Imagery,  and  Hallucination. 
Columbia  University  Press,  New  York,  1939,  p.  212. 

xlviii  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 

and  international  adjustments.  For  a  detailed  discussion  the  reader  is 
referred  to  this  text,  see  index  under  the  terms  ‘identification’,  ‘order*, 
‘natural  order*,  etc. 

5.  METHODS  OF  THE  MAGICIAN 

Another  very  serious  difficulty  arises  due  to  the  fact  that  our  knowl¬ 
edge  of  the  world  and  ourselves  involves  unavoidable  factors  of  decep¬ 
tion  and  self-deception.  A  scientific  study  of  magic  with  its  methods  of 
psycho-logical  deception  is  most  revealing,  as  it  shows  the  mechanisms 
by  which  we  are  continually  and  unknowingly  being  deceived  in  science 
and  daily  life.*  The  stock  in  trade  of  the  magician  to  fool  the  public  con¬ 
sists  of  methods  of  misdirection,  of  mis-evaluation,  half-truths,  etc,,  used 
to  play  on  the  ordinary  associations  and  implications,  habits  of  hasty 
generalizations,  etc.,  of  the  audience,  thus  leading  to  misinterpretations, 
identifications,  lack  of  predictability,  etc.  These  general,  and  so  common, 
psycho-logical  mechanisms  are  very  deep,  and  to  a  large  extent  are  con¬ 
nected  with  the  aristotelian  type  of  intensional,  subject-predicate  orien¬ 
tations,  which  ultimately  may  become  harmful. 

For  maximum  adjustment,  and  therefore  sanity,  we  need  neurological 
methods  to  prevent  and  counteract  these  heretofore  unavoidable  old  de¬ 
ceptions  and  self-deceptions.  In  a  non-aristotelian  system  these  difficul¬ 
ties  are  recognized  and  empirical  methods  are  discovered  to  eliminate 
them  step  by  step.  Such  methods  of  prevention  and  counteraction  cul¬ 
minate  in  training  in  consciousness  of  abstracting  (see  Chapters  XXVI 
XXVII,  XXIX  and  p.  499  ff .) . 

I  must  stress  that  as  far  as  we  humans  are  concerned,  we  cannot  pos¬ 
sibly  be  entirely  ignorant  about  ourselves ;  we  may  have  only  false  knowl¬ 
edge  or  half-truths .  It  is  psychiatricaliy  known  that  in  many  instances 
false  knowledge,  particularly  about  ourselves,  breeds  maladjustments, 
often  of  a  serious  character,  just  because  it  is  based  fundamentally  on 
self-deception.  In  the  meantime  we  react  and  act  ‘as  if  our  half-truths  or 
false  knowledge  were  ‘all  there  is  to  be  known'.  Thus  we  are  bound  to 
be  bewildered,  confused,  obsessed  with  fears,  etc.,  because  of  mistakes 
due  to  our  mis-evaluations,  when  we  orient  ourselves  by  verbal  structures 
which  do  not  fit  facts. 

Section  C.  Revolutions  and  evolutions . 

One  of  the  gravest  difficulties  facing  the  world  today  is  the  passing 
from  one  historical  era  to  another.  Such  passings,  as  history  shows,  have 

*  Kelley,  Douglas  M.  Conjuring  as  an  Asset  to  Occupational  Therapy.  Occu¬ 
pational  Therapy  and  Rehabilitation .  Vol.  19,  No.  2,  April,  1940. 

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION  xlix 

always  been  painful,  and  pregnant  with  consequences.  To  illustrate :  the 
transition  from  papal  control  to  non-papal  control,  passing  through  mur¬ 
derous  religious  persecutions  and  slaughters,  including  the  devastating 
Thirty  Years'  War,  etc. ;  from  French  royalism  to  republicanism,  passing 
through  the  ferocious  French  Revolution  and  Commune;  from  czarism 
to  state  capitalism,  passing  through  the  latest  bloody  Russian  Revolution 
and  a  period  of  so-called  'communism'.  Now  we  are  witnessing  the 
struggles  of  ‘democracies'  with  ‘totalitarian  states',  passing  as  yet  through 
the  recent  ruthless  Spanish  War,  second  World  War,  etc.,  etc. 

Similarly  we  can  give  illustrations  of  painful  transitions  from  one 
system  to  another  from  the  history  of  science,  which  were  also  accom¬ 
panied  by  bewilderment  and  labour:  for  instance,  the  passing  from  the 
ptolemaic  to  the  copernican,  from  euclidean  to  non-euclidean,  newtonian 
to  non-newtonian  (einsteinian),  etc.,  systems. 

In  all  these  transitions  it  took  one  or  more  generations  before  the 
upheaval  subsided  and  an  adjustment  was  made  to  the  new  conditions. 

No  matter  how  painful  and  disturbing  these  transitions  were,  they 
were  still  changes  and  revisions  within  the  then  most  general,  intensional 
aristotelian  system.  This  system  was  imposed  on  the  white  race  by  the 
‘church  fathers'.  Its  strength  and  influence  was  due  to  its  academically 
rationalized  general  verbal  formulations  which  were  set  forth  in  text¬ 
books,  and  thus  became  teachable.  From  the  beginning  the  aristotelian 
system  as  formulated  was  inadequate  and  many  attempts  at  corrections 
were  made.  The  white  race  was  impressed  by  the  church  that  ‘Aristotle 
spake’,  and  there  was  nothing  more  to  be  said.  In  fact,  attempts  to  revise 
this  system  were  prohibited  even  up  to  very  recent  times.  Just  the  same, 
new  facts  which  would  not  fit  the  aristotelian  and  church  patterns  were 
accumulating  and  so  new  methods,  languages  of  special  structure,  etc., 
were  required. 

Perhaps  an  illustration  from  the  history  of  mathematics  will  help. 
For  more  than  2,000  years  by  necessity  mathematicians  differentiated 
and  integrated  in  some  clumsy  fashion  in  order  to  solve  individual  prob¬ 
lems.  But  only  after  the  formulation  of  a  general  theory  by  Newton  and 
by  Leibnitz  did  the  general  method  become  teachable  and  communicable 
as  a  general  practical  discipline  (see  p.  574)  which  provided  the  founda¬ 
tions  for  future  developments  in  mathematics. 

The  aristotelian  system  had  been  formulated  in  a  very  rationalized 
way.  Non-aristotelian  attempts  have  been  and  are  being  made  con¬ 
tinually  in  limited  areas.  The  difficulty  was  that  no  methodological  gen¬ 
eral  theory  based  on  the  new  developments  of  life  and  science  had  been 
formulated  until  general  semantics  and  a  general,  extensional,  teachable 

1  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 

and  communicable,  non-aristotelian  system  was  produced.  The  mam 
difficulties  ahead  are  neuro-semantic  and  neuro-linguistic  because  for 
more  than  2,000  years  our  nervous  systems  have  been  canalized  in  the 
inadequate,  intensional,  often  delusional,  aristotelian  orientations,  which 
are  reflected  even  in  the  structure  of  the  language  we  habitually  use. 

It  may  be  helpful  to  indicate  some  historical  facts  of  the  development 
of  our  orientations  since  Socrates  (469-399  B.C.).  Socrates  was  the 
son  of  a  sculptor  and  himself  did  some  work  with  the  chisel  and  his  hands. 
He  became  an  important  founder  of  a  school  of  ‘philosophy .  In  brief, 
this  school  had  very  high  standards  for  science,  seeking  the  application  of 
the  science  of  the  time  to  life,  so  that  it  became  what  may  be  called  a 
‘school  of  wisdom’. 

One  of  his  students,  Plato  (427-347  B.C.),  who  came  from  an  aristo¬ 
cratic  family,  became  the  founder  of  a  different  school,  called  the  Acad¬ 
emy’,  and  the  ‘father’  of  what  may  be  called  ‘mathematical  philosophy’. 
Unlike  his  teacher,  he  began,  in  his  ‘Doctrine  of  Ideas’,  to  verbally  split 
humans  into  ‘ bod y*  and  ‘mind’,  as  if  they  could  be  so  split  in  living  beings. 
He  built  a  system  of  ‘ immaterialism ’  or  'idealism? , 

Aristotle  (384-322  B.C.),  the  son  of  a  physician,  was  the  student  of 
Plato,  and  particularly  interested  in  biology,  other  natural  sciences,  etc. 
He  founded  the  most  influential  of  the  three  schools,  which  is  called  by 
his  natn*  He  was  undoubtedly  one  of  the  most  gifted  men  mankind  has 
ever  known.  As  usual  in  such  cases,  the  study  of  one  branch  of  knowl¬ 
edge  leads  to  another,  so  Aristotle  was  led  to  the  study  of  ‘logic’,  lin¬ 
guistic  structure,  etc.,  about  which  he  produced  scholarly  treatises  or 
t»irtWiks,  ultimately  formulating  the  most  complete  system  of  his  time. 
Because  of  the  completeness  of  the  system,  backed  by  powerful  influences, 
it  has  moulded  our  orientations  and  evaluations  up  to  the  present.  The 
man  on  the  street,  our  education,  medicine  and  even  sciences,  are  still  m 
the  clutches  of  the  system  of  Aristotle,  a  system  inadequate  for  1941  yet 
perhaps  satisfactory  2,300  years  ago,  when  conditions  of  life  were  rela¬ 
tively  so  simple,  when  orientations  were  on  the  macroscopic  level  only, 
and  knowledge  of  scientific  facts  was  practically  nil  (see  p.  371  ff.). 

In  Aristotle’s  system  as  applied,  the  split  becomes  complete  and  insti¬ 
tutionalized,  with  jails  for  the  ‘animal’  and  churches  for  the  ‘soul’.  Now 
we  begin  to  realize  how  pernicious  and  retarding  for  civilization  that  split 
is  For  instance,  only  since  Einstein  and  Minkowski  do  we  begin  to 
understand  that  ‘space’  and  ‘time’  cannot  be  split  empirically,  otherwise 
we  create  for  ourselves  delusional  worlds.  Only  since  their  work  has 
modern  sub-microscopic  physics  with  all  its  accomplishments  become 
possible. 

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION  li 

Similarly,  and  tragically,  this  applies  to  medicine.  Until  recently  we 
have  had  a  split  medicine.  One  branch,  general  medicine,  was  interested 
in  the  body*  (soma)  ;  the  other  was  interested  in  the  ‘soul*  (‘psyche* ). 
The  net  result  was  that  general  medicine  was  a  glorified  form  of  veterin¬ 
ary  science,  while  psychiatry  remained  metaphysical.*  However,  it  has 
been  found  empirically  that  a  great  many  ‘physical*  ailments  are  of  a 
semantogenic  origin.  Only  a  few  years  ago  general  physicians  began  to 
understand  that  they  cannot  deal  with  humans  without  knowing  some- 
thing  about  psychiatry,  and  psychosomatic  medicine  began  to  be  formu¬ 
lated.  I  cannot  go  into  further  detail  here,  except  to  mention  that  this 
is  another  constructive  step  away  from  the  aristotelian  system,  which  as 
applied  trains  us  in  artificial,  verbal  splits. 

If  we  train  in  methods  which  in  principle  lead  to  splitting  the  person¬ 
ality,  we  obviously  train  or  prepare  the  ground  for  dementia  praecox  or 
schizophrenia,  which  very  often  involves  a  split  personality.  At  any 
rate,  it  does  not  seem  to  be  advisable  for  sanity,  and  so  proper  evaluation 
of  facts*  and  ‘reality*,  to  train  our  children  in  delusional  methods.  Per¬ 
sonally,  the  author  is  always  profoundly  shocked  that  parents,  who  after 
all  care  for  their  children,  can  tolerate  educators,  physicians,  scientists, 
etc.,  who  train  their  children  in  such  pernicious  and  hopelessly  antiquated 
methods.  I  also  always  wonder  whether  educators,  physicians,  scientists 
and  other  professionals  realize  what  harm  they  can  do  by  disregarding 
factors  of  sanity,  or  by  ignoring  them. 

It  is  pitiful  to  watch  how  even  some  of  the  most  outstanding  scientists 
in  the  world  are  unable  to  understand  what  a  passing  from  one  system  to 
another  means.  Thus,  for  example,  an  Encyclopedia  of  Unified  Science 
was  projected.  A  number  of  very  scholarly  treatises  were  published  in 
it,  and  yet  because  the  difficulties  were  not  faced  squarely  the  authors  are 
missing  the  point  that  neuro-semantic  and  neuro-linguistic  mechanisms 
are  involved  and  that  we  are  passing  from  one  system  to  another. 

One  of  the  tremendous  obstacles  in  the  revision  of  the  aristotelian 
system  is  exactly  the  excellence  of  the  work  of  Aristotle  based  on  the  very 
few  scientific  facts  known  2,300  years  ago.  The  aim  of  his  work  circa 
350  b.c.  was  to  formulate  the  essential  nature  of  science  (350  b.c.)  and 
the  forms  and  laws  of  science.  His  immediate  goal  was  entirely  methodo¬ 
logical  (350  B.c.),  and  he  aimed  to  formulate  a  general  method  for  ‘all* 
scientific  work.  He  was  even  expounding  the  theory  of  symmetrical 
relations,  the  relation  of  the  general  to  the  particular,  etc.  In  his  days 
these  orientations  were  by  necessity  two-valued  and  ‘objective*;  hence 

*  Korzybski,  Alfred.  Neuro-semantic  and  Neuro-linguistic  Mechanisms  of 
Extensionalixation.  Amtrican  Journal  of  Psychiatry ,  Vol.  93,  No.  1,  July,  1936. 

lii  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 

follows  his  whole  system,  then  more  or  less  satisfactory  on  macroscopic 
levels.  A  modem  revision  of  the  aristotelian  system  or  the  building  of  a 
non-aristotelian  system  involves,  or  is  based  on,  similar  aims,  namely, 
the  formulation  of  a  general  method  not  only  for  scientific  work,  but  also 

life,  as  we  know  it  today  (1941).  (  _ 

Modern  scientific  developments  show  that  what  we  label  ‘objects  or 
‘objective’  are  mere  nervous  constructs  inside  of  our  skulls  which  our 
nervous  systems  have  abstracted  electro-colloidally  from  the  actual  world 
of  electronic  processes  on  the  sub-microscopic  level.  And  so  we  have  to 
face  a  complete  methodological  departure  from  two-valued,  ‘objective’ 
orientations  to  general ,  infinite-valued,  process  orientations,  as  necessi¬ 
tated  by  scientific  discoveries  for  at  least  the  past  sixty  years. 

The  aim  of  the  work  of  Aristotle  and  the  work  of  the  non-aristotelians 
is  similar,  except  for  the  date  of  our  human  development  and  the  advance 
of  science.  The  problem  is  whether  we  shall  deal  with  science  and  scien¬ 
tific  methods  of  350  b.c.  or  of  1941  a.c.  In  general  semantics,  in  build¬ 
ing  up  a  non-aristotelian  system,  the  aims  of  Aristotle  are  preserved  yet 
scientific  methods  are  brought  up  to  date. 

Section  D.  A  non-aristotelian  revision . 

In  an  attempt  to  convey  the  magnitude  of  the  task  we  are  now  con¬ 
fronting,  I  can  do  no  better  than  to  summarize  roughly  in  the  following 
tabulation  some  of  the  more  outstanding  points  of  difference  between  the 
aristotelian  system  as  it  shapes  our  lives  today,  and  is  lived  by;  and  a 
scientific,  non-aristotelian  system,  as  it  will,  perhaps,  guide  our  lives 
sometime  in  the  future. 

Old  Aristotelian  Orientations 
(circa  350  b.c.) 

New  General  Semantic  Non- Aristo¬ 
telian  Orientations 
(1941  a.c.) 

1. 

Subject-predicate  methods 

Relational  methods 

2. 

Symmetrical  relations,  inadequate 
for  proper  evaluation 

Asymmetrical  relations,  indispensable 
for  proper  evaluation 

3. 

Static,  ‘ objective %  ‘permanent*,  ‘sub¬ 
stance*,  ‘solid  matter*,  etc.,  orien¬ 
tations 

Dynamic,  ever-changing,  etc.,  electronic 
process  orientations 

4. 

‘Properties*  of  ‘substance*,  ‘attri¬ 
butes*,  ‘qualities*  of  ‘matter,*  etc. 

Relative  invariance  of  function,  dynamic 
structure,  etc. 

5. 

Two-valued,  ‘either-or*,  inflexible, 
dogmatic  orientations 

Infinite-valued  flexibility,  degree  orien¬ 
tations 

T 

Static,  finalistic  *  alines/;  finite  num¬ 
ber  of  characteristics  attitudes 

Dynamic  non-allness;  infinite  number  of 
characteristics  attitudes 

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION  liii 

Aristotelian  Orientations 

Non-Aristotelian  Orientations 

7.  By  definition  ‘absolute  sameness  in 
“all”  respects*  (‘identity*) 

i  Empirical  non-identity,  a  natural  law  as 
universal  as  gravitation 

8.  Two-valued  ‘certainty*,  etc. 

Infinite-valued  maximum  probability 

9.  Static  absolutism 

Dynamic  relativism 

10.  By  definition  ‘absolute  emptiness*, 
absolute  space*,  etc. 

Empirical  fullness  of  electro-magnetic, 
gravitational,  etc.,  fields 

11.  By  definition  ‘absolute  time* 

Empirical  space-time 

12.  By  definition  ‘absolute  simultaneity* 

Empirical  relative  simultaneity 

13.  Additive  (‘and*),  linear 

Functional,  non-linear 

14.  (3  + 1) -dimensional  'space*  and 
‘time* 

4-dimensional  space-time 

15.  Euclidean  system 

Non-euclidean  systems 

16.  Newtonian  system 

Einsteinian  or  non-newtonian  systems 

17.  ‘Sense*  data  predominant 

Inferential  data  as  fundamental  new  fac¬ 
tors 

18.  Macroscopic  and  microscopic  levels 

Sw^-microscopic  levels 

19.  Methods  of  magic  (self-deception) 

Elimination  of  self-deception 

20.  Fibers,  neurons,  etc.,  ‘objective* 
orientations 

Electro-colloidal  process  orientations 

21.  Eventual  ‘organism-as-a-whole*,  dis¬ 
regarding  environmental  factors 

Orgamsm-as-a-who!e-tWm*V<wm*f»/,f, 
introducing  new  unavoidable  factors 

22.  Elementalistic  structure  of  language 
and  orientations 

Non-elementalistic  structure  of  language 
and  orientations 

23.  ‘Emotion*  and  ‘intellect*,  etc. 

Semantic  reactions 

24.  'Body*  and  ‘mind*,  etc. 

Psychosomatic  integration 

25.  Tendency  to  split  ‘personality* 

Integrating  ‘personality* 

26.  Handicapping  nervous  integration 

Producing  automatically  thalamo-corti- 
cal  integration 

27 .  Intensional  structure  of  language 
and  orientations,  perpetuating: 

Extensional  structure  of  language  and 
orientations,  producing : 

28.  Identifications  in  value : 

a)  of  electronic,  electro-colloidal,  ’ 

etc.,  stages  of  processes  with 
the  silent,  non-verbal,  ‘objec¬ 
tive’  levels 

b)  of  individuals,  situations,  etc. 

c)  of  orders  of  abstractions 

Consciousness  of  abstracting 

1  Extensional  devices 

29.  Pathologically  reversed  order  of 
evaluation 

Natural  order  of  evaluation 

30.  Conducive  to  neuro-semantic  tension 

