Producing  neuro-semantic  relaxation 

liv 

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 

Aristotelian  Orientations 

N on- Aristotelian  Orientations 

31. 

Injurious  psychosomatic  effects 

Beneficial  psychosomatic  effects 

32. 

Influencing  toward  un-sanity 

Influencing  toward  sanity 

33. 

‘Action  at  a  distance',  metaphysical 
false-to-fact  orientations 

‘Action  by  contact*,  neuro-physiological 
scientific  orientations 

34. 

Two- valued  causality,  and  so  conse¬ 
quent  ‘final  causation' 

Infinite-valued  causality,  where  the  ‘final 
causation’  hypothesis  is  not  needed 

35. 

Mathematics  derived  from  ‘logic', 
with  resulting  verbal  paradoxes 

‘Logic’  derived  from  mathematics,  elimi¬ 
nating  verbal  paradoxes 

36. 

Avoiding  empirical  paradoxes 

Facing  empirical  paradoxes 

37. 

Adjusting  empirical  facts  to  verbal 
patterns 

Adjusting  verbal  patterns  to  empirical 
facts 

38. 

Primitive  static  ‘science'  (religions) 

Modern  dynamic  ‘religions’  (science) 

39. 

Anthropomorphic 

Non-anthropomorphic 

40. 

Non-similarity  of  structure  between 
language  and  facts 

Similarity  of  structure  between  language 
and  facts 

41. 

Improper  evaluations,  resulting  in: 

Proper  evaluations,  tested  by: 

42. 

Impaired  predictability 

Maximum  predictability 

43. 

Disregarded 

Undefined  terms 

44. 

Disregarded 

Self-reflexiveness  of  language 

45. 

Disregarded 

Multiordinal  mechanisms  and  terms 

46. 

Disregarded 

defined  character  of  terms 

47. 

Disregarded 

Inferential  terms  as  terms 

48. 

Disregarded 

Neuro-linguistic  environments  consid¬ 
ered  as  environment 

49. 

Disregarded 

Neuro-semantic  environments  considered 
as  environment 

50. 

Disregarded 

Decisive,  automatic  effect  of  the  struc¬ 
ture  of  language  on  types  of  evalua¬ 
tion,  and  so  neuro-semantic  reactions 

51. 

Elementalistic,  verbal,  intensional 
‘meaning*,  or  still  worse,  ‘meaning 
of  meaning* 

Non-elementalistic,  extensional,  by  fact 
evaluations 

52. 

Antiquated 

Modern,  1941 

The  new  non-aristotelian  orientations  differ  as 

MUCH  FROM  THE  ARISTOTELIAN  AS  THE  ARISTOTELIAN 

DIFFER  FROM  THE  PRIMITIVE  TYPES  OF  EVALUATION. 

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 

lv 

The  old  orientations  are  being  perpetuated,  as  a  rule  unknowingly, 
through  the  aristotelian  structure  of  our  language,  our  institutions,  etc. 
The  new  orientations  are  simpler  than  the  old  because  they  are  closer  to 
empirical  facts,  and  so  are  even  more  easily  absorbed  by  children — pro¬ 
vided  parents,  teachers,  etc.,  are  themselves  aware  of  the  new  methods 
and  so  can  give  the  children  guidance. 

The  difficulties  we  are  now  facing,  with  the  many  important  new  fac¬ 
tors  introduced  in  a  non-aristotelian  system,  listed  roughly  in  the  tabula¬ 
tion,  cannot  be  evaluated  effectively  unless  we  understand  the  role  that 
new  factors  play  in  our  generalizations. 

(5,12) 

Section  E.  New  factors :  the  havoc  they  play  with  our  generalizations . 

In  mathematics  and  science  we  use  extensively  the  method  of  inter¬ 
polation.  In  building  curves  we  do  not  have  all  the  points  or  data.  We 
have  a  number  of  them  and  then  connect  the  points  with  a  smooth  curve, 
y  The  equation  of  that  curve  is  given  on  the 

basis  of  the  actual  data  at  hand.  The  nervous 
processes  which  are  involved  in  interpolations 
and  building  up  equations  are  also  involved  in 
producing  ordinary  generalizations  in  daily 
life ;  that  is,  we  interpolate  from  the  data  we 
have  and  then  generalize  in  words  instead  of 
equations.  It  is  well  known  that  sometimes 
when  a  new  datum  is  discovered  it  transforms 
the  curve  entirely,  with  a  corresponding 
change  in  the  equation  (generalization) . 

Fig.  2  as  an  illustration  will  make  this 
clearer.  If  we  measure  the  experimental 
points  (1,0),  (3,6),  (5,12),  we  would  find 
them  to  lie  on  the  line  abc  with  the  equation 
y~3x  -3,  and  we  might  conclude  therefrom 
that  further  similar  experiments  would  con¬ 
firm  the  linearity  of  the  relationship  being 
studied.  But  if  a  further  analysis  yields  the 
point  (2,6),  the  simplest  curve  fitting  these  data  is  now  the  curve  adbec, 
expressed  by  the  equation  y  =  x3  - 9x2  +  26x -IS,  which  is  different  and 
much  more  complex  than  before,  because  it  is  a  cubic  equation  instead  of 
a  linear  equation.41 

Fig.  2 

*  I  am  indebted  for  this  example  to  Dr.  A.  S.  Householder,  University  of 
Chicago. 

lvi  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 

It  is  not  generally  recognized  what  havoc  the  discovery  of  a  single 
new,  important,  structural  factor  may  play  with  our  generalizations.  In 
science  and  ordinary  life  we  are  coming  across  such  new  factors  quite 
often,  and  we  have  to  change  our  equations  or  generalizations,  and  so 
our  standards  of  evaluation,  if  we  do  not  want  to  build  up  delusional 
situations  for  ourselves. 

As  an  example  I  can  suggest  here  the  work  of  Professor  W.  Bur- 
ridge,*  who  in  his  physiological  investigations  introduced  the  new 
unavoidable  factor  of  the  electro-colloidal  structure  of  life.  In  this  case 
it  does  not  matter  whether  the  particular  colloidal  theory  suggested  by 
Burridge  is  correct  or  not.  The  fact  that  he  introduced  an  important 
new  structural  factor  leads  to  entirely  different  interpretations,  general¬ 
izations,  etc.,  although  the  first  order  empirical  facts  remain.  Such  an 
introduction  requires  a  complete  revision  of  the  generalizations  of  biol- 
ogy,  physiology,  neurology,  etc.,  and  therefore  even  medicine  and 
psychiatry.  Incidentally,  psychosomatic  results  become  at  least  intel¬ 
ligible. 

Other  examples  may  be  given,  such  as  the  work  of  Professor  William 
F.  Petersen,**  who  introduced  the  new  factor  of  weather  into  medicine ; 
or  of  Freud,  who  introduced  the  ‘unconscious*,  etc. ;  or  of  Lorentz,  Ein¬ 
stein  and  others,  who  introduced  the  finite  velocity  of  light  into  the  new- 
tonian  system,  etc.,  etc.  As  is  well  known,  the  introduction  of  these  new 
factors  revolutionized  constructively  the  older  theories. 

The  scientific  requirements  of  a  new  theory  are  very  exacting.  A 
new  theory  must  account  for  the  known  facts  and  predict  new  facts  fol¬ 
lowing  the  new  generalizations,  which  in  turn  depend  upon  the  new  fac¬ 
tors  or  structural  assumptions  introduced.  The  predicted  new  facts 
must  then  be  verified  empirically. 

In  general  semantics  we  introduce  a  number  of  new  unavoidable  struc¬ 
tural  factors;  among  others,  our  neuro-semantic  (neuro-evaluational) 
and  neuro-linguistic  environments  as  environment .  Such  introductions 
also  require  a  radical  revision  of  what  we  know,  and  have  wide  applica¬ 
tions  in  daily  life,  as  well  as  in  sciences,  including  the  foundation  of 
mathematics  (see  chapters  XI V,  XV,  XVIII,  and  XIX)  and  physics 
(see  chapter  XVII).  These  new  factors  should  particularly  interest 
parents,  educators,  medical  men,  psychiatrists,  and  other  specialists. 

The  introduction  of  new  factors  may  at  first  produce  seeming  diffi- 

*  Dean  of  the  Medical  Faculty  and  Principal  of  King  George's  Medical  College, 
Lucknow,  India. 

**  Professor  of  Pathology,  University  of  Illinois,  College  of  Medicine. 

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION  lvii 

culties  because  of  the  unfamiliarity  of  a  new  terminology  which  embodies 
the  new  structural  assumptions,  and  because  of  the  necessity  of  a  re¬ 
canalization  of  our  neuro-linguistic  habits,  etc.  Yet  after  the  new  orien¬ 
tations  are  acquired,  the  new  issues  become  much  simpler  than  the  older, 
because  they  are  better  understood  (see  p.  97). 

In  at  least  one  historical  case,  it  was  the  omission  of  an  unnecessary 
artificial  assumption  that  brought  about  a  transformation  of  the  whole 
system.  I  speak  here  about  euclidean  geometry,  which  assumes  the 
equal  distance  of  parallels,  and  the  non-eucfidean  geometries,  which 
eliminated  this  equal  distance  postulate  as  unnecessary.  The  results  were 
very  striking.  Thus,  in  the  euclidean  system  we  build  curves  out  of  little 
bits  of  ‘straight  lines’.  We  do  the  opposite  in  the  newer  geometries — we 
start  with  curves,  shortest  distances,  etc.,  not  ‘straight  lines*  (as  no  one 
knows  what  that  means),  and  build  up  ‘straight  lines’  as  the  limit  of  an 
arc  of  a  circle  with  an  ‘infinite  radius’  (see  p.  590). 

Further  explanations  are  given  in  the  text,  but  I  hope  that  I  have  con¬ 
veyed  to  the  reader  the  fundamental  character  of  these  problems  and 
some  of  the  difficulties  encountered  at  first  when  new  structural  factors 
are  introduced.  Even  the  elimination  of  a  postulate  may  be  translated 
into  an  introduction  of  a  new  negative  factor.  This  translation  is  impor¬ 
tant  in  life,  although  it  may  be  unimportant  in  technical  mathematics. 
In  science  as  well  as  in  life  we  deal  all  the  time  with  this  kind  of  problems, 
and  when  they  are  not  understood  structurally,  we  are  only  plunged  into 
paradoxes  and  bewilderment,  and  potential  maladjustment. 

Section  F.  Non-aristotelian  methods, 

1.  NEUROLOGICAL  MECHANISMS  OF  EX  TENSION ALIZ  A  T1  ON 

There  is  an  especially  broad  generalization,  already  referred  to,  which 
empirically  indicates  a  fundamental  difference  between  the  traditional, 
aristotelian,  intensional  orientations,  and  the  new  non-aristotelian  exten- 
sional  orientations,  and  in  many  ways  summarizes  the  radical  differences 
between  the  two  systems.  This  is  the  problem  of  intension  (spelled  with 
an  s)  and  extension.  Aristotle,  and  his  followers  even  today,  recognized 
the  difference  between  intension  and  extension.  However,  they  con¬ 
sidered  the  problem  in  the  abstract ,  never  applying  it  to  human  living 
reactions  as  living  reactions,  which  can  be  predominantly  intensional  or 
predominantly  extensional.  The  interested  reader  is  advised  to  consult 
any  textbook  on  ‘logic’  concerning  ‘intension’  and  ‘extension*,  as  well  as 
the  material  given  in  this  text  (see  index). 

The  difference  can  be  illustrated  briefly  by  giving  examples  of  ‘defini- 

lviii  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 

tions\  Thus  a  ‘definition*  by  intension  is  given  in  terms  of  aristotelian 
‘properties*.  For  instance,  we  may  verbally  ‘define*  ‘man*  as  a  ‘feather¬ 
less  biped*,  ‘rational  animal*,  and  what  not,  which  really  makes  no  differ¬ 
ence,  because  no  listing  of  ‘properties*  could  possibly  cover  ‘all*  the  char¬ 
acteristics  of  Smithi,  Smith2,  etc.,  and  their  inter-relations. 

By  extension  ‘man*  is  ‘defined*  by  exhibiting  a  class  of  individuals 
made  up  of  Smithi,  Smith2,  etc. 

On  the  surface  this  difference  may  appear  unimportant ;  not  so  in  liv¬ 
ing  life  applications .  The  deeper  problems  of  neurological  mechanisms 
enter  here.  If  we  orient  ourselves  predominantly  by  intension  or  verbal 
definitions,  our  orientations  depend  mostly  on  the  cortical  region.  If  we 
orient  ourselves  by  extension  or  facts,  this  type  of  orientation  by  neces¬ 
sity  follows  the  natural  order  of  evaluation,  and  involves  thalamic  factors, 
introducing  automatically  cortically  delayed  reactions.  In  other  words, 
orientations  by  intension  tend  to  train  our  nervous  systems  in  a  split  be¬ 
tween  the  functions  of  the  cortical  and  thalamic  regions ;  orientations  by 
extension  involve  the  integration  of  cortico-thalamic  functions. 

Orientations  by  extension  induce  an  automatic  delay  of  reactions, 
which  automatically  stimulates  the  cortical  region  and  regulates  and  pro¬ 
tects  the  reactions  of  the  usually  over-stimulated  thalamic  region. 

What  was  said  here  is  elementary  from  the  point  of  view  of  neurology. 
The  difficulty  is  that  this  little  bit  of  neurological  knowledge  is  not  applied 
in  practice.  Neurologists,  psychiatrists,  etc.,  have  treated  these  prob¬ 
lems  in  an  ‘abstract*,  ‘academic*,  detached  way  only,  somehow,  entirely 
unaware  that  living  human  reactions  depend  on  the  working  of  the  human 
nervous  system,  from  which  dependence  there  is  no  escape.  No  wonder 
‘philosophers*,  ‘logicians*,  mathematicians,  etc.,  disregard  the  working  of 
their  nervous  systems  if  even  neurologists  and  psychiatrists  still  orient 
themselves  by  verbal  fictions  in  the  ‘ abstract *. 

If  we  investigate,  it  seems  appalling  how  little  of  the  vast  knowledge 
we  have  is  actually  applied.  Even  the  ancient  Persians  showed  their 
understanding  of  the  difference  between  learning  and  applying  in  their 
proverb :  ‘He  who  learns  and  learns  and  yet  does  not  what  he  knows,  is 
one  who  plows  and  plows  yet  never  sows*.  In  this  new  modem  non- 
aristotelian  system  we  have  not  only  to  ‘know*  elementary  facts  of  modem 
science,  including  neuro-linguistic  and  neuro-semantic  researches,  but 
also  to  apply  them.  In  fact,  the  whole  passage  from  the  aristotelian  to 
non-aristotelian  systems  depends  on  this  change  of  attitude  from  inten¬ 
sion  to  extension,  from  macroscopic  to  sub-microscopic  orientations, 
from  ‘objective*  to  process  orientations,  from  subject-predicate  to  rela¬ 
tional  evaluations,  etc.  This  is  a  laborious  process  and  months  of  self- 

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION  lix 

discipline  are  required  for  adults  before  these  new  methods  can  be  applied 
generally ;  children  as  a  rule  have  no  difficulties. 

If  we  stop  to  reflect,  however,  it  seems  obvious  that  those  who  are 
trained  in  two-valued,  macroscopic,  ‘objective’,  aristotelian  orientations 
only,  are  thoroughly  unable  to  have  modern,  electro-colloidal,  sub-micro¬ 
scopic,  infinite-valued,  process  orientations  in  life,  which  can  be  acquired 
only  by  training  in  non-aristotelian  methods. 

It  is  sad  indeed  to  deal  with  even  young  scientists  in  the  colloidal  and 
quantum  fields  who,  after  taking  off  their  aprons  in  the  laboratory,  re¬ 
lapse  immediately  into  the  two-valued,  prevalent  aristotelian  orientations, 
thus  ceasing  to  be  scientific  1941.  In  many  ways  these  scientists  are 
worse  off  than  the  ‘man  on  the  street’,  because  of  the  artificially  accen¬ 
tuated  split  between  their  scientific  and  their  life  orientations.  Although 
they  work  in  an  infinite-valued,  non-aristotelian  field,  even  they  need  spe¬ 
cial  training  to  become  conscious  of  how  to  apply  their  own  scientific  non- 
aristotelian  methods  to  life  problems. 

Empirically  the  consequences  of  training  in  the  new  methods  are 
astonishingly  far-reaching.  This  is  easily  understood  after  reflection, 
because  the  integrating  of  the  functions  of  the  cortical  and  thalamic  re¬ 
gions  brings  about  better  functioning  of  glands,  organs,  etc.  Although 
general  semantics  is  not  a  medical  science,  we  can  understand  why  the 
non-aristotelian  extensional  thalamo-cortical  methods  bring  about  a  great 
deal  of  stabilization  and  even  psychosomatic  consequences,  as  the  em¬ 
pirical  results  achieved  by  my  psychiatric  co-workers  and  myself  indicate. 

2.  NEURO-SEMANTIC  RELAXATION 

The  optimum  working  of  the  nervous  system  depends,  among  other 
things,  on  ‘normal’  blood  pressure,  which  is  predominantly  a  thalamic 
function,  supplying  the  nervous  system  with  necessary  blood  circulation. 
As  both  affective,  or  ‘emotional’,  responses  and  blood  pressure  are  neuro- 
logically  closely  connected,  it  is  fundamental  for  ‘emotional’  balance  to 
have  ‘normal’  blood  pressure,  and  vice  versa . 

In  general  semantics  we  utilize  what  I  call  ‘neuro-semantic  relaxa¬ 
tion',  which,  as  attested  by  physicians,  usually  brings  about  ‘normal’ 
blood  pressure;  that  is,  it  lowers  abnormally  high  pressure  and  raises 
abnormally  low  pressure,  thus  regulating  the  essential  blood  circulation, 
and  so  blood  supply.  The  standards  for  ‘normal’  are  given  in  statistical 
averages  and  are  not  accurate  for  the  given  individual,  and  at  different 
times.  These  conditions  and  beneficial  consequences  are  strictly  em¬ 
pirical,  and  must  be  taken  into  account,  regardless  of  the  fact  that  the 
present  scientific  theories  on  this  subject  are  not  yet  clear.  It  must  be 

lx 

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 

realized  that  for  the  'normal’  working  of  the  nervous  system  we  must 
have  a  proper  blood  circulation,  which  may  be  affected  by  the  tension  of 
blood  vessels,  and  is  also  connected  with  ‘emotional*  tension .  We  are 
never  aware  of  this  particular  steady  kind  of  ‘emotional*  tension,  which 
involves  hidden  fears,  anxieties,  uncertainties,  frustrations,  etc,,  and 
through  the  nervous  mechanisms  of  projection  colour  harmfully  our  atti¬ 
tudes  toward  the  world  and  life  in  general.  Such  conditions  result  in 
defensiveness,  which  is  no  defense,  but  a  wasteful,  useless  drain  on  the 
limited  nervous  capacities. 

Some  details  of  the  mechanisms  and  techniques  involved,  as  they 
affect,  among  others,  so-called  ‘speech  difficulties*,  (stuttering,  etc.)  are 
given  by  Professor  Wendell  Johnson,  University  of  Iowa,  in  his  Lan¬ 
guage  and  Speech  Hygiene:  An  Application  of  General  Semantics,  pub¬ 
lished  as  the  first  monograph  of  the  Institute  of  General  Semantics. 
More  details  concerning  neuro-semantic  relaxation  will  be  presented  in 
professional  papers. 

3.  EXTENSIONAL  DEVICES  AND  SOME  APPLICATIONS 

To  achieve  extensionalization  we  utilize  what  I  call  ‘extensional 
devices* : 

1)  Indexes 

2)  Dates 

3)  Etc.  ( et  cetera ) 

4)  Quotes 

5)  Hyphens 

Working  Devices 
Safety  Devices 

It  should  be  noticed  that  in  a  four-dimensional  world  dating  is  only  a 
particular  temporal  index  by  which  we  can  deal  effectively  with  space- 
time.  In  non-aristotelian  orientations  these  extensional  devices  should 
be  used  habitually  and  permanently,  with  a  slight  motion  of  the  hands 
to  indicate  absolute  individuals,  events,  situations,  etc.,  which  change  at 
different  dates,  also  different  orders  of  abstraction,  etc.  Thus  thalamic 
factors  become  involved,  without  which  the  coveted  thalamo-cortical  inte¬ 
gration  cannot  he  accomplished . 

I  may  add  that  all  existing  psychotherapy,  no  matter  of  what  school, 
is  based  on  the  partial  and  particular  extensionalization  of  a  given  patient, 
depending  on  the  good  luck  and  personal  skill  of  the  psychiatrist.  Un¬ 
fortunately  these  specialists  are  in  the  main  unaware  of  what  is  said  here, 
and  of  the  existence  of  a  theory  of  sanity  which  gives  general,  simple,  and 
workable  thalamo-cortical  methods  for  extensionalization,  and  so  thalamo¬ 
cortical  integration. 

A  few  illustrations  of  the  wide  practical  applications  of  some  of  the 
devices  may  be  given  here.  In  many  instances  serious  maladjustments 

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION  lxi 

follow  when  ‘hate*  absorbs  the  whole  of  the  affective  energy  of  the  given 
individual.  In  such  extreme  cases  ‘hate’  exhausts  the  limited  affective 
energy.  No  energy  is  left  for  positive  feelings  and  the  picture  is  often 
that  of  a  dementia  praecox,  etc.  Thus  an  individual  'hates*  a  generalisa¬ 
tion  ‘mother*,  ‘father*,  etc.,  and  so  by  identification  ‘hates*  ‘all  mothers’, 
‘all  fathers’,  etc.,  in  fact,  hates  the  whole  fabric  of  human  society,  and 
becomes  a  neurotic  or  even  a  psychotic.  Obviously,  it  is  useless  to  preach 
‘love*  for  those  who  have  hurt  and  have  done  the  harm.  Just  the  oppo¬ 
site  ;  as  a  preliminary  step,  by  indexing  we  allocate  or  limit  the  ‘hate*  to 
the  individual  Smithi,  instead  of  a  ‘hate’  for  a  generalization  which 
spreads  over  the  world.  In  actual  cases  we  can  watch  how  this  alloca¬ 
tion  or  limitation  of  ‘hate*  from  a  generalization  to  an  individual  helps 
the  given  person.  The  more  they  ‘hate*  the  individual  Smithi  instead  of 
a  generalization,  the  more  positive  affective  energy  is  liberated,  and  the 
more  ‘human*  and  ‘normal*  they  become.  It  is  a  long  struggle,  but  so  far 
empirically  invariably  successful,  provided  the  student  is  willing  to  work 
persistently  at  himself. 

But  even  this  indexed  individualised  ‘hate’  is  not  desirable,  and  we 
eliminate  it  rather  simply  by  dating.  Obviously  Smithi1920  is  not 
Smithi1940  and  most  of  the  time  hurti1920  would  not  be  a  ‘hurt*  in  1940. 
With  such  types  of  orientations  the  individual  becomes  adjusted,  and 
serious  improvements  in  family  and  social  relationships  follow,  because 
