the  student  has  trained  himself  in  a  general  method  for  handling  his  own 
problems. 

Similar  mechanisms  of  generalization  through  identifications  are  in¬ 
volved  in  morbid  and  other  generalized  fears  which  are  so  disastrous  for 
daily  adjustment.  Because  thalamic  factors  are  involved,  these  difficul¬ 
ties  are  helped  greatly  or  eliminated  by  a  similar  use  of  the  extensional 
devices  to  individualize  and  then  date  the  allocated  fears. 

What  a  heavy  price  we  may  sometimes  pay  for  the  disregard  of  exten¬ 
sional  devices  in  connection  with  the  structure  of  language,  can  be  illus¬ 
trated  no  better  than  by  the  life  history  and  work  of  Dr.  Sigmund  Freud. 
In  his  writings  Freud  ascribed  one  intensional  undifferentiated  ‘sex*  even 
to  infants,  which  revolted  public  opinion.  If  Freud  would  have  used  the 
extensional  devices  he  would  not  have  gotten  into  such  detrimental  pro¬ 
fessional  and  other  difficulties.  He  would  not  have  used  the  fiction  ‘sex’ 
without  indexes,  dates  and  quotes,  and  he  would  have  explained  that  an 
infant  has  a  ticklish  organ  which  could  be  labelled  ‘sex0°*  at  birth,  ‘sexx1* 
at  the  age  of  one,  ‘sex22*  at  the  age  of  two,  etc.  These  are  obviously  dif¬ 
ferent  in  life,  but  the  differences  are  hidden  by  the  one  abstract  defini¬ 
tional  term  ‘sex*,  and  made  obvious  only  by  the  extensional  techniques. 

lxii  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 

Let  us  be  frank  about  it.  The  intensional  abstract  ‘sex’  labels  a  fiction. 

By  extension  or  facts,  ‘sex’  varies  with  every  individual  not  only  with 
age  (dates),  but  in  relation  to  endless  other  factors,  and  can  be  handled 
adequately  only  by  the  use  of  extensional  devices. 

4.  IMPLICATIONS  OF  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  LANGUAGE 
In  what  is  said  above  we  were  already  dealing  with  the  change  from 
an  intensional  to  an  extensional  structure  of  language,  and  so  orienta¬ 
tion.  We  can  investigate  a  step  further,  and  find  that  the  aristotelian 
structure  of  language  is  in  the  main  elementalistic,  implying,  through 
structure,  a  split  or  separation  of  what  in  actuality  cannot  be  separated. 
For  instance,  we  can  verbally  split  ‘body’  and  ‘mind’,  ‘emotion  and  intel¬ 
lect’,  ‘space’  and  ‘time’,  etc.,  which  as  a  matter  of  fact  cannot  be  separated 
empirically,  and  can  be  split  only  verbally.  These  elementalistic,  split¬ 
ting,  structural  characteristics  of  language  have  been  firmly  rooted  in  us 
through  the  aristotelian  training.  It  built  for  us  a  fictitious  animistic 
world  not  much  more  advanced  than  that  of  the  primitives,  a  world  in 
which  under  present  conditions  an  optimum  adjustment  is  in  principle 

impossible.  . 

In  a  non-aristotelian  system  we  do  not  use  elementalistic  terminology 

to  represent  facts  which  are  non-elementalistic.  We  use  terms  like 
‘semantic  reactions’,  ‘psychosomatic’,  ‘space-time’,  etc.,  which  eliminate 
the  verbally  implied  splits,  and  consequent  mis-evaluations.  In  the  be¬ 
ginning  of  my  seminars  when  I  am  explaining  space-time,  students  often 
react  by  saying,  ‘Oh,  you  mean  “space”  and  “time”  ’.  This  translation 
would  abolish  the  whole  modern  advances  of  physics,  because  of  the 
structural  implications  of  a  delusional  verbal  split.  .  Similarly  the 
habitual  use  of  the  non-elementalistic  term  ‘semantic  reactions’  eliminates 
metaphysical  and  verbal  speculations  on  such  elementalistic  fictions  as 
‘emotion’  and  ‘intellect’,  etc.,  considered  as  separate  entities. 

Unfortunately  these  considerations  of  structural  implications  have 
been  entirely  disregarded  in  daily  life  even  by  scientists,  often  befuddling 
issues  very  seriously.  Thus,  the  term  ‘concept’  is  widely  used,  and  the 
users  are  not  conscious  that  this  term  has  elementalistic  implications  of 
‘mind’  or  ‘intellect’  taken  separately,  which  then  become  verbal  fictions. 
The  actual  facts,  however,  can  be  simply  expressed  with  correct  struc¬ 
tural  implications.  What  is  called  ‘concept’  amounts  to  nothing  more 
or  less  than  a  verbal  formulation,  a  term  which  eliminates  the  false-to-fact 
implications.  Students  of  general  semantics  are  strongly  advised  never 
to  use  the  elementalistic  term  ‘concept’,  but  the  non-elementalistic  ‘formu¬ 
lation’  instead.  We  could  eventually  berate  and  ridicule  people  for  their 

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION  lxiii 

old  neuro-linguistic  habits,  but  in  our  work  we  take  the  neurological  atti¬ 
tude  and  realize  the  difficulties  of  linguistic  habits  and  neurological  re¬ 
canalization.  From  this  point  of  view  we  only  face  understanding^  the 
inherent  difficulties.  I  can  even  now  hear  the  reactions  of  some  of  my 
readers,  T  fully  agree  with  you,  and  I  believe  it  is  a  very  fine  concept’ t 
And  so  it  goes. 

From  the  above  it  becomes  obvious  that  without  changing  the  lan¬ 
guage  itself,  which  is  practically  impossible,  we  can  easily  change  the 
structure  of  language  to  one  free  from  false-to-fact  implications.  This 
change  is  feasible. 

Another  example  may  make  issues  clearer.  Thus  the  intensional 
verbal  definition  of  ‘man*  or  ‘chair*,  etc.,  brings  to  our  consciousness 
similarities,  and,  so  to  say,  drives  the  differences  into  the  ‘unconscious’. 
In  a  world  of  processes  and  non-identity  it  follows  that  no  individual, 
‘object',  event,  etc.,  can  be  the  ‘same'  from  one  moment  to  the  next.  And 
so  individualizing  (indexes)  and  temporal  devices  (dates),  etc.,  should 
be  used  conjointly .  Thus,  obviously  chair!1600  is  not  the  ‘same’  as 
chair!1940,  nor  is  SmithiMondiy  the  ‘same’  as  SmithiTueBd*y.  Orientations  in 
such  extensional  terms  bring  to  our  consciousness  not  only  similarities 
but  also  differences.  Through  training  in  the  consciousness  of  abstract¬ 
ing  we  become  aware  that  characteristics  are  left  out  in  the  process  of 
abstracting  by  our  nervous  systems,  and  so  we  become  conscious  of  the 
possibility  that  new  factors  may  arise  at  any  time  which  would  necessitate 
a  change  in  our  generalizations. 

Once  more  we  can  get  a  bit  of  wisdom  from  mathematical  method. 
I  believe  it  was  the  great  mathematician  Sylvester  who  said  that  ‘in 
mathematics  we  look  for  similarities  in  differences  and  differences  in 
similarities',  which  statement  should  apply  to  our  whole  life  orientation. 
This  is  made  uniquely  applicable  to  life  by  the  new  non-aristotelian  exten¬ 
sional  structure  of  language  and  so  orientations. 

The  reader  will  find  in  this  work  the  use  of  certain  terms  which, 
although  they  are  standard  English  words,  are  not  habitually  used.  The 
terms  used  here  have  been  carefully  selected  and  tested,  and  found  to  be 
more  similar  to  the  structure  of  the  actual  facts.  The  power  of  terminol¬ 
ogy,  because  of  its  structural  implications,  is  well  known  in  science,  but 
is  entirely  disregarded  in  our  daily  neuro-linguistic  habits. 

It  is  shocking  to  realize  that  even  such  scholarly  aristotelians  as  the 
Jesuits,  and  other  devotees,  are  unable  or  unwilling  to  comprehend  the 
obvious  structural  modern  neuro-semantic  and  neuro-linguistic  facts. 
When  confronted  with  them  they  hide  behind  a  verbal  smoke  screen  of 
medieval  terms  such  as  ‘nominalism',  ‘realism',  etc.,  which  in  modern  sci- 

lxiv  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 

ence  are  hopelessly  antiquated,  useless,  confusing,  and  so  eventually 
harmful.  Their  attitude  even  today  is  that  all  those  problems  were 
settled  and  disposed  of  by  different  monks  in  the  Middle  Ages.  Modern 
researches  reveal  that  nothing  of  the  sort  was  settled  or  disposed  of,  and 
that  a  new,  up-to-date  revision  is  necessary  to  eliminate  the  false  knowl¬ 
edge  from  which  present  day  tragedies  follow  automatically.  The  reader 
is  referred  to  the  Encyclopaedia  Britannica  under  such  terms  as  Nominal¬ 
ism’,  ‘realism’,  and  related  terms. 

Section  G.  -§^de fined  terms.* 

As  was  explained  before,  for  a  revision  of  a  system  we  must  first  get 
outside  of  the  system.  Only  after  producing  a  non-aristotelian  exten- 
sional  system  can  the  aristotelian  intensional  structure  of  our  traditional 
system  and  language  be  properly  evaluated. 

Here  we  introduce  a  most  important  technical  term  which  describes 
a  fundamental  characteristic  of  a  correct  attitude  toward  language; 
namely,  that  most  terms  are  ‘^^defined’.  They  are  over-defined  (over¬ 
limited)  by  intension,  or  verbal  definition,  because  of  our  belief  in  the 
definition;  and  are  hopelessly  under-defined  by  extension  or  facts, 
when  generalizations  become  merely  hypothetical.  For  instance,  the 
euclidean  parallels  with  their  equal  distance  are  over-defined  by  intension 
and  under-defined  by  extension,  as  ‘equal  distance’  is  unnecessary  and 
also  is  denied  by  facts.  Similarly  the  newtonian  equations  are  over¬ 
defined  (over-limited)  by  intension,  while  under-defined  by  extension, 
which  includes  the  necessary  finite  velocity  of  a  signal  (Lorentz- 
Einstein) . 

From  these  two  examples  alone  we  may  see  how  heavy  the  problem 
is,  as  the  discovery  of  a  new  important  factor  makes  it  obvious  that  most 
generalizations  must  be  ^defined,  depending  upon  whether  our  atti¬ 
tude  is  intensional  or  extensional.  Unfortunately  only  those  who  have 
studied  psychiatry  and/or  general  semantics  can  fully  comprehend  the 
difficulties  involved.  Different  maladjusted,  neurotics,  psychotics,  etc., 
orient  themselves  by  intension  most  of  the  time.  This  means  they  evalu¬ 
ate  by  over-definition,  just  because  they  believe  in  their  limited  verbal- 

*  The  term  ‘over-defined  class1  was  introduced  to  the  best  of  my  knowledge  by 
Dr.  A.  S.  Householder.  This  term  is  inadequate  for  our  purpose,  as  it  disregards 
the  problems  of  intension  and  extension,  which  represent  different  types  of  evaluation. 
Besides,  the  term  ‘class’  is  very  ambiguous.  In  science  and  life  we  deal  mostly 
with  ^^de fined  terms,  as  will  be  explained. 

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION  lxv 

isms,  and  not  by  extensional  facts,  which  make  us  conscious  of  under- 
definition. 

To  make  this  fundamental  difficulty  clearer  I  will  use  a  rather  trivial 
illustration.  The  dictionaries  define  ‘house*  as  a  'building  for  human 
habitation  or  occupation*,  etc.  Let  us  imagine  that  we  buy  a  house ;  this 
buying  is  an  extensional  activity,  usually  with  some  consequences.  If 
we  orient  ourselves  by  intension  we  are  really  buying  a  definition, 
although  we  may  even  inspect  the  house,  which  may  appear  desirable, 
etc.  Then  suppose  we  move  into  the  house  with  our  furniture  and  the 
whole  house  collapses  because  termites  have  destroyed  all  the  wood,  leav¬ 
ing  only  a  shell,  perhaps  satisfying  to  the  eye.  Does  the  verbal  defini¬ 
tion  of  the  house  correspond  to  the  extensional  facts?  Of  course  not. 
It  becomes  obvious  then  that  by  intension  the  term  'house*  was  over¬ 
defined,  or  over-limited,  while  by  extension,  or  actual  facts,  it  was  hope¬ 
lessly  under-defined,  as  many  important  characteristics  were  left  out. 
In  no  dictionary  definition  of  a  'house*  is  the  possibility  of  termites  men¬ 
tioned. 

‘Philosophers*,  etc.,  and  ‘philosophizing*  laymen,  if  they  ever  will  be 
able  to  face  facts  and  verbal  paradoxes,  will  have  a  merry  time  arguing 
back  and  forth  about  the  above  human  and  neuro-linguistic  situation 
because  they  know  nothing  about  psychiatry  and  empirical  data  of  gen¬ 
eral  semantics.  Without  serious  neuro-linguistic  study,  including  the 
'philosophical  treatises*  of  'mentally*  ill  in  hospitals,  they  will  not  be  able 
to  understand  why,  by  intension  or  belief  in  verbal  definitions,  most  terms 
are  hopelessly  over-defined,  while  by  extension  they  are  hopelessly  under- 
defined.  Their  analysis  of  intensional  'over-definitions*  will  be  exten¬ 
sional  by  necessity ,  and  they  will  have  great  difficulties  in  realizing  the 
very  important  fact  that  we  deal  for  the  most  part  only  with  -^defined 
terms. 

I  must  stress  again  that  this  difficulty  is  not  inherent  in  our  language 
as  such,  but  depends  exclusively  on  our  attitude  toward  the  use  of  lan¬ 
guage. 

The  ignorance  of  ‘philosophers*,  etc.,  about  neuro-semzntic  and  neuro- 
linguistic  issues  is  not  only  appalling,  but  positively  harmful  to  sanity, 
civilization  and  culture.  To  justify  their  own  existence  in  civilization 
they  should  have  investigated  such  problems  professionally  long  ago,  and 
incorporated  them  in  their  work.  Even  the  present  world  tragedies  are 
one  of  the  results  of  their  intensional  delusional  w^wro-semantic  and 
w#ttro-linguistic  detachment.  Present  day  totalitarianisms  were  built 
by  the  dumping  on  the  human  nervous  systems  of  such  terms  as  ‘com¬ 
munism,*  ‘bolshevism/  etc.,  which  induced  corresponding  fearful  signal 

lxvi  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 

reactions  (see  chapter  XXI)  of  the  ruling  classes,  resulting  in  their  im- 
becilic  and  suicidal  behaviour.  The  ruling  classes  welcomed  in  many 
ways  the  totalitarians  as  an  eventual  safe-guard  of  their  personal  selfish 
interests.  The  extensional  results  are  that  the  dreaded  ‘communists*  and 
‘bolshevists*  have  united  with  the  totalitarians,  and  today,  1940,  the  ‘com¬ 
munists*  are  as  ‘imperialistic*  as  any  czar  has  ever  been. 

To  give  another  example  of  ^^defined  terms,  it  may  be  helpful  to 
cite  a  paradox  formulated  by  the  mathematician  Frege  in  connection  with 
linguistic  difficulties  underlying  mathematical  foundations. 

In  a  village  there  was  only  one  barber,  who  shaved  only  those  who 
did  not  shave  themselves.  The  question  arises  whether  the  barber  shaves 
himself  or  not.  If  we  say  ‘yes,*  then  he  did  not  shave  himself;  if  we  say 
‘no/  then  he  shaved  himself.  In  daily  life  we  deal  all  the  time  with  such 
paradoxes,  which  if  not  clarified  result  only  in  bewilderment. 

The  term  ‘barber*  as  a  term ,  since  it  omits  the  living  human  being,  is 
a  label  for  a  fiction,  because  there  is  no  such  thing  as  a  ‘barber*  without 
a  living  human  being.  By  extension  the  given  specialist  in  shaving, 
Smithi,  is  not  so  simple.  He  is  peppered  with  complex  chain-indexes 
and  dates.  Thus,  Smith!!  may  be  by  profession  a  barber,  Smithy  may  be 
a  father,  Smithi8  may  be  a  member  of  the  village  council,  and  anyway 
Smithin  is  a  living  person  who  has  his  own  life  and  personality  outside  his 
profession,  and  ultimately  he  has  to  shave  himself  if  he  does  not  want  a 
beard,  verbalism  or  no  verbalism.  Obviously  the  term  ‘barber’  is  over¬ 
defined,  over-limited,  by  intension,  and  is  under-defined  by  extension. 

One  of  my  co-workers,  commenting  on  this  paradox,  suggested  that 
the  barber  may  be  a  woman  and  have  no  beard ;  or,  the  barber  may  be  a 
beardless  hermaphrodite  or  eunuch ;  or,  the  barber  may  have  a  full  beard. 
Thus,  we  have  only  traditionally  assumed,  in  analyzing  this  old  paradox, 
that  the  barber  was  a  man  with  a  beard  which  was  somehow  shaved. 

The  difficulties  of  this  ^^defined  terms  situation  affect  not  only 
our  daily  lives,  but  science  as  well.  For  example,  H20  is  by  intension  or 
definition  over-defined ;  by  extension  or  in  practice  we  do  not  deal  with 
‘pure*  H20,  which  is  only  a  symbol  on  paper,  because  actually  unavoid¬ 
able  impurities  are  always  present. 

Similarly  let  us  consider  ‘ blood  transfusion *.  In  the  beginning  we 
used  the  term  ‘blood  transfusion*  as  over-defined;  by  extension  it  turned 
out  to  be  under-defined,  because  different  bloods  have  different  charac¬ 
teristics,  and  often  blood  of  one  type  killed  the  patient  who  had  blood  of 
another  type. 

Here  I  will  list  a  few  of  the  many  heavy  terms  we  use  in  science  and 

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION  lxvii 

daily  life  which  are  the  cause  of  endless  verbal  bickering  and  confusion, 
because  of  our  lack  of  realization  of  their  “-^defined  character,  depend¬ 
ing  uniquely  on  our  attitudes.  Terms  such  as  variation  in  biology  and 
anthropology,  learning,  frustration,  education,  needs,  intelligence,  in¬ 
stincts,  genius,  teacher,  leadership,  love,  hate,  fear,  sex,  man,  woman, 
infantilism,  maladjustment,  dementia  praecox,  personality,  democracy, 
totalitarianism,  dollar,  god,  gold,  war,  peace,  aggression,  neutral,  jew, 
number,  velocity,  etc.,  etc.,  can  serve  as  illustrations. 

One  psychoanalyst  suggests  ego  and  super-ego;  another  writes:  T 
could  quote  you  a  considerable  part  of  psychoanalytic  terms*.  An  epis- 
tomologist  says,  ‘Meaning  is  a  forbidden  term  in  my  courses.  ...  In 
linguistics  the  terms  phoneme,  word,  sentence  are  mazes  of  confusion. 
.  .  .  Philosophy  is  in  as  bad  a  situation.  Metaphysics  is  even  worse.’ 
To  quote  a  prominent  anthropologist:  ‘^-definition  is  notably  com¬ 
mon  in  the  field  of  so-called  social  anthropology  in  which  students  at¬ 
tempt  to  disregard  the  human  organism  and  deal  with  human  affairs  as 
discrete  phenomena*.  For  example,  ‘ culture  may  be  technology,  morals, 
philosophy,  or  a  wooden  leg — all  most  vaguely  formulated.  .  .  .  When 
some  change  in  the  anatomy  and  physiology  of  the  organism  is  attributed 
to  environment,  the  latter  term  is  not  broken  down  into  climate,  rainfall, 
food  supply,  etc.  Social  environment  may  be  arts,  industries,  law, 
morals,  religion,  familial  institutions,  tradition,  etc.* 

The  following  comment  by  a  mathematician  shows  the  generality  of 
this  problem:  ‘A  term  would  seem  to  be  extensionally  under-defined  so 
long  as  we  cannot  in  practice  exhaust  its  instances  by  enumeration.  But 
this  much  is  true  of  just  about  every  term  of  the  kind  traditionally  known 
as  “general  concrete** ;  e.g.  house,  dime,  star,  neurone  * 

A  journalist  suggests :  ‘As  an  example  recently  come  to  our  attention 
I  would  mention  those  magic  words  Monroe  Doctrine .  Even  when  Mr. 
Hull  discusses  it,  as  he  does  as  nearly  correctly  as  anyone  “in  the  know**, 
he  omits  some  real  facts,  such  as  the  economic  implications  of  overturn¬ 
ing  the  international  status  quo  in  this  hemisphere.  But  when  Japan 
and/or  Germany  (high  order  abstractions  as  used  here)  refer  to  Asiatic 
and/or  European  Monroe  Doctrines,  the  meaning  of  the  original  words 
has  been  completely  metamorphosed  through  ^^definition.  The  Amer¬ 
ican  accepted  meaning  includes  no  actual  control  of  those  falling  within 
the  doctrine's  sphere,  whereas  Japan  and  Germany  mean  an  actual 
hegemony  in  their  respective  spheres.  The  relationship  between  ours 
and  theirs  is  therefore  a  vast  confusion  of  terms. 

‘Then  consider  the  incidents  growing  out  of  insults  in  the  interna- 

lxviii  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 

tional  fields.  What  is  an  insult  ?  It  is  usually  pure  verbalism  with  great 
affective  characteristics  manipulated  to  sway  others  as  the  swayer  directs. 
To  bring  it  into  the  domestic  field,  call  a  Republican  (what  is  that?) 
a  New  Dealer  (again,  what  is  that?)  and  the  fur  begins  to  fly/ 

A  leading  moving  picture  executive  says  that  actors  have  frequent 
verbal  arguments  about  what  is  funny.  The  only  thing  to  do  is  to  try 
it  before  an  audience.  ‘If  it  makes  them  .  .  .  laugh,  it  may  be  termed 
funny.  If  it  fails  to  make  them  laugh,  it  is  not  funny /  In  the  mean¬ 
time,  ‘your  audience  may  tell  you  that  the  subject  in  dispute  is  neither 
funny  nor  not-funny.  It  is  merely  boring/ 

There  is  no  need  to  give  further  examples  here,  as  practically  the 
whole  dictionary  could  be  quoted.  In  my  enquiry  concerning  —^defined 
terms  in  many  fields  I  got  a  number  of  answers  which  were  very  fun¬ 
damental,  which  I  gratefully  acknowledge.  Some  replies  were  to  the 
effect  that  T  would  gladly  give  you  examples  such  as  you  ask  for,  but  I 
do  not  think  I  have  any  that  would  be  new  to  you’,  which  shows  their 
understanding  of  the  problem.  Yet  the  most  extensional  answer  was 
given  by  that  brilliant  jurist,  Dr.  Robert  M.  Hutchins,  who  sent  to  me 
his  Convocation  Address  of  June,  1940  with  a  letter,  which  he  has  kindly 
given  me  permission  to  quote,  as  follows :  T  am  afraid  you  will  feel  that 
all  the  words  I  use  are  examples  of  the  errors  you  are  attacking.  Here 
is  my  last  Convocation  Address,  with  a  sample  in  every  line/  Such  a 
judgement  is  profoundly  justified  whenever  language  is  utilized.  This 
address  is  a  splendid  piece  of  work,  and  it  implies  the  intuitive  recogni¬ 
tion  of  the  fundamental  neuro-linguistic  difficulties  we  are  up  against. 

But  an  intuitive  grasp  by  exceptional  persons  does  not  make  that 
recognition  teachable  in  general  education.  We  need  crisp,  general 
methodological  formulations  which,  will  make  people  aware  of  the  role 
the  structure  of  language  plays  in  affecting  our  types  of  reactions.  For 
instance,  our  language  may  be  elementalistic  or  non-elementalistic,  inten- 
sional  or  extensional,  in  structure,  etc.  We  discover  also  the  fundamen¬ 
tal  multiordinal  character  of  the  most  important  terms  we  have,  the 
—^defined  character  of  most  of  our  terms,  etc. 

As  the  difficulties  mentioned  here  are  inherent  in  our  neuro-semantic 
and  neuro-linguistic  mechanisms,  which  control  our  reactions,  the  only 
possible  safe-guard  against  the  dangers  of  hopeless  bewilderment,  fears, 
anxieties,  etc.,  is  the  consciousness  of  the  mechanisms .  Certainly  ‘phi¬ 
losophers',  ‘logicians’,  psychiatrists,  educators,  etc.,  should  be  aware  of 
these  problems,  and  introduce  this  consciousness  even  in  elementary 
education  and  in  psychotherapy. 

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION  lxix 

The  problem  of  j^defined  terms  is  very  difficult  to  explain  briefly. 
It  is  discussed  more  fully  in  two  of  my  papers  presented  before  profes¬ 
sional  societies.* 

Section  H.  The  passing  of  the  old  aristotelian  epoch . 

1.  ‘MAGINOT  LINE  MENTALITIES’ 

Present  day  scientific  researches  and  historical  world  developments 
show  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  old  aristotelian  epoch  of  human  evolution 
is  dying.  The  terrors  and  horrors  we  are  witnessing  in  the  East  and 
the  West  are  the  deathbed  agonies  of  that  passing  epoch,  and  not  the 
beginning  of  a  new  system.  The  changes  of  historical  periods  in  human 
development  are  often  accompanied  by  the  disorganization,  and  some¬ 
times  acute  suffering,  of  mankind,  and  the  price  is  bound  to  be  paid  by 
one  or  more  generations. 

I  doubt  if  in  the  whole  of  human  history  there  is  a  more  accentuated 
illustration  than  the  tragic  and  sudden  collapse,  in  the  summer  of  1940, 
of  the  French  government  and  army,  and  eventually  of  French  culture 
and  ‘democracy'.  The  degree  of  stupidity,  treachery,  graft,  dishonesty, 
ignorance,  and  ultimately  decadence,  etc.,  the  French  plutocrats  and  poli¬ 
ticians,  and  so-called  ‘intelligentsia1  displayed  is  unprecedented,  particu¬ 
larly  because  of  the  fine  historical  record  the  French  have  had.  We  test 
the  freshness  or  deterioration  of  fishes  by  smelling  the  head  end,  and  as 
we  know  at  the  date  of  this  writing,  the  head  ends  of  the  French  ‘democ¬ 
racy'  have  a  putrid  odor.  This  deterioration  affected  the  French  military 
men,  who  once  were  the  finest  in  the  world,  and  so  the  collapse  was  com¬ 
plete.  I  can  give  no  better,  no  more  pitiful,  no  more  shocking  illustra¬ 
tion  of  the  collapse  of  the  old  system. 

The  ‘Maginot  line  mentality'  will  become  a  historical  classic,  and  will 
be  applied  quite  appropriately  to  other  than  military  fields.  It  means  a 
thoughtless,  self-deceptive,  etc.,  ‘security'  in  antiquated  systems  as 
matched  against  modern  methods  of  1940.  Well,  the  French  Marianna 
felt  secure  from  the  front  and  was  taken  from  behind  by  the  German  army 
men,  who  traditionally  pay  no  attention  to  such  ‘details'. 

*  (a)  <*e*’ne<*  Terms,  1939,  the  third  of  a  trilogy  of  papers  presented  be¬ 

fore  annual  meetings  of  the  American  Mathematical  Society  on  General  Semantics: 
1.  Kxtensionalization  in  Mathematics,  Mathematical  Physics  and  General  Education, 
1W5;  II.  Thalamic  Symbolism  and  Mathematics,  1938.  Institute  of  General 
Semantics,  Lakeville,  Connecticut. 

(b)  General  Semantics,  Psychiatry,  Psychotherapy  and  Prevention,  presented 
before  the  annual  meeting  of  the  American  Psychiatric  Association,  1940. 

Ixx  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 

Dealing  with  those  tragic  and  painful  collapses  in  civilizations,  and 
eventually  passing  to  another  spasm  of  civilization,  what  interests  us 
most  in  considering  the  problems  of  sanity,  is  the  newest,  psychopatho- 
logical  methods  of  destroying  sanity,  not  merely  the  organized  orgies  of 
murder,  rape,  arson,  looting,  drugging,  and  destruction  under  different 
dictators,  mikados,  etc. 

I  mention  the  ‘mikado’  especially  here  as  a  tragic  human  example  of 
the  effect  of  ^^defined  terms,  which  in  life  application  sway  the  his¬ 
tory  of  mankind.  By  definition  and/or  creed  the  mikado  is  supposed  to 
be  some  sort  of  a  ‘god’,  etc.  By  extension  or  facts,  the  best  we  know,  he 
is  probably  a  sort  of  a  nice,  supposedly  educated,  collegian.  He  has  a 
wife  and  makes  babies,  but  he  is  told  about  Japanese  people,  the  be¬ 
haviour  of  Japanese  troops  in  China,  etc.,  only  as  much  as  the  ruling 
clique  in  Japan  allows  him  to  know.  If  he  would  be  allowed  to  know 
what  ‘his’  soldiers,  and  so  his  representatives,  are  actually  doing  in  China 
with  their  governmentally  organised  murder,  rape,  looting,  drugging, 
etc.,  I  doubt  if  he,  as  a  ‘nice  collegian1,  would  approve  it.  However,  if 
he  would  try  to  do  something  about  it,  he  probably  would  be  ‘liquidated’ 
by  the  ruling  clique.  From  a  historical,  civilization,  human  point  of  view 
he  must  be  adjudged  responsible,  as  the  head  of  his  government,  for  what 
the  ruling  clique  and  the  Japanese  army  do  in  China  in  his  name. 

This  applies  to  many  other  ‘rulers’,  who  seldom  know  what  is  going 
on  extensionally  because  they  rely  on  the  use  of  —^defined  terms  in 
the  reports  of  those  who  are  in  actual  control.  Ignorance  in  high  places 
cannot  humanly  be  an  excuse. 

Imagine  a  British  empire  tolerating  so  long  a  Chamberlain  in  the 
government,  or  the  endless  petty,  befuddling,  deluding,  etc.,  bickerings  of 
political  partisanship,  which  are  good  enough  to  wreck  any  system  of 
‘democracy*  (in  practice  another  ^defined  term). 

It  seems,  however,  there  is  at  least  one  point  the  totalitarian  and 
‘democratic*  politicians  have  in  common,  best  expressed  by  Kipling : 

*  'Ow  the  loot! 

Bloomin’  loot! 

That's  the  thing  to  make  the  boys  git  up  an'  shoot ! 

It's  the  same  with  dogs  an'  men, 

If  you'd  make  'em  come  again 
Clap  'em  forward  with  a  Loo !  loo !  Lulu !  Loot  1 
Whoopee !  Tear  'im,  puppy !  Loo !  loo ! 

Lulu!  Loot!  loot!  loot!’ 

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION  lxxi 

2.  WARS  OF  AND  ON  NERVES 

It  was  explained  already  how  the  introduction  of  new  factors  is  bound 
to  change  our  generalizations  and  therefore  evaluations.  But  this  some¬ 
how  is  disregarded  by  most  rulers  and  politicians  who  are  on  the  defen¬ 
sive,  while  those  who  are  on  the  offensive  introduce  new  psycho-logical 
factors  to  confuse  the  old  generalizations,  as  a  rule  successfully.  Poli¬ 
ticians,  gangsters,  military  men,  etc.,  without  any  understanding  of  the 
depth  of  destructiveness  to  the  human  nervous  systems,  utilize  these 
methods  quite  successfully.  Magicians  have  studied  those  methods  pro¬ 
fessionally,  but  they  utilize  them  for  entertainment,  not  for  destruction. 

These  destructive  methods  are  the  bases  of  the  ‘war  oj  nerves',  and 
the  ‘war  on  nerves',  etc.,  to  the  point  of  using  ‘ screaming *  bombs,  verbal 
distortion,  the  ‘psychology'  of  deception,  etc.  These  methods  can  be 
counteracted  only  when  governments  who  feel  their  responsibility  not 
only  to  the  ruling  classes,  but  also  to  the  people  of  their  nations,  will 
employ  experts  in  neuro-psychiatry,  anthropology,  general  semantics,  etc., 
for  guidance,  if  the  present  world  neurosis  is  to  be  checked. 

There  are  persistent  reports  that  the  Nazi  government  is  utilizing  a 
staff  of  psycho-logical  experts  for  destructive  purposes.  Other  totali¬ 
tarian  governments  ape  their  successfully  worked  out  and  tested  methods. 
The  ‘democratic'  governments  in  this  present  fundamental  nerve  contest 
appear  a  tragic  joke  of  ignorance,  inefficiency,  etc.  In  practice  this 
amounts  to  betrayal,  because  they  fail  to  recognize  the  overwhelming  im¬ 
portance  and  vulnerability  of  the  human  nervous  system,  and  do  not  utilize 
such  experts  in  a  constructive  way.  The  ‘scream*  of  a  bomb,  for  instance, 
is  much  more  destructive  to  the  ‘enemy*  than  the  destruction  by  the  bomb 
itself,  which  may  kill  a  few  people  at  the  cost  of  at  least  $100,000  per 
corpse,  while  the  ‘scream*  alone  brings  demoralizing  terror  to  hundreds, 
if  not  thousands  of  people.  It  is  certainly  an  expertly  calculated  and 
efficient  ‘war  on  human  nerves*.  But  what  can  be  done  if  ignorant  ‘demo¬ 
cratic'  governments  refuse  to  live  up  to  their  duties  ? 

Humanity,  civilizations,  cultures,  etc.,  are  ultimately  based  on  the 
constructive  use  of  neuro-semantic  and  neuro-linguistic  mechanisms 
present  in  every  one  of  us.  Many  pathological  Nazi  leaders  utilize  these 
