constructive  mechanisms  in  civilization  for  destructive  selfish  purposes. 
Under  experts  they  have  turned  against  mankind  the  essential  assets  of 
mankind.  The  beginning  was  ‘mental*  illness  of  a  few  leaders,  based  on 
hates,  fears,  revenges,  etc.  Later  this  destructive  task  was  passed  on  to 
governmental  psycho-logical  experts,  to  build  up  methods  to  tear  down 
human  neuro- semantic  and  neuro-linguistic  mechanisms,  quite  success- 

lxxii  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 

fully  because  of  the  abysmal  ignorance  of  modern  scientific  issues  exhib¬ 
ited  by  the  political  verbalists  and  enchanters  of  other  nations. 

One  of  the  most  effective  of  these  methods  is  the  use  of  pathological 
verbal  distortion  such  as  is  found  among  the  ‘mentally*  ill.  For  instance, 
a  paranoiac  may  believe  ‘honestly*  that  he  is  persecuted,  become  domi¬ 
nated  by  ‘hate*,  etc.,  and  ultimately  may  kill  to  ‘defend*  himself.  Unfor¬ 
tunately  at  present  only  psychiatrists,  familiar  with  verbal  distortions  and 
‘rationalizations*  of  patients  in  hospitals,  can  fully  understand  these 
problems. 

A  ‘mentally*  ill  person  is  not  necessarily  a  ‘genius,*  but  it  is  well 
known  to  psychiatrists  that  some  ‘mentally*  ill  are  often  very  cunning  and 
will  outwit  any  doctor  or  nurse.  At  present  the  people  of  the  world  do 
not  realize  that  they  are  being  trained  in  psychopathological  uses  of  their 
nervous  systems,  and  a  future  generation  or  two  will  become  semantically 
crippled  because  trained  in  such  distortions. 

The  violation,  through  ignorance  and/or  ww-sanity,  of  the  similarity 
of  structure  in  the  map-territory  relationship  (see  p.  58  ff.  and  p.  750 
ff.),  and/or  deliberate,  professionally  planned  distortion  of  it,  abolishes 
predictability,  proper  evaluation,  trust,  etc.  This  results  only  in  breeding 
fears,  anxieties,  hates,  etc.,  which  disorganize  individuals  and  even 
nations.  There  must  be  a  correspondence  and  similarity  of  structure 
between  language  and  facts,  and  so  consequent  thalamo-cortical  integra¬ 
tion,  if  we  are  to  survive  as  a  sane  ‘civilized*  race. 

In  a  few  years  history  will  judge  these  dying  spasms  of  the  aristotelian 
system,  a  system  which  was  the  best  of  its  kind  2,300  years  ago,  as  for¬ 
mulated  by  a  great  man  under  the  conditions  of  the  very  few  scientific 
facts  known  at  that  date.  It  is  not  so  today,  1941.  Most  of  the  knowl¬ 
edge  of  scientific  facts  and  methods  of  Aristotle  are  obsolete  today,  and  in 
the  main  harmful,  like  the  ‘Maginot  line*  orientation. 

By  necessity  the  aristotelian  system  was  based  on  macroscopic  or 
animal,  ‘sense*,  levels,  which  even  now  predominantly  guide  the  masses. 
It  could  take  into  consideration  ‘sense*  data,  etc.,  but  cannot  deal  ade¬ 
quately  with  1941  cultural  as  well  as  sanity  conditions  which,  as  we  know 
today,  are  resultants  of  sub-microscopic,  electro-colloidal  processes. 

In  a  non-aristotelian  system  we  are  stressing  the  differences  between 
the  animal  reflex,  automatic  signal  reactions,  which  do  not  involve  ‘think¬ 
ing’,  human  ‘intelligence*,  etc.,  and  human  symbol  reactions,  with  their 
flexibility,  based  on  conscious  evaluations,  etc.  These  differences  could 
hardly  be  conveyed  better  than  by  studying  The  Rape  of  the  Masses; 
The  Psychology  of  Totalitarian  Propaganda ,  by  Dr.  Serge  Chakotin, 
(Alliance  Book  Corporation,  New  York,  1940).  A  former  student  of 

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION  lxxiii 

Professor  Pavlov,  Dr.  Chakotin  bases  his  analysis  of  totalitarian  methods 
on  Pavlov’s  fundamental  researches  of  conditional  reactions  in  dogs. 

3.  HITLER  AND  PSYCHO-LOGICAL  FACTORS  IN  HIS  LIFE 

The  groping  dissatisfaction  with  the  old  system  was  so  general  that 
only  a  catalyst  was  needed  to  precipitate  the  crisis.  This  catalyst  was 
found  in  the  son  of  Alois  Schicklgruber  (also  spelled  Schiicklgruber) 
who  later  changed  his  name  to  ‘Hitler’.  There  was  a  history  of  illegiti¬ 
macy  in  the  family.  Rudolf  Olden  in  his  biography  of  Hitler  says,  ‘Hitler 
has  given  the  simplest  and  clearest  picture  possible  of  conditions  in  his 
father’s  home.  But  we  have  only  to  look  at  the  facts  to  see  that,  far  from 
being  simple,  the  married  life  of  his  father  was  unusual  and  tempestuous. 
Three  wives,  seven  children,  one  divorce,  one  birth  before  marriage,  two 
shortly  after  the  wedding,  one  wife  fourteen  years  older  than  himself  and 
another  twenty-three  years  younger — that  is  saying  a  good  deal  for  a 
Customs  officer/ 

There  were  other  important  circumstances  in  Adolf  Hitler’s  life 
which  were  influential  and  found  their  fulfillment  in  totalitarian  systems, 
(a)  He  was  born  from  a  peasant  stock,  by  tradition  prepared  to  carry  a 
heavy  load  of  work  with  persistency,  (b)  He  was  baptized  in  the  Cath¬ 
olic  Church,  an  institution  well  known  to  have  totalitarian  orientations, 
and  which  up  to  this  day  in  principle  proclaims  authority  over  ‘all’  the 
Catholics  in  the  world.  Having  absorbed  that  totalitarian  orientation 
from  childhood  up,  which  applies  also  to  Mussolini,  Stalin,  etc.,  it  was 
simple  for  those  so  trained  to  switch  to  state  totalitarianism ,  where  such 
leaders  could  find  a  ‘lebensraum’  for  themselves  as  individuals,  thus  en¬ 
hancing  their  own  ‘egos’,  and  incidentally  filling  their  pockets.  No  one 
who  has  actually  studied  the  public  appearances  of  various  totalitarian 
‘fuhrers’  can  miss  the  utter  similarity  between  their  reactions  and  the 
reactions  of  the  mobs  to  them.  They  act  like  little  ‘gods  on  wheels',  and 
the  mobs  react  with  unreasoned,  blind,  fanatical  subjection,  which  the 
fuhrers  and  their  aides  know  how  to  manufacture. 

(c)  Hitler  was  born  into  Austrian  bureaucracy,  one  of  the  most  in¬ 
efficient,  dishonest,  hypocritical,  etc.,  bureaucracies  in  the  world,  perme¬ 
ated  with  the  Hapsburg  motto,  ‘Divide  et  impera’.  The  older  Schickl¬ 
gruber  wanted  his  son  also  to  become  a  Hapsburg  bureaucrat.  Schickl¬ 
gruber,  Jr.  had  a  natural  repulsion  for  them,  and  so  deliberately  boy¬ 
cotted  any  education,  to  disqualify  himself  for  such  a  fate.  This  lack 
of  education  ostracized  him  from  the  class  of  so-called  ‘intelligentsia’, 
lo  which  a  Hapsburg  bureaucrat  eventually  belonged.  Through  living 
necessities  he  had  to  become  a  plain  labour  hand,  yet  because  of  his  para- 

lxxiv  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 

noia  tendencies,  delusions  of  grandeur  based  on  unhealthy  worship  of 
historical  ‘heroes’,  etc.,  he  was  also  not  acceptable  to  the  plain  workers, 
who  are  generally  sane  and  do  not  look  at  life  as  a  Wagnerian  opera.  So 
in  reality  he  found  that  he  was  not  acceptable  anywhere,  belonged 
nowhere,  a  misfit  everywhere,  until  he  adhered  to  totalitarianism  as  a 
‘religion’  which  he  and  his  closest  associates  modified  to  suit  the  Prussian 
character,  selected  by  them  as  a  standard  of  German  perfection,  to  be 
imposed  on  the  rest  of  the  world. 

(d)  When  he  joined  the  German  army  with  its  orderly  efficiency, 
etc  he  found  an  ideal  for  himself  as  an  escape  from  Hapsburg  decadence. 
No 'matter  how  he  hated  the  Hapsburg  polite  perfidy,  he  was  too  much 
of  an  Austrian  not  to  utilize  to  the  limit  the  Hapsburg  methods.  Ulti¬ 
mately  through  this  combination  of  methods  he  ‘out-Prussianed’  the 
Prussians,  whose  particular  arrogant,  brutal  methods  were  never  ap¬ 
proved  and  often  disliked  throughout  the  world  and  even  in  Germany. 

I  give  these  data  as  partial  explanations  of  how  through  life  and  other 
circumstances  the  whole  life  of  Hitler,  as  well  as  his  political  program 
was  based  on  hate,  revenge  and  destruction  of  what  he  feared  and  hated 
as  a  person,  driven  by  his  delusions  of  persecution  and  grandeur.  It  was 
only  natural  in  his  ‘chosen  people’  delusion  that  he  should  hate  and  try 
to  destroy  other  ‘chosen  people’ ;  obviously  there  is  no  place  m  this  world 
for  two  or  more  ‘chosen  people*.  The  absurdity  of  Hitler’s  ignorant 
anthropological  theories  has  been  definitely  established  by  science  and 
history,  and  in  fact  are  not  taken  seriously  by  many  of  the  informed  Nazi 

leaders  themselves.  . 

Some  such  analysis  of  a  few  of  the  more  important  factors  in  Hitler  s 
life  indicates  how  his  ‘mental’  illness  developed,  involving  ‘inferiority 
and  ‘persecution’  complexes,  etc.,  and  explains  why  for  his  own  comfort 
he  surrounded  himself  personally  with  mostly  psychopathological  people, 
although  their  psychiatric  classifications  may  be  different. 

Very  soon  psychiatric  treatises  will  be  written  on  the  ‘Jehovah  com¬ 
plex’  of  Schicklgruber,  Jr.,  etc.  Perhaps  the  following  quotations  will 
illustrate  how  the  ‘Jehovah’,  as  recorded  in  Exodus  19  and  20,  is  being 

copied  today :  .  ,  ,  «  , 

‘Now  therefore,  if  ye  will  obey  my  voice  indeed,  and  keep  my  cove¬ 
nant,  then  ye  shall  be  mine  own  possession  from  among  all  peoples:  for 
all  the  earth  is  mine :  and  ye  shall  be  unto  me  a  kingdom  of  priests,  and  a 
holy  nation.  These  are  the  words  which  thou  shalt  speak  unto  the 
children  of  Israel  [Nazis].’ 

Or,  ‘I  am  Jehovah  thy  God,  who  brought  thee  ...  out  of  the  house 
of  bondage  [England].’ 

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION  lxxv 

Or,  ‘for  I  Jehovah  thy  God  am  a  jealous  God,  visiting  the  iniquity 
of  the  fathers  upon  the  children,  upon  the  third  and  upon  the  fourth 
generation  of  them  that  hate  me,  and  showing  mercy  unto  thousands  of 
them  that  love  me  and  keep  my  commandments/ 

Or,  ‘An  altar  of  earth  thou  shalt  make  unto  me,  and  shalt  sacrifice 
thereon  thy  burnt-offerings,  and  thy  peace-offerings,  thy  sheep,  and  thine 
oxen :  in  every  place  where  I  record  my  name  I  will  come  unto  thee  and 
I  will  bless  thee/  Etc.,  etc. 

These  suggestions  are  given  only  to  indicate  how  psychiatrists  can 
help  future  historians. 

4.  EDUCATION  FOR  INTELLIGENCE  AND  DEMOCRACY 
It  may  become  clearer  why  I  speak  of  a  dying,  aristotelian,  two-valued 
system  by  giving  examples  of  how  this  type  of  evaluation  is  at  the  founda¬ 
tion  of  present  day  confusions  and  terrors.  Thus,  for  instance,  the  Nazi 
militant  delusion  of  ‘chosen  people*  gives  us  an  excellent  illustration  of 
a  two-valued,  ‘either-or*  orientation.  The  two- valued  semantic  twisting 
of  ‘real  neutrality*  is  another  significant  example.  This  distortion  has 
kept  the  ‘neutrals*  in  terrors,  disorganizing  their  national  and  political 
life  to  the  point  of  complete  collapse,  which  today  is  a  historical  fact. 
The  Nazi  two-valued  evaluation  of  ‘neutrality*  was:  either  be  ‘really 
neutral*  and  endorse  and  fight  for  the  Nazis,  or  be  ‘not  really  neutral*  and 
not  help  them.  According  to  this  orientation  a  ‘really  neutral*  Belgium, 
Holland,  Denmark,  Norway,  etc.,  should  fight  against  England,  France, 
etc.,  to  prove  that  they  are  ‘really  neutral* ! 

A  similar  analysis  applies  to  the  ‘aggression*  of  China  against  Japan, 
Czechoslovakia  against  Germany,  Poland  against  Germany,  Poland 
against  Russia,  Finland  against  Russia,  Greece  against  Italy,  etc.,  and  so 
on  endlessly,  which  shows  only  the  pathological  application  of  the  two¬ 
valued,  ‘either-or*  patterns  in  action .  This  analysis  applies  also  to  the 
first  World  War  and  the  ‘war  guilt*.  In  a  non-aristotelian  orientation  we 
ask  for  actual  facts,  and  do  not  accept  mere  verbalism.  Who  invaded 
whom?  The  historical  facts  are  simple.  We  know  by  now  who  invaded 
whom ,  and  never  mind  verbal  definitions. 

When  analysed  from  a  non-aristotelian  point  of  view,  such  orienta¬ 
tions  appear  pathologically  twisted.  Yet  they  produced  results,  as  history 
shows.  It  is  not  accidental  that  some  years  ago  Hitler  in  one  of  his 
speeches  took  a  definite  stand  for  the  prevailing  aristotelianism,  two¬ 
valued  orientations,  etc.,  and  against  modern  science,  which  naturally 
develops  in  a  non-aristotelian  direction.  Quite  soon  whole  volumes  will 

lxxvi  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 

be  written  on  this  subject;  here  it  is  possible  only  to  indicate  the  main 

methodological  issues  involved. 

Dr.  Irving  J.  Lee  in  his  article,  ‘General  Semantics  and  Public  Speak- 
ing’.  Quarterly  Journal  of  Speech,  December,  1940,  formulates  a  fun¬ 
damental  contrast  between  the  types  of  ‘rhetorics’  of  Aristotle  and  Hitler, 
and  the  non-aristotelian  type  of  communication  found  in  general  seman¬ 
tics  which  is  based  on  proper  evaluation,  made  possible  by  thalamo¬ 
cortical  integration.  .  .  ., 

We  should  not  make  the  mistake  of  fancying  that  Hitler,  etc.,  or  the 
tpiiraHn  are  building  a  new  non-aristotelian  system,  and  a  future  new  saner 
civilization.  It  is  only  a  rebellion  within  the  old  ‘either-or’  system,  a  chang¬ 
ing  from  one  scheme  of  selfishness,  greed  and  force  to  another  cabal  of  sd- 
fishness,  greed,  and  brute  force,  this  time  unavoidably  lowering  human  cul¬ 
tural  standards  by  training  future  generations  m  pathological  abuses  of 
neuro-semantic  and  neuro-linguistic  mechanisms,  emasculating  and 

misusing  science,  etc.  ...  r 

A  non-aristotelian  system  must  include  considerations  of  neuro- 
semantic  and  neuro-linguistic  environments  as  environment.  Introduc¬ 
tions  of  such  new  factors  necessitate  a  complete  revision  of  all  known 
doctrines,  pet  creeds,  etc.,  and  make  possible  the  building  of  asctenceof 
man  which  under  the  old  aristotelian  conditions  was  impossible,  lhe 
tabulation  given  here  indicates  some  of  the  many  older  fictitious  factors 
which  have  been  eliminated  as  false  to  facts  and  destructive,  whde  new, 
constructive  factors  have  been  introduced.  This  by  necessity  requires 
the  utilization  of  more  adequate  methods  and  techniques  by  which  we  can 

cope  with  a  new  world.  t  .  . 

The  new,  non-aristotelian  types  of  evaluations  are  forthcoming  in 
every  field  of  human  endeavour,  in  science  and/or  life,  necessitated  by 
the  urgencies  of  modern  conditions.  The  main  problem  today  is  to  formu¬ 
late  general  methods  by  which  these  many  separate  attempts  can  be  uni¬ 
fied  into  a  general  system  of  evaluation,  which  can  become  commumcab  e 
to  children  and,  with  more  difficulty,  even  to  adults.  History  shows  that 
whenever  older  methods  prove  their  inefficiency  new  methods  are  pro¬ 
duced  which  meet  the  new  conditions  more  effectively.  But  the  difficul¬ 
ties  involved  must  first  be  clearly  formulated  before  methods  and  tech¬ 
niques  can  be  devised  with  which  we  can  deal  with  them  more  success- 

Ml‘t  seems  unnecessary  to  enlarge  on  the  present  day  world  tragedies 
because  many  excellent  volumes  have  already  been  written  and  are  con¬ 
tinuing  to  accumulate,  psychiatric  evaluations  included.  I  must  stress, 
however,  that  no  writer  I  know  of  has  ever  understood  the  depth  of  the 

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION  lxxvii 

pending  transition  from  the  aristotelian  system  to  an  already  formulated 
non-aristotelian  system.  This  transition  is  much  deeper  than  the  change 
from  merely  one  aristotelian  ‘ism’  to  another. 

We  argue  so  much  today  about  ‘democracy’  versus  'totalitarianism’. 
Democracy  presupposes  intelligence  of  the  masses  ;*  totalitarianism  does 
not  to  the  same  degree.  But  a  'democracy*  without  intelligence  of  the 
masses  under  modern  conditions  can  be  a  worse  human  mess  than  any 
dictatorship  could  be.**  Certainly  present  day  education,  while  it  may 
cram  students*  heads  with  some  data,  without  giving  them  any  adequate 
methodological  synthesis  and  extensional  working  methods,  does  not 
train  in  ‘intelligence*  and  how  to  become  adjusted  to  life,  and  so  does  not 
work  toward  ‘democracy*.  Experiments  show  that  even  a  root  can  learn 
a  lesson  (see  p.  120),  and  animals  can  learn  by  trial  and  error.  But  we 
humans  after  these  millions  of  years  should  have  learned  how  to  utilize 
the  ‘intelligence’  which  we  supposedly  have,  with  some  predictability,  etc., 
and  use  it  constructively,  not  destructively,  as,  for  example,  the  Nazis  are 
doing  under  the  guidance  of  specialists. 

In  general  semantics  we  believe  that  some  such  thing  as  healthy 
human  intelligence  is  possible,  and  so  somehow  we  believe  in  the  eventual 
possibility  of  ‘democracy*.  We  work,  therefore,  at  methods  which  could 
be  embodied  even  in  elementary  education  to  develop  the  coveted  thala- 
mo-cortical  integration,  and  so  sane  intelligence.  Naturally  in  our  work 
prevention  is  the  main  aim,  and  this  can  be  accomplished  only  through 
education,  and  as  far  as  the  present  is  concerned,  through  re-education, 
and  re~ training  of  the  human  nervous  system. 

Section  L  Constructive  suggestions . 

As  far  back  as  1933,  on  page  485  ff .  of  the  present  book,  I  drew  atten¬ 
tion  to  the  human  dangers  of  the  abuse  of  neuro-semantic  and  neuro-lin¬ 
guistic  mechanisms,  with  suggestions  for  preventive  measures.  In  Sep¬ 
tember,  1939,  I  advanced  further  constructive  suggestions  to  some  lead¬ 
ing  governments,  urging  the  employment  of  permanent  boards  of  neuro¬ 
psychiatrists,  psycho-logicians,  and  other  specialists,  to  counteract  similar 
dangers  in  connection  with  the  present  world  crises.  I  received  only  two 
polite  acknowledgements  of  my  letters.  But  both  forewarnings  of  1933 
and  1939  have  been  disregarded  in  practice,  even  by  specialists,  with 
known  disastrous  results. 

*  Mumford,  Lewis.  Men  Must  Act.  Harcourt,  Brace,  New  York,  1939. 

**  Consult,  for  example,  comments  of  Supreme  Court  justices  about  the  impos¬ 
sibility  of  ‘justice’  when  juries  are  made  up  of  individuals  of  low  grade  ‘mentality*, 

etc. 

lxxviii  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 

In  the  meantime  the  more  far-sighted  Nazi  government  employed  a 
staff  of  specialists  working  at  methods  to  disorganize  the  nervous  func¬ 
tioning  of  their  adversaries  which,  as  facts  show,  have  worked  very  suc¬ 
cessfully  and  devastatingly  upon  the  unlucky  citizens  whom  the  short¬ 
sighted,  unscientific,  etc.,  governments  never  guided  toward  the  proper 
use  of  their  nervous  systems,  or  safe-guarded  from  the  abuses.* 

Perhaps  at  present,  1941,  after  some  irreparable  harm  has  been  done, 
the  governments  of  the  world  will  awaken  and  realize  that  the  proper 
functioning  of  the  nervous  systems  of  their  citizens  is  in  many  ways  more 
important  than  any  gun,  battleship  or  aeroplane,  etc.,  could  possibly  be, 
as  there  must  be  a  Smithi  behind  the  gun ! 

No  matter  who  is  finally  ‘victorious*  in  the  present  world  struggle,  no 
matter  which  way  we  look  at  it,  the  return  to  the  old  conditions  is  impos¬ 
sible.  A  complete  neuro-semantic  and  neuro-linguistic  revision  is  inevi¬ 
table,  and  this  revision  is  bound  to  lead  away  from  aristotelianism.  For 
this  revision  we  are  preparing  the  foundations  in  the  formulations  of  gen¬ 
eral  semantics.  Before  any  lasting  adjustments  in  the  future  social, 
economic,  political,  ethical,  etc.,  fields  are  accomplished  we  have  to  be 
able  to  evaluate  properly  and  talk  sense .  Otherwise  the  situation  is 
hopeless. 

Obviously,  regardless  of  what  the  ‘politicians*  may  say,  in  every  coun¬ 
try  we  necessarily  have  some  kind  of  guidance  by  the  government  and 
executive  power,  no  matter  in  what  direction.  Even  ‘complete  lack  of 
guidance*  must  be  considered  guidance  of  some  sort,  in  the  direction,  say, 
of  ‘rugged  individualism*,  etc.,  which,  if  carried  to  the  limit,  becomes  the 
unworkable  ideal  of  anarchy.  In  practical  life  such  attitudes  ultimately 
engender  animal  competition  instead  of  human  co-operation,  and  the  very 
opposite  of  what  we  consider  as  the  social  feeling  imperative  for  ‘democ¬ 
racy*. 

The  real  question  is  whether  the  existing  governments  are  informed 
enough  about  human  neurological  problems,  sanity,  etc.,  and  are  intelli¬ 
gent  enough,  honest  enough,  etc.,  to  guide  and  advise  their  people  con¬ 
structively  and  efficiently  in  constantly  emerging  neurological  situations 
such  as  occur  in  home  and  school  lives,  in  national  and  international 
affairs,  etc.  Unfortunately  the  answer  is  in  the  negative.  At  present 
there  is  no  such  government  I  know  of.  The  Nazi  government,  on  the 
other  hand,  has  mobilized  the  psycho-logical  knowledge  available  to  them 
for  destructive  purposes,  which  must  be  professionally  counteracted  by 
the  rest  of  the  governments  of  the  civilized  world,  if  sanity  is  to  prevail 

♦Taylor,  Edmond.  The  Strategy  of  Terror .  Houghton-Mifflin,  Boston,  1940. 

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION  lxxix 

Depending  on  science  for  more  and  better  killing  machines  is  certainly 
not  the  solution  for  human  problems,  culture  and  civilization.  Without 
being  sentimental,  in  a  human  civilization  humans  matter  more  than 
machines,  or  symbols  such  as  a  ‘dollar’,  a  ‘pound  sterling’,  a  ‘pound  of 
flesh’,  a  ‘scalp’,  etc.,  or  such  verbal  generalizations  as  ‘liberty’,  ‘equality’, 
etc.  The  living  reactions  of  Smithi  are  more  important  than  the  verbal¬ 
isms  of  Smitht,  who  nevertheless  can  shake  the  air  with  his  verbal  tricks, 
as  many  of  us  too  often  do,  affecting  the  nervous  systems  of  others. 

At  present  the  totalitarians  have  exploited  neuro-semantic  and  neuro¬ 
linguistic  mechanisms  to  their  destructive  limit,  the  best  they  knew  how, 
to  date.  Counteraction,  reconstruction,  and/or  prevention  are  impossible 
unless  such  mechanisms  are  utilized  constructively  under  the  guidance  of 
governmental  specialists  in  the  fields  of  anthropology,  neuro-psychiatry, 
general  semantics,  etc.,  who  would  understand  the  language  of  their 
fellow  workers  in  related  scientific  fields,  and  would  be  free  to  devote 

THEIR  ENTIRE  TIME  AND  EFFORTS  TO  THIS  TASK ,  AND  TO  FURTHER  INVES¬ 
TIGATIONS. 

Although  practically  all  civilized  states  employ  psychiatrists  in  their 
governmental  hospitals  for  ‘mentally*  ill,  these  physicians  are  necessarily 
preoccupied  with  their  patients  and  cannot  undertake  the  special  duties 
of  the  board  I  suggest.  Such  a  board  would  require  the  full  time  and 
attention  of  its  members,  as  they  would  be  called  upon  for  consultation 
by  various  other  governmental  departments  such  as  interior,  state,  labour, 
commerce,  health,  army,  navy,  etc.,  and  so  special  studies  and  co-ordi¬ 
nating  knowledge  in  related  branches  of  science  would  be  essential. 

It  seems  extremely  short-sighted  in  1941  that  governments  should 
employ  permanently  specialists  in  chemistry,  physics,  engineering,  etc.  ; 
other  specialists  who  advise  how  to  eliminate  lice  from  poultry,  raise  pigs* 
conserve  wild  life,  etc. — and  yet  have  no  permanent  consulting  board  of 
specialists  who  would  advise  how  to  conserve  and  prevent  the  abuse  of 
human  nervous  systems.  Even  a  Chamberlain  would  have  intelligence 
and/or  honesty  enough  to  pass  a  problem  of  a  ‘magnetic  mine*  to  physi¬ 
cists  and  engineers,  and  not  to  party  politicians,  who  know  nothing  about 
such  mechanisms,  but  would  nevertheless  be  ready  to  debate  ‘politically* 
on  the  subject. 

For  example,  if  consulted,  such  a  suggested  body  of  governmental 
specialists  would  have  studied  Mein  Kampf  and  various  speeches  of 
Hitler,  Goebbels,  etc.,  as  a  part  of  their  duties,  long  ago,  and  would  have 
advised  their  governments  that  psychopathological  people  are  getting  in 
control  of  world  affairs  and  that  their  words  cannot  be  trusted  at  all 

lxxx  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 

There  would  have  been  no  ‘appeasements’,  etc.,  and  other  measures  would 
have  been  taken  to  cope  with  the  depth  of  the  problems  involved. 

It  seems  that  the  suggestions  made  on  page  485  ff.,  although  neces¬ 
sary,  are  not  sufficient  at  the  date  of  this  writing,  and  the  latest  sugges¬ 
tions  become  imperative  to  safe-guard  our  future. 

CONCLUSION 

To  summarize,  under  present  world  conditions  the  role  of  govern¬ 
ments  is  becoming  more  and  more  difficult  and  important.  With  all  mod¬ 
em  complexities  it  is  impossible  for  governmental  men  to  be  specialists 
in  every  field  of  science,  and  therefore  they  must  depend  on  professional 
experts  attached  to  the  government,  not  only  in  the  fields  of  chemistry, 
engineering,  physics,  agriculture,  etc.,  which  they  already  utilize ;  but  also 
in  anthropology,  neuro-psychiatry,  general  semantics,  and  related^  pro¬ 
fessions.  Otherwise  the  governments  will  indefinitely  play  the  role  of 
the  blind  leading  the  blind.  It  is  unreasonable  to  wait  ten  or  twenty 
years  to  learn  by  bitter  experience  how  short-sighted  and  incompetent 
our  governments  have  been.  Why  not  utilize  some  human  intelligence, 
proper  evaluation,  etc.,  toward  which  extensional  methods  lead,  and 
thereby  have  some  predictability .  This  is  definitely  an  imperative, 
immediate  need. 

We  should  not  delude  ourselves.  Once  the  psychopathological  mis¬ 
uses  of  neuro-semantic  and  neuro-linguistic  mechanisms  have  been  so 
successfully  introduced,  they  will  remain  with  us  unless  reconstructive 
and  preventive  governmental  measures  are  undertaken  by  experts,  at 
once. 

The  conditions  of  the  world  are  such  today  that  private  scientific 
undertakings  and  even  professional  opinions  of  scientific  societies,  or  in¬ 
ternational  congresses,  etc.,  are  bound  to  be  ineffective.  Only  govern¬ 
mental  interest,  backing,  financing,  etc.,  can  organize  and  enforce  a  seri¬ 
ous  movement  for  sanity,  the  more  so  since  scientists,  physicians,  edu¬ 
cators,  and  other  professionals  do  not  have  the  necessary  time,  money, 
authority,  or  even  initiative  to  carry  forward  concerted  plans.  We  have 
learned  this  group  wisdom  by  now  in  the  case  of  smallpox  vaccination, 
control  of  epidemics,  etc.,  and  I  venture  to  suggest  that  only  such  group 
wisdom  will  be  effective  as  far  as  the  health  of  our  nervous  systems  is 
concerned.  In  terms  of  money  certainly  it  would  be  economical  to  spend 
for  preventive  and  permanent  measures  an  amount  even  less  than  the  cost 
of  a  single  aeroplane  which  is  made  today  and  shot  down  tomorrow. 

It  must  be  sadly  admitted  that  even  professionals,  no  matter  how 
prominent  they  may  be  in  their  narrow  specialties,  as  individuals  or  spe- 

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION  lxxxi 

cialized  groups  are  at  present  scientifically  unequipped  to  deal  with  such 
large  and  complex  problems  as  the  passing  from  one  system  of  orienta¬ 
tion  to  another,  because  those  whose  duty  it  was  to  integrate  methodolog¬ 
ically  the  vast  knowledge  at  hand,  have  failed.  Such  conditions  can  be 
remedied  only  by  diversified  methodological  investigations,  co-operation, 
and  concerted  action  of  specialists  in  different  fields,  which  no  private 
undertaking  can  organize  effectively.  The  reader  is  referred  to  page 
558  ff.  and  also  to  my  ‘Science  of  Man*.* 

There  can  be  little  doubt  that  self-seeking  politicians,  to  cover  up  their 
own  tracks,  will  be  against  such  scientific  sanity  guidance,  but  enlightened 
public  opinion  will  sooner  or  later  force  the  issues  to  the  only  possible 
intelligent  solution. 

The  prevalent  and  constantly  increasing  general  deterioration  of 
human  values  is  an  unavoidable  consequence  of  the  crippling  misuse  of 
ft -linguistic  and  w^wro-semantic  mechanisms.  In  general  semantics 
we  are  concerned  with  the  sanity  of  the  race,  including  particularly  meth¬ 
ods  of  prevention ;  eliminating  from  home,  elementary,  and  higher  educa¬ 
tion  inadequate  aristotelian  types  of  evaluation,  which  too  often  lead  to 
the  un-sanity  of  the  race,  and  building  up  for  the  first  time  a  positive 
theory  of  sanity,  as  a  workable  non-aristotelian  system. 

The  task  ahead  is  gigantic  if  we  are  to  avoid  more  personal,  national, 
and  even  international  tragedies  based  on  unpredictability,  insecurity, 
fears,  anxieties,  etc.,  which  are  steadily  disorganizing  the  functioning  of 
the  human  nervous  system.  Only  when  we  face  these  facts  fearlessly 
and  intelligently  may  we  save  for  future  civilizations  whatever  there  is 
left  to  save,  and  build  from  the  ruins  of  a  dying  epoch  a  new  and  saner 
society. 

I  seriously  appeal  to  scientists,  educators,  medical  men,  especially 
psychopathologists,  parents,  and  other  forward-looking  citizens  to  inves¬ 
tigate  and  co-operate  in  urging  the  governments  to  carry  out  their  duty 
to  guide  the  people  scientifically,  as  suggested  here. 

A  non-aristotelian  re-orientation  is  inevitable ;  the  only  problem  today 
is  when,  and  at  what  cost. 

A.  K. 

Chicago,  March,  1941. 

*  Korzybski,  A.  The  Science  of  Man.  Amer.  Jour,  of  Psychiatry .  May,  1937 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

I  gratefully  acknowledge  the  valuable  comments  of  the  following  in 
connection  with  defined  terms  :  Franz  Alexander,  M.D.,  Professor 
