21.  General  Semantics:  Papers  from  the  First  American  Congress  for  General 

Semantics ,  1935.  With  an  introductory  ‘Outline  of  General  Semantics’  by 
Alfred  Korzybski  and  other  related  contributions.  Bibliography.  Collected 
and  arranged  by  Hansell  Baugh.  (Author  index  Korzybski)  Arrow  Edi¬ 
tions,  New  York,  1938.  Distributed  also  by  the  Institute  of  General 
Semantics,  Chicago. 

22.  Outline  of  General  Semantics;  The  Application  of  Some  Methods  of  Exact 

Sciences  to  the  Solution  of  Human  Problems  and  Educational  Training  for 
General  Sanity.  Presented  before  First  American  Congress  for  General 
Semantics,  Ellensburg,  Wash.,  1935.  Reproduced  from  No.  21. 

23.  Neuro- Semantic  and  Neuro-Linguistic  Mechanisms  of  Extensionalization ; 

General  Semantics  as  a  Natural  Experimental  Science.  Presented  before 
the  Psychology  Section,  A.A.A.S.,  St.  Louis,  Dec.,  1935.  Amer.  Jour .  of 
Psychiatry.  July,  1936. 

24.  The  Science  of  Man.  Amer.  Jour .  of  Psychiatry .  May,  1937. 

25.  General  Semantics;  Extensionalization  in  Mathematics,  Mathematical  Physics 

and  General  Education.  Three  papers  presented  before  annual  meetings  of 
the  Amer.  Math.  Soc.,  1935,  1938,  1939.  With  an  introductory  Outline  of 
General  Semantics.  General  Semantics  Monographs  No.  II.  Institute  of 
General  Semantics,  Chicago,  1941. 

26.  A  Memorandum  on  the  Institute  of  General  Semantics.  A  preliminary  report, 

194°. 

27.  General  Semantics,  Psychiatry,  Psychotherapy  and  Prevention.  Paper  pre¬ 

sented  before  the  Amer.  Psychiatric  Asso.,  May,  1940.  Amer.  Jour,  of 
Psychiatry.  Sept.,  1941. 

28.  Introduction  to  Second  Edition,  Science  and  Sanity,  1941.  Separately  pub¬ 

lished.  Institute  of  General  Semantics,  Chicago. 

29.  Michie,  S.  A  New  General  Language  Curriculum  for  the  Eighth  Grade. 

Modem  Language  Jour.  Feb.,  1938. 

30.  Semmelmeyer,  M.  The  Application  of  General  Semantics  to  a  Program  for 

Reading  Readiness.  Paper  presented  before  the  Third  Annual  Conference 
on  Reading,  University  of  Chicago,  June,  1940.  Institute  of  General  Seman¬ 
tics,  Chicago.  An  abridgement  of  this  paper  is  published  in  the  proceedings 
of  the  conference,  Readtng  and  Pupil  Development,  under  the  title,  ‘Pro¬ 
moting  Readiness  for  Reading  and  for  Growth  in  the  Interpretation  of 
Meaning1.  Suppl.  Educ.  Monographs,  No.  51,  October,  1940.  Univ.  of 
Chicago  Press. 

31.  Weinberg,  A.  M.  General  Semantics  and  the  Teaching  of  Physics.  Amer 

Physics  Teacher.  April,  1939. 

32.  Weyl,  Hermann.  The  Mathematical  Way  of  Thinking.  Studies  in  the  His¬ 

tory  of  Science.  Univ.  of  Pa.  Press,  1941. 

Latest  list  of  publications  available  from  Institute  of  General  Semantics,  Lake¬ 
ville,  Connecticut. 

PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION  1933 

It  is  difficult  for  a  philosopher  to  realise  that  anyone  really  is  confining 
his  discussion  within  the  limits  that  I  have  set  before  you.  The  boundary 
is  set  up  just  where  he  is  beginning  to  get  excited.  (573)  A.  n.  whitehead 

That  all  debunkers  must  add  new  boshes  of  their  own  to  supply  the  vacua 
created  by  the  annihilation  of  the  old,  is  probably  a  law  of  nature.  (22) 

E.  T.  BELL 

Teaching  without  a  system  makes  learning  difficult.  The  Talmud 

The  layman,  the  'practical'  man,  the  man  in  the  street,  says,  What  is 
that  to  me?  The  answer  is  positive  and  weighty.  Our  life  is  entirely  de¬ 
pendent  on  the  established  doctrines  of  ethics,  sociology,  political  economy, 
government,  law,  medical  science,  etc.  This  affects  everyone  consciously  or 
unconsciously,  the  man  in  the  street  in  the  first  place,  because  he  is  the 
most  defenseless.  (280>  A.  K. 

When  new  turns  in  behaviour  cease  to  appear  in  the  life  of  the  individ¬ 
ual  its  behaviour  ceases  to  be  intelligent.  (106)  c.  E.  coghill 

'Tis  a  lesson  you  should  heed. 

Try  again; 

If  at  first  you  don't  succeed , 

Try  again; 

Then  your  courage  should  appear » 
For  if  you  will  persevere 
You  will  conquer ,  never  fear , 

Try  again, 

William  Edward  Hickson. 

The  main  portions  of  the  present  work  have  already  been  presented 
in  the  form  of  lectures  before  different  universities,  technological  in¬ 
stitutes,  teachers'  and  physicians'  associations,  and  other  scientific 
bodies.  The  general  outline  was  presented  for  the  first  time  before  the 
International  Mathematical  Congress  in  Toronto  in  1924,  and  pub¬ 
lished  in  the  form  of  a  booklet.  A  further  elaboration  of  the  system 
was  read  before  the  Washington  (D.  C.)  Society  for  Nervous  and 
Mental  Diseases  in  1925,  and  the  Washington  (D.  C.)  Psychopatho- 
logical  Society  in  1926,  and  later  published.  A  fuller  draft  was  pre¬ 
sented  before  the  Congres  des  mathematiciens  des  pays  Slaves,  in  War¬ 
saw,  Poland,  in  1929.  A  special  and  novel  aspect  of  the  subject,  in 
connection  with  the  conditional  reflexes  of  Pavlov,  was  outlined  before 
the  First  Internationa!  Congress  of  Mental  Hygiene,  Washington,  D. 

lxxxix 

see  page  xii 

xc 

PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION 

C.,  in  1930.  Other  aspects  were  discussed  before  the  American  Mathe¬ 
matical  Society,  October  25,  1930,  and  the  Mathematical  Section  of 
The  American  Association  for  the  Advancement  of  Science,  December 
28,  1931.  The  latter  paper  is  printed  as  Supplement  III  in  this 
volume. 

The  general  character  of  the  present  work  is  perhaps  best  indicated 
by  the  two  following  analogies.  It  is  well  known  that  for  the  working 
of  any  machine  some  lubricant  is  needed.  Without  expressing  any 
judgement  about  the  present  ‘machine  age*,  we  have  to  admit  that  tech¬ 
nically  it  is  very  advanced,  and  that  without  this  advancement  many 
scientific  investigations  necessitating  very  refined  instruments  would  be 
impossible.  Let  us  assume  that  mankind  never  had  at  its  disposal  a 
clean  lubricant,  but  that  existing  lubricants  always  contained  emery 
sand,  the  presence  of  which  escaped  our  notice.  Under  such  condi¬ 
tions,  existing  technical  developments,  with  all  their  consequences, 
would  be  impossible.  Any  machine  would  last  only  a  few  weeks  or 
months  instead  of  many  years,  making  the  prices  of  machines  and  the 
cost  of  their  utilization  entirely  prohibitive.  Technical  development 
would  thus  be  retarded  for  many  centuries.  Let  us  now  assume  that 
somebody  were  to  discover  a  simple  means  for  the  elimination  of  emery 
from  the  lubricants ;  at  once  the  present  technical  developments  would 
become  possible,  and  be  gradually  accomplished. 

Something  similar  has  occurred  in  our  human  affairs.  Technically 
we  are  very  advanced,  but  the  elementalistic  premises  underlying  our 
human  relations,  practically  since  Aristotle,  have  not  changed  at  all. 
The  present  investigation  reveals  that  in  the  functioning  of  our  nervous 
systems  a  special  harmful  factor  is  involved,  a  ‘lubricant  with  emery’ 
so  to  speak,  which  retards  the  development  of  sane  human  relations 
and  prevents  general  sanity.  It  turns  out  that  in  the  structure  of  our 
languages,  methods,  ‘habits  of  thought’,  orientations,  etc.,  we  preserve 
delusional,  psychopathological  factors.  These  are  in  no  way  inevitable, 
as  will  be  shown,  but  can  be  easily  eliminated  by  special  training, 
therapeutic  in  effect,  and  consequently  of  educational  preventive  value. 
This  ‘emery*  in  the  nervous  system  I  call  identification.  It  involves 
deeply  rooted  ‘principles*  which  are  invariably  false  to  facts  and  so  our 
orientations  based  on  them  cannot  lead  to  adjustment  and  sanity. 

A  medical  analogy  here  suggests  itself.  We  find  a  peculiar  parallel 
between  identification  and  infectious  diseases.  History  proves  that 
under  primitive  conditions  infectious  diseases  cannot  be  controlled. 
They  spread  rapidly,  sometimes  killing  off  more  than  half  of  the  af¬ 
fected  population.  The  infectious  agent  may  be  transmitted  either 

PREFACE  TO  Tlili  FIRST  HDITION  xci 

directly,  or  through  rats,  insects,  etc.  With  the  advance  of  science, 
we  are  able  to  control  the  disease,  and  various  important  preventive 
methods,  such  as  sanitation,  vaccination,  etc.,  are  at  our  disposal. 

Identification  appears  also  as  something  infectious’,  for  it  is  trans¬ 
mitted  directly  or  indirectly  from  parents  and  teachers  to  the  child 
by  the  mechanism  and  structure  of  language,  by  established  and  in¬ 
herited  ‘habits  of  thought’,  by  rules  for  life-orientation,  etc.  There 
are  also  large  numbers  of  men  and  women  who  make  a  profession 
of  spreading  the  disease.  Identification  makes  general  sanity  and  com¬ 
plete  adjustment  impossible.  Training  in  non-identity  plays  a  thera¬ 
peutic  role  with  adults.  The  degree  of  recovery  depends  on  many  fac¬ 
tors,  such  as  the  age  of  the  individual,  the  severity  of  the  ‘infection’, 
the  diligence  in  training  in  non-identity,  etc.  With  children  the  train¬ 
ing  in  non-identity  is  extremely  simple.  It  plays  the  role  both  of 
sanitation  and  of  the  equally  simple  and  effective  preventive  vaccina¬ 
tion. 

As  in  infectious  diseases,  certain  individuals,  although  living  in 
infected  territory,  are  somehow  immune  to  this  disease.  Others  are 
hopelessly  susceptible. 

The  present  work  is  written  on  the  level  of  the  average  intelligent 
layman,  because  before  we  can  train  -children  in  non-identity  by  pre¬ 
ventive  education,  parents  and  teachers  must  have  a  handbook  for  their 
own  guidance.  It  is  not  claimed  that  a  millenium  is  at  hand,  far  from 
it ;  yet  it  seems  imperative  that  the  w^wro-psycho-logical  factors  which 
make  general  sanity  impossible  should  be  eliminated. 

I  have  prefaced  the  parts  of  the  work  and  the  chapters  with  a 
large  number  of  important  quotations.  I  have  done  so  to  make  the 
reader  aware  that,  on  the  one  hand,  there  is  already  afloat  in  the  ‘uni¬ 
verse  of  discourse’  a  great  deal  of  genuine  knowledge  and  wisdom,  and 
that,  on  the  other  hand,  this  wisdom  is  not  generally  applied  and,  to  a 
large  extent,  cannot  be  applied  as  long  as  we  fail  to  build  a  simple  sys¬ 
tem  based  on  the  complete  elimination  of  the  pathological  factors. 

A  system,  in  the  present  sense,  represents  a  complex  whole  of  co¬ 
ordinated  doctrines  resulting  in  methodological  rules  and  principles 
of  procedure  which  affect  the  orientation  by  which  we  act  and  live. 
Any  system  involves  an  enormous  number  of  assumptions,  presup¬ 
positions,  etc.,  which,  in  the  main,  are  not  obvious  but  operate  un¬ 
consciously.  As  such,  they  are  extremely  dangerous,  because  should 
it  happen  that  some  of  these  unconscious  presuppositions  are  false  to 
facts,  our  whole  life  orientation  would  be  vitiated  by  these  unconscious 
delusional  factors,  with  the  necessary  result  of  harmful  behaviour  and 

XC11 

PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION 

maladjustment.  No  system  has  ever  been  fully  investigated  as  to  its 
underlying  unconscious  presuppositions.  Every  system  is  expressed 
in  some  language  of  some  structure,  which  is  based  in  turn  on  silent 
presuppositions,  and  ultimately  reflects  and  reinforces  those  presup¬ 
positions  on  and  in  the  system.  This  connection  is  very  close  and  allows 
us  to  investigate  a  system  to  a  large  extent  by  a  linguistic  structural 
analysis. 

The  system  by  which  the  white  race  lives,  suffers,  'prospers*, 
starves,  and  dies  today  is  not  in  a  strict  sense  an  aristotelian  system. 
Aristotle  had  far  too  much  of  the  sense  of  actualities  for  that.  It 
represents,  however,  a  system  formulated  by  those  who,  for  nearly  two 
thousand  years  since  Aristotle,  have  controlled  our  knowledge  and 
methods  of  orientations,  and  who,  for  purposes  of  their  own,  selected 
what  today  appears  as  the  worst  from  Aristotle  and  the  worst  from 
Plato  and,  with  their  own  additions,  imposed  this  composite  system 
upon  us.  In  this  they  were  greatly  aided  by  the  structure  of  language 
and  psycho-logical  habits,  which  from  the  primitive  down  to  this  very 
day  have  affected  all  of  us  consciously  or  unconsciously,  and  have 
introduced  serious  difficulties  even  in  science  and  in  mathematics. 

Our  rulers:  politicians,  ‘diplomats*,  bankers,  priests  of  every  de¬ 
scription,  economists,  lawyers,  etc.,  and  the  majority  of  teachers  re¬ 
main  at  present  largely  or  entirely  ignorant  of  modern  science,  scientific 
methods,  structural  linguistic  and  semantic  issues  of  1933,  and  they  also 
lack  an  essential  historical  and  anthropological  background,  without 
which  a  sane  orientation  is  impossible.*  This  ignorance  is  often  wilful 
as  they  mostly  refuse,  with  various  excuses,  to  read  modem  works 
dealing  with  such  problems.  As  a  result  a  conflict  is  created  and  main¬ 
tained  between  the  advance  of  science  affecting  conditions  of  actual 
life  and  the  orientations  of  our  rulers,  which  often  remain  antiquated 
by  centuries,  or  one  or  two  thousand  years.  The  present  world  condi¬ 
tions  are  in  chaos ;  psycho-logically  there  exists  a  state  of  helplessness — 
hopelessness,  often  resulting  in  the  feelings  of  insecurity,  bitterness,  etc., 
and  we  have  lately  witnessed  psychopathological  mass  outbursts,  sim¬ 
ilar  to  those  of  the  dark  ages.  Few  of  us  at  present  realize  that,  as  long 
as  such  ignorance  of  our  rulers  prevails,  no  solution  of  our  human 
problems  is  possible . 

*  The  literature  of  these  subjects  is  very  large  and  impossible  to  give 
here  or  in  my  bibliography;  but  as  primers  I  may  as  well  suggest  numbers 
299,  334,  492,  558,  589  in  my  bibliography.  These  books  in  turn  give  further 
references. 

PRLiFACli  TO  THK  FIRST  HDITION  xciii 

The  distinctly  novel  issue  in  a  non-aristotelian  system  seems  to  be 
that  in  a  human  class  of  life  elementary  methodological  and  structural 
ignorance  about  the  world  and  ourselves,  as  revealed  by  science,  is 
bound  to  introduce  delusional  factors,  for  no  one  can  be  free  from 
some  conscious  or  unconscious  structural  assumptions.  The  real  and 
only  problem  therefore  seems  to  be  whether  our  structural  assump¬ 
tions  in  1933  are  primitive  or  of  the  1933  issue.  The  older  populariza¬ 
tion  of  science'  is  not  the  solution,  it  often  does  harm.  The  progress 
of  science  is  due  in  the  main  to  scientific  methods  and  linguistic  revis¬ 
ions,  and  so  the  new  facts  discovered  by  such  methods  cannot  be 
properly  utilized  by  antiquated  psycho-logical  orientations  and  lan¬ 
guages.  Such  utilization  often  results  only  in  bewilderment  and  lack 
of  balance.  Before  we  can  adjust  ourselves  to  the  new  conditions  of 
life,  created  in  the  main  by  science,  we  must  first  of  all  revise  our 
grossly  antiquated  methods  of  orientation.  Then  only  shall  we  be  able 
to  adjust  ourselves  properly  to  the  new  facts. 

Investigations  show  that  the  essential  scientific  structural  data  of 
1933  about  the  world  and  ourselves  are  extremely  simple,  simpler  even 
than  any  of  the  structural  fancies  of  the  primitives.  We  usually  have 
sense  enough  to  fit  our  shoes  to  our  feet,  but  not  sense  enough  to  revise 
our  older  methods  of  orientation  to  fit  the  facts.  The  elimination  of 
primitive  identifications,  which  is  easily  accomplished  once  we  take  it 
seriously,  produces  the  necessary  psycho-logical  change  toward  sanity. 

‘Human  nature'  is  not  an  elementalistic  product  of  heredity  alone, 
or  of  environment  alone,  but  represents  a  very  complex  organism-as-a- 
whole  end-result  of  the  enviro-genetic  manifold.  It  seems  obvious, 
once  stated,  that  in  a  human  class  of  life,  the  linguistic,  structural,  and 
semantic  issues  represent  powerful  and  ever  present  environmental 
factors,  which  constitute  most  important  components  of  all  our  prob¬ 
lems.  ‘Human  nature’  can  be  changed ,  once  we  know  how.  Experi¬ 
ence  and  experiments  show  that  this  ‘change  of  human  nature’,  which 
under  verbal  elementalism  was  supposed  to  be  impossible,  can  be  ac¬ 
complished  in  most  cases  in  a  few  months,  if  we  attack  this  problem  by 
the  non- elementalistic,  newro-psycho-logical,  special  non-identity  tech¬ 
nique. 

If  the  ignorance  and  identifications  of  our  rulers  could  be  eliminated 
a  variety  of  delusional  factors  through  home  and  school  educational 
and  other  powerful  agencies  would  cease  to  be  imposed  and  enforced 
upon  us,  and  the  revision  of  our  systems  would  be  encouraged,  rather 
than  hampered.  Effective  solutions  of  our  problems  would  then  appear 
spontaneously  and  in  simple  forms;  our  ‘shoes’  would  fit  our  ‘feet*  and 

XCIV 

PRFFACH  TO  T \Ui  FIRST  KDITION 

we  could  ‘walk  through  life’  in  comfort,  instead  of  enduring  the  pres¬ 
ent  sufferings. 

Since  our  existing  systems  appear  to  be  in  many  respects  unwork¬ 
able  and  involve  psychopathological  factors  owing  in  the  main  to  cer¬ 
tain  presuppositions  of  the  aristotelian  system,  and  also  for  brevity’s 
sake,  I  call  the  whole  operating  systemic  complex  ‘aristotelian’.  The 
outline  of  a  new  and  modern  system  built  after  the  rejection  of  the 
delusional  factors  I  call  ‘non-aristotelian’.  To  avoid  misunderstand¬ 
ings  I  wish  to  acknowledge  explicitly  my  profound  admiration  for 
the  extraordinary  genius  of  Aristotle,  particularly  in  consideration  of 
the  period  in  which  he  lived.  Nevertheless,  the  twisting  of  his  system 
and  the  imposed  immobility  of  this  twisted  system,  as  enforced  for 
nearly  two  thousand  years  by  the  controlling  groups,  often  under 
threats  of  torture  and  death,  have  led  and  can  only  lead  to  more  dis¬ 
asters.  From  what  we  know  about  Aristotle,  there  is  little  doubt  that, 
if  alive,  he  would  not  tolerate  such  twistings  and  artificial  immobility 
of  the  system  usually  ascribed  to  him. 

The  connection  between  the  study  of  psychiatry  and  the  study  of 
mathematics  and  the  foundations  of  mathematics  is  very  instructive. 
In  the  development  of  civilization  and  science  we  find  that  some 
disciplines,  for  instance,  the  very  young  science  of  psychiatry,  have 
progressed  rapidly.  Other  disciplines  such  as  mathematics,  physics, 
etc.,  until  recently  progressed  slowly,  mainly  on  account  of  certain 
dogmas  and  prejudices.  Of  late  some  of  these  prejudices  have  been 
eliminated,  and  since  then  the  progress  of  these  sciences  has  become 
extremely  rapid.  Still  other  disciplines  such  as  'psychology’,  the 
traditional  ‘philosophy’,  sociology,  political  economy,  ethics,  etc.,  have 
developed  their  principles  very  little  in  nearly  two  thousand  years 
notwithstanding  a  wealth  of  accumulated  new  data. 

Many  reasons  are  responsible  for  this  curious  state  of  affairs,  but 
I  will  suggest  only  three,  in  the  order  of  their  importance.  (1)  First 
of  all,  the  last  mentioned  slowly  developing  disciplines  are  the  closest 
to  us  humans,  and  a  primitive  man,  or  an  entirely  ignorant  person 
‘knows  all  about’  these  most  complex  problems  in  existence.  This 
‘know  it  all’  general  tendency  produces  an  environmental,  psycho¬ 
logical,  linguistic,  etc.,  manifold,  filled  with  identifications  which  pro¬ 
duce  dogmas,  prejudices,  misunderstandings,  fears,  and  what  not,  mak¬ 
ing  an  impersonal,  impartial  scientific  approach  next  to  impossible. 
(2)  Few  of  us  realize  the  unbelievable  traps,  some  of  them  of  a  psy¬ 
chopathological  character,  which  the  structure  of  our  ordinary  lan¬ 
guage  sets  before  us.  These  also  make  any  scientific  approach  or 

PRLiFACF  TO  1  Hi:  FIRST  liDITION 

xcv 

agreement  on  vital  points  impossible.  We  grope  by  animalistic  trial 
and  error,  and  by  equally  animalistic  strife,  wars,  revolutions,  etc. 
'These  first  two  points  apply  practically  to  all  of  us,  and  introduce 
great  difficulties  even  into  mathematics.  (3)  One  of  the  main  reasons 
why  psychiatry  has  advanced  so  rapidly  in  such  a  short  period  in  con¬ 
tradistinction  to  ‘psychology",  is  that  it  studies  relatively  simple  and 
relatively  singled-out  symptoms.  But  as  these  symptoms  are  not  iso¬ 
lated,  and  represent  the  reactions  of  the  organism-as-a-whole,  their 
partial  study  yields  glimpses  of  the  general  and  fundamental  mecha¬ 
nisms.  If  we  study  mathematics  and  mathematical  sciences  as  forms 
of  human  behaviour,  we  study  also  simplified  and  singled-out  human 
reactions  of  the  type:  ‘one  and  one  make  two',  ‘two  and  one  make 
three",  etc.,  and  we  also  get  glimpses  of  general  mechanisms.  In  psy¬ 
chiatry  we  study  simplified  psycho-logical  reactions  at  their  worst;  in 
mathematics  and  mathematical  sciences  we  study  simplified  psycho¬ 
logical  reactions  at  their  best.  When  both  types  of  reactions  are 
studied  conjointly,  most  unexpected  and  very  far-reaching  results 
follow  which  deeply  affect  every  known  phase  of  human  life  and 
activity,  science  included.  The  results  of  such  widely  separated  studies 
do  not  conflict,  but  supplement  each  other,  elucidating  very  clearly  a 
general  mechanism  which  operates  in  all  of  us.  Psychiatrical  studies 
help  us  most  unexpectedly  in  the  solution  of  mathematical  paradoxes; 
and  mathematical  studies  help  us  to  solve  very  important  problems  in 
psychotherapy  and  in  prevention  of  psycho-logical  disorders. 

History  shows  that  the  advancement  of  science  and  civilization 
involves,  first,  an  accumulation  of  observations;  second,  a  preliminary 
formulation  of  some  kind  of  ‘principles"  (which  always  involve  some 
unconscious  assumptions)  ;  and,  finally,  as  the  numbers  of  observations 
increase,  it  leads  to  the  revision  and  usually  the  rejection  of  unjusti¬ 
fied,  or  false  to  facts  ‘principles",  which  ultimately  are  found  to  repre¬ 
sent  only  postulates.  Because  of  the  cumulative  and  non-elementalistic 
character  of  human  knowledge,  a  mere  challenge  to  a  ‘principle'  does 
not  carry  us  far.  For  expediency,  assumptions  underlying  a  system 
have  (1)  to  be  discovered,  (2)  tested,  (3)  eventually  challenged, 
(4)  eventually  rejected,  and  (5)  a  system ,  free  from  the  eventually 
objectionable  postulates,  has  to  be  built. 

Examples  of  this  abound  in  every  field,  but  the  histories  of  the 
non~euclidean  and  non-newtonian  systems  supply  the  simplest  and 
most  obvious  illustrations.  For  instance,  the  fifth  postulate  of  Euclid 
did  not  satisfy  even  his  contemporaries,  but  these  challenges  were 
ineffective  for  more  than  two  thousand  years.  Only  in  the  nineteenth 

xcvi  PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION 

century  was  the  fifth  postulate  eliminated  and  non-euclidean  systems 
built  without  it.  The  appearance  of  such  systems  marked  a  profound 
revolution  in  human  orientations.  In  the  twentieth  century  the  much 
more  important  ‘principles*  underlying  our  notions  about  the  physical 
world,  such  as  ‘absolute  simultaneity*,  ‘continuity*  of  atomic  processes, 
‘certainty*  of  our  experiments  and  conclusions,  etc.,  were  challenged, 
and  systems  were  then  built  without  them.  As  a  result,  we  now  have 
the  magnificent  non-newtonian  physics  and  world  outlooks,  based  on 
the  work  of  Einstein  and  the  quantum  pioneers. 

Finally,  for  the  first  time  in  our  history,  some  of  the  most  important 
principles  of  all  principles,  this  time  in  the  ‘mental  world*,  were 
challenged  by  mathematicians.  For  instance  the  universal  validity  of 
the  so-called  ‘logical  law  of  the  excluded  third*  was  questioned.  Un¬ 
fortunately,  as  yet,  no  full-fledged  systems  based  on  this  challenge 
have  been  formulated,  and  so  it  remains  largely  inoperative,  although 
the  possibilities  of  some  non-aristotelian,  though  elementalistic  and 
unsatisfactory  ‘logics*,  are  made  obvious. 

Further  researches  revealed  that  the  generality  of  the  ‘law  of  the 
excluded  third*  is  not  an  independent  postulate,  but  that  it  is  only  an 
elementalistic  consequence  of  a  deeper,  invariably  false  to  facts  prin¬ 
ciple  of  ‘identity’,  often  unconscious  and  consequently  particularly  per¬ 
nicious.  Identity  is  defined  as  ‘absolute  sameness  in  all  respects*,  and  it 
is  this  ‘all*  which  makes  identity  impossible.  If  we  eliminate  this  ‘all* 
from  the  definition,  then  the  word  ‘absolute*  loses  its  meaning,  we  have 
‘sameness  in  some  respects*,  but  we  have  no  ‘identity’,  and  only  ‘simi¬ 
larity*,  ‘equivalence*,  ‘equality*,  etc.  If  we  consider  that  all  we  deal  with 
represents  constantly  changing  sub-microscopic,  interrelated  processes 
which  are  nor,  and  cannot  be  ‘identical  with  themselves*,  the  old  dictum 
that  ‘everything  is  identical  with  itself*  becomes  in  1933  a  principle  in¬ 
variably  false  to  facts. 

Someone  may  say,  ‘Granted,  but  why  fuss  so  much  about  it?*  My 
answer  would  be,  ‘Identification  is  found  in  all  known  primitive  peoples ; 
in  all  known  forms  of  “mental**  ills;  and  in  the  great  majority  of 
personal,  national,  and  international  maladjustments.  It  is  important, 
therefore,  to  eliminate  such  a  harmful  factor  from  our  prevailing  sys¬ 
tems.  Certainly  no  one  would  care  to  contaminate  his  child  with  a 
dangerous  germ,  once  it  is  known  that  the  given  factor  is  dangerous. 
Furthermore,  the  results  of  a  complete  elimination  of  identity  are  so  far- 
reaching  and  beneficial  for  the  daily  life  of  everyone,  and  for  science,* 

*  While  correcting  the  proofs  of  this  Preface,  I  read  a  telegraphic  press  re¬ 
port  from  London  by  Science  Service,  that  Professor  Max  Born,  by  the  applica- 

PRITACI*  TO  THli  FIRST  1*1)1  HON  xcvn 

l hat  such  'fussing’  is  not  only  justified,  but  becomes  one  of  the  primary 
l asks  before  us.  Anyone  who  will  study  the  present  work  will  be 
easily  convinced  by  observations  of  human  difficulties  in  life,  and 
science,  that  the  majority  of  these  difficulties  arise  from  necessary 
false  evaluations,  in  consequence  of  the  unconscious  false  to  facts 
identifications. 

The  present  work  therefore  formulates  a  system,  called  non- 
aristotelian,  which  is  based  on  the  complete  rejection  of  identity  and 
its  derivatives,  and  shows  what  very  simple  yet  powerful  structural 
factors  of  sanity  can  be  found  in  science.  The  experimental  develop¬ 
ment  of  science  and  civilization  invariably  involves  more  and  more 
refined  discriminations.  Each  refinement  means  the  elimination  of 
some  identifications  somewhere,  but  many  still  remain  in  a  partial  and 
mostly  unconscious  form.  The  non-aristotelian  system  formulates  the 
general  problem  of  non-identity,  and  gives  childishly  simple  non- 
el  ementalistic  means  for  a  complete  and  conscious  elimination  of 
identification,  and  other  delusional  or  psychopathological  factors  in 
all  known  fields  of  human  endeavours,  in  science,  education,  and  all 
known  phases  of  private,  national,  and  international  life.  This  work, 
in  its  application  to  education  and  psychotherapy,  has  been  experi¬ 
mental  for  more  than  six  years. 

The  volume  is  divided  into  three  main  divisions.  Book  I  gives  a 
general  survey  of  non-aristotelian  structural  factors  discovered  by 
science,  which  are  essential  in  a  textbook.  Only  such  data  are 
selected,  interpreted  and  evaluated  as  are  necessary  for  a  full  mastery 
of  the  system.  Book  II  presents  a  general  introduction  to  non-aristote¬ 
lian  systems  and  general  semantics  free  from  identity,  and  gives  a 
technique  for  the  elimination  of  delusional  factors  from  our  psycho¬ 
logical  reactions.  Book  III  gives  additional  structural  data  about  lan¬ 
guages,  and  also  an  outline  of  the  essential  structural  characteristics 
of  the  empirical  world,  but  only  such  as  are  pertinent  for  training  in 
the  non-aristotelian  discipline. 

Following  each  quotation  prefacing  each  part  and  chapter,  the 
