number  in  parenthesis  indicates  the  number  of  the  book  in  the  bibli¬ 
ography  from  which  the  quotation  is  taken. 

tion  of  the  non~elementalistic  methods  of  Einstein,  has  succeeded  in  making  & 
major  contribution  to  the  formulation  of  a  unified  field  theory  which  now  in* 
eludes  the  quantum  mechanics.  Should  this  announcement  be  verified  in  its  scien¬ 
tific  aspects,  our  understanding  of  the  structure  of  'matter*,  'electron*,  etc.,  would 
be  greatly  advanced,  and  would  involve  of  course  most  important  practical  appli¬ 
cations.  For  the  semantic  aspects  of  these  problems,  see  pp.  378,  386  f.,  541,  667, 
698-701,  and  Chapter  XXXIX. 

xcviii  PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION 

I  have  tried  to  avoid  footnotes  as  much  as  possible.  The  small 
numbers  after  some  words  in  the  text  refer  to  the  Notes  on  p.  763  if., 
where  the  references  to  the  bibliography  are  given. 

Book  II  is  largely  self-contained  and  therefore  can  be  read  inde¬ 
pendently  of  the  others,  after  the  reader  has  become  acquainted  with 
the  short  tables  of  abbreviations  given  on  pp.  15  and  16,  and  with 
Chapters  II  and  IV.  I  believe,  however,  that  for  the  best  results  the 
book  should  be  read  consecutively  without  stopping  at  passages  which  at 
first  are  not  entirely  clear,  and  read  at  least  twice.  On  the  second  read¬ 
ing,  passages  which  at  first  were  not  clear  will  become  obvious  because, 
in  such  a  wide  system,  the  beginning  presupposes  the  end,  and  vice 
versa. 

The  discovery  of  such  important  and  entirely  general  delusional 
factors  in  the  older  systems  leads  to  a  far-reaching  revision  of  all 
existing  disciplines.  Because  of  modern  complexities  of  knowledge 
this  revision  can  only  be  accomplished  by  the  activities  of  specialists 
working  together  as  a  group,  and  unified  by  one  principle  of  non¬ 
identity,  which  necessitates  a  structural  treatment. 

To  facilitate  this  most  urgent  need,  and  to  present  the  results  of 
this  work  to  the  public  at  reasonable  prices,  an  International  Non- 
aristotelian  Library  has  been  organized,  to  be  printed  and  distributed 
by  The  Science  Press  Printing  Company,  Lancaster,  Pennsylvania, 
U.  S.  A.,  and  Grand  Central  Terminal,  New  York  City. 

It  is  also  intended  to  organize  an  International  Non-aristotelian 
Society  with  branches  in  connection  with  all  institutions  of  learning 
throughout  the  world,  where  co-operative  scientific  work  for  the  elimi¬ 
nation  of  identity  can  be  carried  out,  as  this  work  is  beyond  the  capaci¬ 
ties  of  any  one  man. 

Since  the  scope  of  the  Library  and  Societies  is  international,  I 
have  accepted,  in  the  main,  the  Oxford  spelling  and  rules,  which  are 
a  happy  medium  between  the  English  used  in  the  United  States  of 
America  and  that  of  the  rest  of  the  world.  In  certain  instances  I  had 
to  utilize  some  forms  of  expressions  which  are  not  entirely  customary, 
but  these  slight  deviations  were  forced  upon  me  by  the  character  of  the 
subject,  the  need  for  clarity,  and  the  necessity  for  cautiousness  in 
generalizations.  The  revision  of  the  manuscript  and  reading  of  the 
proofs  in  connection  with  other  editorial  and  publishing  duties  has  been 
a  very  laborious  task  for  one  man,  and  I  only  hope  that  not  too  many 
mistakes  have  been  overlooked.  Corrections  and  suggestions  from  the 
readers  are  invited. 

The  International  Non-aristotelian  Library  is  a  non-commercial, 

PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION 

XCIX 

scientific  venture,  and  the  interest  and  help  of  scientists,  teachers,  and 
those  who  are  not  indifferent  to  the  advancement  of  science,  civilization, 
sanity,  peace,  and  to  the  improvement  of  social,  economic,  international, 
etc.,  conditions,  will  be  greatly  appreciated. 

From  one  point  of  view,  this  enquiry  has  been  independent;  from 
another,  much  material  has  been  adapted.  In  some  instances  it  is  im¬ 
possible  to  give  specific  credit  to  an  author,  particularly  in  a  text¬ 
book,  and  it  is  simpler  and  fairer  to  state  that  the  works  of  Professors 
H.  F.  Biggs,  G.  Birtwistle,  E.  Bleuler,  R.  Bonola,  M.  Bom,  P.  W. 
Bridgman,  E.  Cassirer,  C.  M.  Child,  A.  S.  Eddington,  A.  Einstein, 
A.  Haas,  H.  Head,  L.  V.  Heilbrunn,  C.  J.  Herrick,  S.  E.  Jelliffe, 
C.  J.  Keyser,  C.  I.  Lewis,  J.  Loeb,  H.  Minkowski,  W.  F.  Osgood,  H. 
Pieron,  G.  Y.  Rainich,  B.  Russell,  C.  S.  Sherrington,  L.  Silberstein, 
A.  Sommerfeld,  E.  H.  Starling,  A.  V.  Vasiliev,  H.  Weyl,  W.  A. 
White,  A.  N.  Whitehead,  E.  B.  Wilson,  L.  Wittgenstein  and  J.  W. 
Young  have  been  constantly  consulted. 

Although  I  have  had  no  opportunity  to  use  directly  the  funda¬ 
mental  researches  of  Doctor  Henry  Head  on  aphasia,  and  particularly 
on  semantic  aphasia,  my  whole  work  has  been  seriously  influenced  by 
his  great  contributions.  Doctor  Head's  work,  in  connection  with  a 
non-elementalistic  analysis,  makes  obvious  the  close  connection  be¬ 
tween:  (1)  identifications;  (2)  structural  ignorance;  (3)  lack  of 
proper  evaluations  in  general,  and  of  the  full  significance  of  words  and 
phrases  in  particular;  and  (4)  the  corresponding  necessary,  at  least 
colloidal  lesions  of  the  nervous  system. 

I  am  under  heavy  obligations  to  Professors:  E.  T.  Bell,  P.  W. 
Bridgman,  C.  M.  Child,  B.  F.  Dostal,  M.  H.  Fischer,  R.  R.  Gates 
(London),  C.  Judson  Herrick,  H.  S.  Jennings,  R.  J.  Kennedy,  R.  S. 
Lillie,  B.  Malinowski  (London),  R.  Pearl,  G.  Y.  Rainich,  Bertrand 
Russell  (London),  M.  Trainer  (Bern),  W.  M.  Wheeler,  H.  B.  Wil¬ 
liams,  W.  H.  Wilmer;  and  Doctors:  C.  B.  Bridges,  D.  G.  Fairchild,  W. 
H.  Gantt,  P.  S.  Graven,  E.  L.  Hardy,  J.  A.  P.  Millet,  P.  Weiss,  W.  A. 
White,  Mr.  C.  K.  Ogden  (London),  and  Miss  C.  L.  Williams,  for  read¬ 
ing  the  manuscript  and/or  the  proofs  as  a  whole,  or  in  part,  and  for 
their  invaluable  criticism,  and  suggestions. 

I  also  owe  much  to  Doctor  C.  B.  Bridges  and  Professor  W.  M. 
Wheeler,  not  only  for  their  important  criticisms  and  constructive  sug¬ 
gestions,  but  also  for  their  painstaking  editorial  corrections  and  in¬ 
terest. 

Needless  to  say,  I  assume  full  responsibility  for  the  following 
pages,  the  more,  that  I  did  not  always  follow  the  suggestions  made. 

c 

PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION 

I  wish  to  express  my  deep  appreciation  to  Doctor  W.  A.  White 
and  the  staff  of  St.  Elizabeth's  Hospital,  Washington,  D.  C.,  who,  during 
my  two  years  of  study  in  the  hospital,  gave  me  every  assistance  to 
facilitate  my  research  work  there.  I  am  indebted  to  Doctor  P.  S. 
Graven  for  supplying  me  with  his  as  yet  unpublished  experimental 
clinical  material,  which  was  very  useful  to  me. 

Three  important  terms  have  been  suggested  to  me ;  namely,  ‘enviro- 
genetic’  by  Doctor  C.  B.  Bridges,  'actional*  by  Professor  P.  W.  Bridg¬ 
man,  and  ‘un-sane’  by  Doctor  P.  S.  Graven,  which  debt  I  gladly 
acknowledge. 

I  am  also  deeply  grateful  to  Professor  R.  D.  Carmichael  for  writ¬ 
ing  Supplement  I  for  this  book  on  the  Theory  of  Einstein,  and  to 
Doctor  P.  Weiss  for  his  kind  permission  to  reprint  as  Supplement  II 
his  article  on  the  Theory  of  Types. 

I  warmly  appreciate  the  kindness  of  those  authors  who  gave  me 
their  permission  to  utilize  their  works. 

During  my  twelve  years  of  research  work  in  the  present  subject 
and  preparation  of  this  volume  I  have  been  assisted  by  a  number  of 
persons,  to  whom  I  wish  to  express  my  appreciation.  My  particular 
appreciation  is  extended  to  my  secretary,  Miss  Lily  E.  MaDan  who, 
besides  her  regular  work,  made  the  drawings  for  the  book;  to  Miss 
Eunice  E.  Winters  for  her  genuine  assistance  in  reading  the  proofs 
and  compiling  the  bibliography;  and  to  Mr.  Harvey  W.  Culp  for  the 
difficult  reading  of  the  physico-mathematical  proofs  and  the  equally 
difficult  preparation  of  the  index. 

The  technical  efficiency  in  all  departments  of  the  Science  Press 
Printing  Company,  and  the  zealous  and  courteous  co-operation  of  its 
compositors  and  officials,  have  considerably  facilitated  the  publication 
of  this  book,  and  it  is  my  pleasant  duty  to  extend  my  thanks  to  them. 

My  heaviest  obligations  are  to  my  wife,  formerly  Mira  Edgerly. 
This  work  was  difficult,  very  laborious,  and  often  ungrateful,  which 
involved  the  renouncing  of  the  life  of  ‘normal’  human  beings,  and  we 
abandoned  much  which  is  supposed  to  make  ‘life  worth  living’.  With¬ 
out  her  whole-hearted  and  steady  support,  and  her  relentless  encourage¬ 
ment,  I  neither  would  have  formulated  the  present  system  nor  written 
the  book  which  embodies  it.  If  this  book  proves  of  any  value,  Mira 
Edgerly  is  in  fact  more  to  be  thanked  than  the  author.  Without  her 
interest,  no  non-aristotelian  system,  nor  theory  of  sanity  would  have 
been  produced  in  1933. 

New  York,  August,  1933. 

A.  K. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 

The  author  and  the  publishers  gratefully  acknowledge  the  following 
permissions  to  make  use  of  copyright  material  in  this  work : 

Messrs.  G.  Allen  and  Unwin,  London,  for  permission  to  quote  from 
the  works  of  Bertrand  Russell. 

The  publishers  of  the  Archives  of  Neurology  and  Psychiatry,  for 
permission  to  quote  from  a  paper  by  W.  A.  White. 

Messrs.  Blackie  and  Son,  London  and  Glasgow,  for  permission  to 
quote  from  the  works  of  E.  Schrodinger. 

Messrs.  Gebriider  Borntraeger,  Berlin,  for  permission  to  utilize 
material  from  the  work  of  L.  V.  Heilbrunn. 

The  Cambridge  University  Press,  Cambridge,  England,  for  per¬ 
mission  to  quote  from  the  works  of  G.  Birtwistle,  A.  S.  Eddington, 
A.  N.  Whitehead,  A.  N.  Whitehead  and  Bertrand  Russell. 

The  Chemical  Catalog  Company,  New  York,  for  permission  to 
quote  from  Colloid  Chemistry >  edited  by  J.  Alexander. 

Messrs.  J.  and  A.  Churchill,  London,  for  permission  to  quote  from 
the  work  of  E.  H.  Starling. 

Messrs.  Constable  and  Company,  London,  for  permission  to  utilize 
material  from  the  works  of  A.  Haas. 

Messrs.  Doubleday,  Doran  and  Company,  Garden  City  and  New 
York,  for  permission  to  quote  from  the  work  of  J.  Collins. 

Messrs.  E.  P.  Dutton  and  Company,  New  York,  for  permission  to 
quote  from  the  works  of  C.  J.  Keyser. 

The  Franklin  Institute,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  for  permission  to  quote 
from  the  paper  of  G.  Y.  Rainich  printed  in  the  Journal  of  the  Franklin 
Institute. 

Messrs.  Harcourt,  Brace  and  Company,  New  York,  for  permission 
to  quote  from  the  work  of  W.  M.  Wheeler. 

Messrs.  Henry  Holt  and  Company,  New  York,  for  permission  to 
quote  from  the  works  of  C.  M.  Child,  A.  Einstein,  and  C.  J.  Herrick. 

Messrs.  Kegan  Paul,  Trench,  Trubner  and  Company,  London,  and 
Messrs.  Harcourt,  Brace  and  Company,  New  York,  for  permission  to 
quote  from  the  works  of  C.  K.  Ogden  and  I.  A.  Richards,  H.  Pieron, 
and  Bertrand  Russell. 

Messrs.  Macmillan  and  Company,  London  and  New  York,  for 
permission  to  quote  from  the  works  of  L.  Couturat,  W.  S,  Jevons,  J. 
Royce,  and  S.  P.  Thompson. 

The  Macmillan  Company,  New  York  and  London,  for  permission 
to  quote  from  the  works  of  E.  Bleuler,  M.  Bocher,  P.  W.  Bridgman, 
A.  S.  Eddington,  E.  V.  McCollum,  W.  F.  Osgood,  and  A.  N.  White- 
head. 

Messrs.  Methuen  and  Company,  London,  and  Messrs.  Dodd,  Mead 
and  Company,  New  York,  for  permission  to  quote  from  the  works  of 
A.  Einstein,  H.  Minkowski,  and  H,  Weyl. 

ci 

cii  PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION 

Messrs.  Methuen  and  Company,  London,  and  Messrs.  E.  P.  Dutton 
and  Company,  New  York,  for  permission  to  quote  from  the  works  of 
M.  Born,  A.  Haas,  A.  Sommerfeld,  and  H.  Weyl. 

The  publishers  of  ‘Mind’,  Cambridge,  England,  for  permission  to 
reprint  the  article  of  P.  Weiss. 

Sir  John  Murray,  London,  and  Messrs.  P.  Blakiston’s  Son  and 
Company,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  for  permission  to  quote  from  the  work  of 
W.  D.  Halliburton. 

The  Nervous  and  Mental  Disease  Publishing  Company,  Washing¬ 
ton,  D.  C.,  for  permission  to  quote  from  the  works  of  S.  E.  Jelliffe  and 
W.  A.  White. 

Messrs.  W.  W.  Norton  and  Company,  New  York,  for  permission 
to  quote  from  the  works  of  H.  S.  Jennings. 

The  Open  Court  Publishing  Company,  Chicago,  Ill.,  for  permission 
to  quote  from  the  works  of  R.  Bonola,  R.  D.  Carmichael,  Bertrand 
Russell  and  J.  B.  Shaw. 

The  Oxford  University  Press,  London  and  New  York,  for  a  ten 
dollar  permission  to  quote  from  the  works  of  I.  P.  Pavlov  and  H.  F. 
Biggs. 

The  publishers  of  Physical  Review,  New  York,  for  permission  to 
quote  from  the  paper  of  C.  Eckart. 

The  Princeton  University  Press,  Princeton,  New  Jersey,  for  per¬ 
mission  to  quote  from  the  work  of  A.  Einstein. 

Messrs.  G.  P.  Putnam's  Sons,  New  York  and  London,  for  permis¬ 
sion  to  utilize  the  works  of  J.  Loeb. 

The  W.  B.  Saunders  Company,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  for  permission 
to  quote  from  the  works  of  W.  T.  Bovie,  A.  Church  and  F.  Peterson, 
and  C.  J.  Herrick. 

The  Science  Press,  New  York  and  Lancaster,  Pa.,  for  permission 
to  quote  from  the  work  of  H.  Poincare. 

Messrs.  Charles  Scribner's  Sons,  New  York,  for  permission  to 
quote  from  the  works  of  G.  Santayana. 

The  University  of  California  Press,  Berkeley,  Calif.,  for  permission 
to  quote  from  the  work  of  C.  I.  Lewis. 

The  University  of  Chicago  Press,  Chicago,  Ill.,  for  permission  to 
quote  from  the  works  of  W.  Heisenberg,  C.  J.  Herrick,  R.  S.  Lillie, 
and  J.  Loeb. 

The  publishers  of  the  University  of  Washington  Chapbooks,  Seat¬ 
tle,  Wash.,  for  permission  to  quote  from  the  work  of  E.  T.  Bell. 

The  Williams  and  Wilkins  Company,  Baltimore,  Md.,  for  permis¬ 
sion  to  quote  from  the  work  of  E.  T.  Bell. 

In  several  instances  I  have  quoted  a  few  lines  from  other  publi¬ 
cations,  without  asking  special  permission.  I  now  wish  to  express  my 
gratitude  to  these  respective  publishers. 

In  all  instances  the  sources,  from  which  the  quotations  and  the 
material  used  were  taken,  are  explicitly  indicated  in  the  text  of  the 
book. 

BOOK  I 

A  General  Survey  of 
Non-Aristotelian  Factors 

Allow  me  to  express  now,  once  and  for  all,  my  deep  respect  for  the  work 
of  the  experimenter  and  for  his  fight  to  wring  significant  facts  from  an  in¬ 
flexible  Nature,  who  says  so  distinctly  "No”  and  so  indistinctly  "Yes”  to 
our  theories.  (5  so  Hermann  weyl 

The  firm  determination  to  submit  to  experiment  is  not  enough;  there  are 
still  dangerous  hypotheses;  first,  and  above  all,  those  which  are  tacit  and 
unconscious.  Since  we  make  them  without  knowing  it,  we  are  powerless  to 
abandon  them.  <4i7>  H*  poincare 

The  empiricist .  .  .  thinks  he  believes  only  what  he  sees,  but  he  is  much 
better  at  believing  than  at  seeing.  (46D  g.  santayana 

For  a  Latin,  truth  can  be  expressed  only  by  equations;  it  must  obey  laws 
simple,  logical,  symmetric  and  fitted  to  satisfy  minds  in  love  with  mathe¬ 
matical  elegance.  ,  , 

The  Anglo-Saxon  to  depict  a  phenomenon  will  first  be  engrossed  in  mak¬ 
ing  a  model ,  and  he  will  make  it  with  common  materials,  such  as  our  crude, 
unaided  senses  show  us  them.  ...  He  concludes  from  the  body  to  the  atom. 

Both  therefore  make  hypotheses,  and  this  indeed  is  necessary,  since  no 
scientist  has  ever  been  able  to  get  on  without  them.  The  essential  thing  is 
never  to  make  them  unconsciously.  (417)  h.  poincar6 

If  a  distinction  is  to  be  made  between  men  and  monkeys,  it  is  largely 
measurable  by  the  quantity  of  the  subconscious  which  a  higher  order  of 
being  makes  conscious.  That  man  really  lives  who  brings  the  greatest 
fraction  of  his  daily  experience  into  the  realm  of  the  conscious.* 

MARTIN  H.  FISCHER 

The  thought  of  the  painter,  the  musician,  the  geometrician,  the  trades¬ 
man,  and  the  philosopher  may  take  very  different  forms;  still  more  so  the 
thought  of  the  uncultivated  man,  which  remains  rudimentary  and  revolves 
for  ever  in  the  same  circles.  (4ii>  henri  pi£ron 

One  need  only  open  the  eyes  to  see  that  the  conquests  of  industry  which 
have  enriched  so  many  practical  men  would  never  have  seen  the  light,  if 
these  practical  men  alone  had  existed  and  if  they  had  not  been  preceded  by 
unselfish  devotees  who  died  poor,  who  never  thought  of  utility,  and  yet 
had  a  guide  far  other  than  caprice.  (417)  h.  poincare 

*  Soinal  Cord  Education.  III.  Med .  Jour.  Dec.,  1928. 

NON-ARISTOTELIAN  FACTORS 

The  men  most  disdainful  of  theory  get  from  it,  without  suspecting  it, 
their  daily  bread;  deprived  of  this  food,  progress  would  quickly  cease,  and 
we  should  soon  congeal  into  the  immobility  of  old  China.  (417)  h.  poincar£ 

If  one  wishes  to  obtain  a  definite  answer  from  Nature  one  must  attack 
the  question  from  a  more  general  and  less  selfish  point  of  view.  (415) 

M. PLANCK 

In  particular — if  we  use  the  word  intelligence  as  a  synonym  for  mental 
activity,  as  is  often  done — we  must  differentiate  between  the  primitive  forms 
of  sensory  intelligence,  with  their  ill-developed  symbolism  beyond  which 
backward  children  cannot  advance,  .  .  .  and  the  forms  of  verbal  intelligence 
created  by  social  education,  abstract  and  conceptual  forms.  (411) 

HENRI  PI&RON 

A  civilisation  which  cannot  burst  through  its  current  abstractions  is 
doomed  to  sterility  after  a  very  limited  period  of  progress,  (575) 

A.  N.  WHITEHEAD 

.  .  .  almost  any  idea  which  jogs  you  out  of  your  current  abstractions 
may  be  better  than  nothing.  (575)  a.  n.  whitehead 

That  is  precisely  what  common  sense  is  for,  to  be  jarred  into  uncommon 
sense.  One  of  the  chief  services  which  mathematics  has  rendered  the  human 
race  in  the  past  century  is  to  put  ‘common  sense’  where  it  belongs,  on  the 
topmost  shelf  next  to  the  dusty  canister  labeled  ‘discarded  nonsense.’  (23) 

E.  T.  BELL 

If  you  have  had  your  attention  directed  to  the  novelties  in  thought  in 
your  own  lifetime,  you  will  have  observed  that  almost  all  really  new  ideas 
have  a  certain  aspect  of  foolishness  when  they  are  first  produced.  (575) 

A.  N.  WHITEHEAD 

To  know  how  to  criticize  is  good,  to  know  how  to  create  is  better.  (417) 

H.  poincarG 

The  explanatory  crisis  which  now  confronts  us  in  relativity  and  quantum 
phenomena  is  but  a  repetition  of  what  has  occurred  many  times  in  the  past. 
. . .  Every  kitten  is  confronted  with  such  a  crisis  at  the  end  of  nine  days.  (55) 

P.  W.  BRIDGMAN 

The  concept  does  not  exist  for  the  physicist  until  he  has  the  possibility 

of  discovering  whether  or  not  it  is  fulfilled  in  an  actual  case _ As  long  as 

this  requirement  is  not  satisfied,  I  allow  myself  to  be  deceived  as  a  physicist 
(and  of  course  the  same  applies  if  I  am  not  a  physicist),  when  I  imagine 
that  I  am  able  to  attach  a  meaning  to  the  statement  of  simultaneity.  (I 
would  ask  the  reader  not  to  proceed  farther  until  he  is  fully  convinced  on 
this  point.)  (150)  A.  EINSTEIN 

Einstein,  in  thus  analyzing  what  is  involved  in  making  a  judgment  of 
simultaneity,  and  in  seizing  on  the  act  of  the  observer  as  the  essence  of  the 
situation,  is  actually  adopting  a  new  point  of  view  as  to  what  the  concepts 
of  physics  should  be,  namely,  the  operational  view  ...  if  we  had  adopted  the 
operational  point  of  view,  we  would,  before  the  discovery  of  the  actual 
physical  facts,  have  seen  that  simultaneity  is  essentially  a  relative  concept, 
and  would  have  left  room  in  our  thinking  for  the  discovery  of  such  effects 
as  were  later  found.  (55)  p,  w.  bridgman 

NON  ARISTOTELIAN  FACTORS 

Let  any  one  examine  in  operational  terms  any  popular  present-da  v  dis¬ 
cussion  of  religious  or  moral  questions  to  realize  the  magnitude  of  the  re¬ 
formation  awaiting  us.  Wherever  we  temporize  or  compromise  in  applying 
our  theories  of  conduct  to  practical  life  we  may  suspect  a  failure  of  opera¬ 
tional  thinking.  (55)  p*  w*  bridgman 

I  believe  that  many  of  the  questions  asked  about  social  and  philosophical 
subjects  will  be  found  to  be  meaningless  when  examined  from  the  point  of 
view  of  operations.  It  would  doubtless  conduce  greatly  to  clarity  of  thought 
if  the  operational  mode  of  thinking  were  adopted  in  all  fields  of  inquiry  as 
well  as  in  the  physical.  Just  as  in  the  physical  domain,  so  in  other  domains, 
one  is  making  a  significant  statement  about  his  subject  in  stating  that  a 
certain  question  is  meaningless.  (55)  P.  w.  bridgman 

There  is  a  sharp  disagreement  among  competent  men  as  to  what  can  be 
proved  and  what  cannot  be  proved,  as  well  as  an  irreconcilable  divergence 
of  opinion  as  to  what  is  sense  and  what  is  nonsense.  (22)  e.  t.  bell 

Notice  the  word  “nonsense”  above.  It  was  their  inability,  among  other 
things,  to  define  this  word  .  .  .  that  brought  to  grief  the  heroic  attempt  of 
Russell  and  Whitehead  to  put  mathematical  reasoning  on  a  firm. basis.  (22) 

E.  T.  BELL 

The  structure  of  all  linguistic  material  is  inextricably  mixed  up  with,  and 
dependent  upon,  the  course  of  the  activity  in  which  the  utterances  are 
embedded.  (332)  b.  malinowski 

To  sum  up,  we  can  say  that  the  fundamental  grammatical  categories, 
universal  to  all  human  languages,  can  be  understood  only  with  reference 
to  the  pragmatic  Weltanshauung  of  primitive  man,  and  that,  through  the 
use  of  Language,  the  barbarous  primitive  categories  must  have  deeply  in¬ 
fluenced  the  later  philosophies  of  mankind.  (332)  b.  malinowski 

Since  no  two  events  are  identical,  every  atom,  molecule,  organism,  per¬ 
sonality,  and  society  is  an  emergent  and,  at  least  to  some  extent,  a  novelty. 
And  these  emergents  are  concatenated  in  such  a  way  as  to  form  vast  rami¬ 
fying  systems,  only  certain  ideal  sections  of  which  seem  to  have  elicited  the 
attention  of  philosophers,  owing  to  their  avowedly  anthropocentric  and 
anthropodoxic  interests.  (555)  william  morton  wheeler 

The  words  is  and  is  not,  which  imply  the  agreement  or  disagreement  of 
two  ideas,  must  exist,  explicitly  or  implicitly,  in  every  assertion.  (354) 

AUGUSTUS  DE  MORGAN 

The  little  word  is  has  its  tragedies;  it  marries  and  identifies  different 
things  with  the  greatest  innocence;  and  yet  no  two  are  ever  identical,  and 
if  therein  lies  the  charm  of  wedding  them  and  calling  them  one,  therein  too 
lies  the  danger.  Whenever  I  use  the  word  is,  except  in  sheer  tautology,  I 
deeply  misuse  it;  and  when  I  discover  my  error,  the  world  seems  to  fall 
asunder  and  the  members  of  my  family  no  longer  know  one  another.  (461) 

G. SANTAYANA 

The  complete  attempt  to  deal  with  the  term  is  would  go  to  the  form  and 
matter  of  every  thing  in  existence,  at  least,  if  not  to  the  possible  form  and 
matter  of  all  that  does  not  exist,  but  might.  As  far  as  it  could  be  done,  it 
would  give  the  grand  Cyclopaedia,  and  its  yearly  supplement  would  be  the 
history  of  the  human  race  for  the  time.  (354)  Augustus  de  Morgan 

Consciousness  is  the  feeling  of  negation:  in  the  perception  of  ‘the  stone 
as  grey,’  such  feeling  is  in  barest  germ;  in  the  perception  of  ‘the  stone  as 
not  grey,'  such  feeling  is  full  development.  Thus  the  negative  perception 
is  the  triumph  of  consciousness.  (578)  A.  N.  whitehead 

NON  AK ISTOTKLI AN  FACTORS 

But,  if  we  designate  as  intelligence,  quantitatively,  the  totality  of  mental 
functioning,  it  is  evident  that  the  suppression  of  verbal  thought  involves 
a  defect,  relatively  very  important  among  cultivated  individuals  leading  a 
complex  social  life:  the  uneducated  person  from  this  point  of  view  is  a  de¬ 
fective.  (411)  HENRI  PlfeRON 

The  philosophy  of  the  common  man  is  an  old  wife  that  gives  him  no 
pleasure,  yet  he  cannot  live  without  her,  and  resents  any  aspersions  that 
strangers  may  cast  on  her  character.  (46i)  G.  Santayana 

It  is  terrible  to  see  how  a  single  unclear  idea,  a  single  formula  without 
