meaning,  lurking  in  a  young  man’s  head,  will  sometimes  act  like  an  ob¬ 
struction  of  inert  matter  in  an  artery,  hindering  the  nutrition  of  the  brain, 
and  condemning  its  victim  to  pine  away  in  the  fullness  of  his  intellectual 
vigor  and  in  the  midst  of  intellectual  plenty.  (402)  Charles  s.  peirce 

PART  I 

PRELIMINARIES 

Corpus  Errorum  Biohgicorum 

But  exactly  the  distinctive  work  of  science  is  the  modification,  the  recon¬ 
struction,  the  abandonment  of  old  ideas;  the  construction  of  new  ones  on 
the  basis  of  observation.  This  however  is  a  distressing  operation,  and 
many  refuse  to  undergo  it ;  even  many  whose  work  is  the  practice  of  scientific 
investigation.  The  old  ideas  persist  along  with  the  new  observations;  they 
form  the  basis— often  unconsciously— for  many  of  the  conclusions  that  are 
drawn. 

This  is  what  has  occurred  in  the  study  of  heredity.  A  burden  of  concepts 
and  definitions  has  come  down  from  pre-experimental  days;  the  pouring 
of  the  new  wine  of  experimental  knowledge  into  these  has  resulted  in  con¬ 
fusion.  And  this  confusion  is  worse  confounded  by  the  strange  and  strong 
propensity  of  workers  in  heredity  to  flout  and  deny  and  despise  the  ob¬ 
servations  of  the  workers  in  environmental  action;  the  equally  strange  and 
strong  propensity  of  students  of  environmental  effects  to  flout  and  deny  and 
despise  the  work  on  inheritance.  If  one  accepts  the  affirmative  results  of 
both  sets,  untroubled  by  their  negations,  untroubled  by  definitions  that 
have  come  from  the  past,  there  results  a  simple,  consistent  and  useful  body 
of  knowledge;  though  with  less  pretentious  claims  than  are  set  forth  by 
either  single  set. 

Our  first  fallacy  springs  from  the  situation  just  described.  It  is: 

I.  The  fallacy  of  non-experimental  judgments,  in  matters  of  heredity 
and  development.  .  .  . 

Our  second  general  fallacy  is  one  that  appears  in  the  interpretation  of 
observational  and  experimental  results;  it  underlies  most  of  the  special 
fallacies  seen  in  genetic  biology.  This  is  the  fallacy  that  Morley  in  his  life 
of  Gladstone  asserts  to  be  the  greatest  affliction  of  politicians;  it  is  indeed 
a  common  plague  of  humanity.  It  is: 

II.  The  fallacy  of  attributing  to  one  cause  what  is  due  to  many  causes. 

III.  The  fallacy  of  concluding  that  because  one  factor  plays  a  role, 
another  does  not;  the  fallacy  of  drawing  negative  conclusions  from  positive 
observations.  ... 

IV.  The  fallacy  that  the  characteristics  of  organisms  are  divisible  into 
two  distinct  classes;  one  due  to  heredity,  the  other  to  environment.  .  .  . 

VII.  The  fallacy  of  basing  conclusions  on  implied  premises  that  when 
explicitly  stated  are  rejected.  ... 

Many  premises  influencing  reasoning  are  of  this  hidden,  unconscious 
type.  Such  ghostly  premises  largely  affect  biological  reasoning  on  the  topics 
here  dealt  with;  they  underlie  several  of  the  fallacies  already  stated,  and 
several  to  come.  .  .  . 

VIII.  The  fallacy  that  showing  a  characteristic  to  be  hereditary  proves 
that  it  is  not  alterable  by  the  environment.  .  .  , 

\}\<  KIJ  Ml  N  AR1KS 

IX.  The  fallacy  that  showing  a  characteristic  to  be  altered  by  the  en¬ 
vironment  proves  that  it  is  not  hereditary.  .  .  . 

It  appears  indeed  probable,  from  the  present  state  of  knowledge  and  the 
trend  of  discovery,  that  the  following  sweeping  statements  will  ultimately 
turn  out  to  be  justified: — 

(1)  All  characteristics  of  organisms  may  be  altered  by  changing  the 
genes;  provided  we  can  learn  how  to  change  the  proper  genes. 

( 2)  .  All  characteristics  may  be  altered  by  changing  the  environmental 
conditions  under  which  the  organism  develops;  provided  that  we  learn 
what  conditions  to  change  and  how  to  change  them. 

.  (3)  Any  kind  of  change  of  characteristics  that  can  be  induced  by  alter- 
ihg  genes,  can  likewise  be  induced  (if  we  know  how)  by  altering  conditions. 
(This  statement  is  open  to  more  doubt  than  the  other  two;  but  it  is  likely 
eventually  to  be  found  correct.)  .  .  . 

x*  T1?e  fallacy  that  since  all  human  characteristics  are  hereditary, 
heredity  is  all-important  in  human  affairs,  environment  therefore  unim¬ 
portant.  .  .  . 

XI*  The  fallacy  that  since  all  important  human  characteristics  are 
environmental,  therefore  environment  is  all-important,  heredity  unim¬ 
portant,  in  human  affairs.  (247)  H.  s.  tbnnings 

CHAPTER  I 

AIMS,  MEANS  AND  CONSEQUENCES  OF  A 
NON-ARISTOTELIAN  REVISION 

The  process  of  intellectualism  is  not  the  subject  I  wish  to  treat:  I  wish 
to  speak  of  science,  and  about  it  there  is  no  doubt;  by  definition,  so  to 
speak,  it  will  be  intellectualistic  or  it  will  not  be  at  all.  Precisely  the  ques¬ 
tion  is,  whether  it  will  be.  (417)  h.  poincar£ 

The  aim  of  science  is  to  seek  the  simplest  explanations  of  complex  facts. 

. .  .  Seek  simplicity  and  distrust  it.  (573)  a.  n.  whitehead 

The  present  enquiry  originated  in  my  attempt  to  build  a  science  of 
man.  The  first  task  was  to  define  man  scientifically  in  non-elementalistic, 
functional  terms.  I  accomplished  that  in  my  book  Manhood  of  Human¬ 
ity  (New  York,  E.  P.  Dutton  &  Co.),  and  in  it  I  called  the  special 
characteristic  which  sharply  distinguishes  man  from  animal  the  time¬ 
binding  characteristic. 

In  the  present  volume  I  undertake  the  investigation  of  the  mechan¬ 
ism  of  time-binding.  The  results  are  quite  unexpected.  We  discover 
that  there  is  a  sharp  difference  between  the  nervous  reactions  of  animal 
and  man,  and  that  judging  by  this  criterion,  nearly  all  of  us,  even  now, 
copy*  animals  in  our  nervous  responses,  which  copying  leads  to  the 
general  state  of  un-sanity  reflected  in  our  private  and  public  lives,  insti¬ 
tutions  and  systems.  By  this  discovery  the  whole  situation  is  radically 
changed.  If  we  copy  animals  in  our  nervous  responses  through  the  lack 
of  knowledge  of  what  the  appropriate  responses  of  the  human  nervous 
system  should  be,  we  can  stop  doing  so,  both  individually  and  collectively, 
and  we  are  thus  led  to  the  formulation  of  a  first  positive  theory  of  sanity. 

The  old  dictum  that  we  ‘are*  animals  leaves  us  hopeless,  but  if  we 
merely  copy  animals  in  our  nervous  responses,  we  can  stop  it,  and  the 
hopeless  becomes  very  hopeful,  provided  we  can  discover  a  physiological 
difference  in  these  reactions.  Thus  we  are  provided  with  a  definite  and 
promising  program  for  an  investigation. 

Such  an  investigation  is  undertaken  in  the  present  volume. 

The  result  of  this  enquiry  turned  out  to  be  a  non-aristotelian  sys¬ 
tem,  the  first  to  be  formulated,  as  far  as  I  know,  and  the  first  to  express 
the  very  scientific  tendency  of  our  epoch,  which  produced  the  non- 
euclidean  and  non-newtonian  (Einstein's  and  the  newer  quantum  theories) 
systems.  It  seems  that  these  three,  the  non-aristotelian,  non-euclidean 
and  non-newtonian  systems  are  as  much  interwoven  and  interdependent 

♦The  use  of  the  term  ‘copy’  is  explained  in  Chapter  II. 

J.  PKKL1 M  IN  ARIES 

as  were  the  corresponding  older  systems.  The  aristotelian  and  the  non- 
aristotelian  systems  are  the  more  general,  the  others  being  only  special 
and  technical  consequences  arising  from  them. 

Both  the  aristotelian  and  the  non-aristotelian  systems  affect  our 
lives  deeply,  because  of  psycho-logical  factors  and  the  immediacy  of  their 
application.  Each  is  the  expression  of  the  psycho-logical  tendencies  of 
its  period.  Each  in  its  period  must  produce  in  the  younger  generations 
a  psycho-logical  background  which  makes  the  understanding  of  its  ap¬ 
propriate  disciplines  ‘natural*  and  simple.  In  an  aristotelian  human 
world  the  euclidean  and  newtonian  systems  are  ‘natural*,  while  the  youth 
educated  in  the  non-aristotelian  habits  will  find  the  non-euclidean  and 
non-newtonian  systems  simpler,  more  ‘natural*,  and  the  older  systems 
‘unthinkable*. 

The  functioning  of  the  human  nervous  system  is  a  more  generalized 
affair  than  that  of  the  animal,  with  more  possibilities.  The  latter  is  a 
special  case  of  the  former,  but  not  vice  versa.  John  Smith,  through 
ignorance  of  the  mechanism,  may  use  his  nervous  system  as  a  Fido ;  but 
Fido  cannot  copy  Smith.  Hence,  the  danger  for  Smith,  but  not  for  Fido. 
Fido  has  many  of  his  own  difficulties  for  survival,  but,  at  least,  he  has 
no  self-imposed  conditions,  mostly  silly  and  harmful,  such  as  Smith  has 
ignorantly  imposed  on  himself  and  others.  The  field  covered  by  this 
enquiry  is  very  wide  and  involves  unexpectedly  special  suggestive  con¬ 
tributions  in  diverse  branches  of  science.  To  list  a  few  for  orientation : 

1.  The  formulation  of  General  Semantics,  resulting  from  a  General 
Theory  of  Time-binding,  supplies  the  scientists  and  the  laymen  with  a 
general  modern  method  of  orientation,  which  eliminates  the  older  psycho¬ 
logical  blockages  and  reveals  the  mechanisms  of  adjustment ; 

2.  The  departure  from  aristotelianism  will  allow  biologists,  physiol¬ 
ogists,  etc.,  and  particularly  medical  men  to  ‘think*  in  modern  colloidal 
and  quantum  terms,  instead  of  the  inadequate,  antiquated  chemical  and 
physiological  terms.  Medicine  may  then  become  a  science  in  the  1933 
sense ; 

3.  In  psychiatry  it  indicates  on  colloidal  grounds  the  solution  of  the 
‘body-mind*  problem ; 

4.  It  shows  clearly  that  desirable  human  characteristics  have  a 
definite  psycho  physiological  mechanism  which,  up  till  now,  has  been  mis¬ 
used,  to  the  detriment  of  all  of  us ; 

5.  It  gives  the  first  definition  of  ‘consciousness*  in  simpler  physico¬ 
chemical  terms ; 

6.  A  general  theory  of  sanity  leads  to  a  general  theory  of  psycho¬ 
therapy,  including  all  such  existing  medical  schools,  as  they  all  deal  with 

AIMS,  MEANS  AND  CONSEQUENCES 

disturbances  of  the  semantic  reactions  (psycho-logical  responses  to  words 
and  other  stimuli  in  connection  with  their  meanings)  ; 

7.  It  formulates  a  physiological  foundation  for  ‘mental’  hygiene, 
which  turns  out  to  be  a  most  general  preventive  psychophysiological  ex¬ 
perimental  method; 

8.  It  shows  the  psychophysiological  foundation  of  the  childhood  of 
humanity  as  indicated  by  the  infantilism  in  our  present  private,  public, 
and  international  lives ; 

9.  In  biology  it  gives  a  semantic  and  structural  solution  of  the 
‘organism-as-a-whole*  problem ; 

10.  In  physiology  and  neurology  it  reformulates  to  human  levels  the 
Pavlov  theory  of  conditional  reflexes,  suggesting  a  new  scientific  field 
of  psychophysiology  for  experiments ; 

11.  In  epistemology  and  semantics  it  establishes  a  definite  non- 
elemen tali stic  theory  of  meanings  based  not  only  on  definitions  but  also 
on  undefined  terms ; 

12.  It  introduces  a  new  development  and  use  of  ‘structure’ ; 

13.  It  establishes  structure  as  the  only  possible  content  of 
knowledge ; 

14.  It  discovers  the  multiordinality  of  the  most  important  terms 
we  have,  thus  removing  the  psycho-logical  blockage  of  semantic  origin 
and  helping  the  average  man  or  scientist  to  become  a  ‘genius’,  etc. ; 

15.  It  formulates  a  new  and  physiological  theory  of  mathematical 
types  of  extreme  simplicity  and  very  wide  application ; 

16.  It  offers  a  non-aristotelian  solution  of  the  problem  of  mathe¬ 
matical  ‘infinity’ ; 

17.  It  offers  a  new  non-aristotelian,  semantic  (from  Greek,  to  sig¬ 
nify)  definition  of  mathematics  and  number,  which  clarifies  the  mysteries 
about  the  seemingly  uncanny  importance  of  number  and  measurement 
and  throws  a  new  light  on  the  role,  structural  significance,  meaning,  and 
methods  of  mathematics  and  its  teaching; 

18.  In  physics,  the  enquiry  explains  some  fundamental,  but  as  yet 
disregarded,  semantic  aspects  of  physics  in  general,  and  of  Einstein’s 
and  the  new  quantum  theories  in  particular ; 

19.  It  resolves  simply  the  problem  of  ‘indeterminism’  of  the  newer 
quantum  mechanics,  etc. 

I  realize  that  the  thoughtful  reader  may  be  staggered  by  such  a 
partial  list.  I  am  in  full  sympathy  with  him  in  this.  I  also  was  staggered. 

As  this  enquiry  claims  to  be  scientific,  in  the  1933  sense,  I  must 
explain  how,  in  spite  of  great  difficulties  and  handicaps,  I  was  able  to 
accomplish  the  work.  As  my  work  progressed,  it  turned  out  to  be 

I.  PRELIMINARIES 

‘speaking  about  speaking'.  Now  all  scientific  works  in  all  fields  are 
written  or  spoken,  and  so  are  ultimately  verbal.  In  order  to  speak  about 
speaking,  in  any  satisfactory  and  fundamental  1933  sense,  I  had  to 
become  acquainted  with  the  special  languages  used  by  scientists  in  all 
fields.  I  did  not  realize  beforehand  what  a  very  serious  undertaking  this 
was.  It  took  many  years  and  much  hard  labour  to  accomplish  it,  but,  once 
accomplished,  the  rest  was  simple.  Scientists  do  not  differ  from  the 
rest  of  us.  They  usually  disregard  entirely  structural,  linguistic,  and 
semantic  issues,  simply  because  no  one  has,  as  yet,  formulated  these 
problems  or  shown  their  importance.  The  structural  revision  of  their 
language  led  automatically  to  new  results  and  new  suggestions,  and 
hence  the  surprising  list. 

The  present  enquiry  is  limited  and  partial,  but  because  it  deals  with 
linguistic  and  semantic  issues  and  their  physiological  and  psycho-logical 
aspects,  it  is,  as  far  as  it  goes,  unusually  general .  I  found  that,  in 
writing,  it  is  extremely  difficult  and  impracticable  always  to  state  ex¬ 
plicitly  the  limitations  of  a  statement.  It  seems  most  practical  to  say 
here  that,  in  general,  all  statements  here  made  are  limited  by  further 
considerations  of  the  actualities  of  an  analysed  problem. 

Thus,  for  instance,  a  ‘theory  of  sanity'  deals  with  the  most  im¬ 
portant  semantic  issues  from  limited  semantic  aspects,  and  has  nothing 
to  do  with  forms  of  ‘insanity'  arising  from  different  organic,  or  toxic, 
or  other  disturbances,  which  remain  as  serious  as  ever.  The  statements 
made  cover  just  as  much  as  further  investigations  will  allow  them  to 
cover — and  no  more. 

The  reader  should  be  warned  against  undue  generalizations,  as  they 
may  be  unjustified.  It  is  impossible,  at  this  stage,  to  foresee  all  the  rami¬ 
fications  of  the  present  work.  The  verbal  issues,  which  correspond 
roughly  to  the  older  ‘mental'  issues,  seem  to  pervade  all  human  problems 
to  some  extent,  and  so  the  field  of  application  and  influence  of  any  such 
enquiry  must  be  very  large.  Most  of  the  results  of  the  present  work 
involve  factors  of  unusual  security  of  conclusion,  though  they  may  vio¬ 
late  canons  of  our  ‘philosophical'  creeds. 

The  explanation  is  astonishingly  simple  and  easily  verified.  The 
present  non-aristotelian  system  is  based  on  fundamental  negative  prem¬ 
ises;  namely,  the  complete  denial  of  ‘identity',  which  denial  cannot  be 
denied  without  imposing  the  burden  of  impossible  proof  on  the  person 
who  denies  the  denial.  If  we  start,  for  instance,  with  a  statement 
that  ‘a  word  is  not  the  object  spoken  about',  and  some  one  tries  to  deny 
that,  he  would  have  to  produce  an  actual  physical  object  which  would 
be  the  word , — impossible  of  performance,  even  in  asylums  for  the  ‘men- 

AIMS,  M  ft  A  N  S  AND  CONSKyUKNCKS 

tally*  ill.  Hence  my  security,  often  ‘blasphemously  cheerful*,  as  one  of 
my  friends  calls  it. 

This  general  denial  of  the  ‘is*  of  identity  gives  the  main  funda¬ 
mental  non-aristotelian  premise,  which  necessitates  a  structural  treat¬ 
ment.  The  status  of  negative  premises  is  much  more  important  and 
secure  to  start  with  than  that  of  the  positive  ‘is*  of  identity,  found  in  the 
aristotelian  system,  but  easily  shown  to  be  false  to  fact,  and  involving 
important  delusional  factors. 

Any  map  or  language,  to  be  of  maximum  usefulness,  should,  in 
structure,  be  similar  to  the  structure  of  the  empirical  world.  Likewise, 
from  the  point  of  view  of  a  theory  of  sanity,  any  system  or  language 
should,  in  structure,  be  similar  to  the  structure  of  our  nervous  system. 
It  is  easily  shown  that  the  aristotelian  system  differs  structurally  from 
these  minimal  requirements,  and  that  the  non-aristotelian  system  is  in 
accordance  with  them. 

This  fact  turns  out  to  be  of  psychophysiological  importance.  The 
above  considerations,  and  others  impossible  to  mention  in  this  chapter, 
have  suggested  to  me  the  form  and  structure  of  the  whole  work.  I  have 
spared  no  effort  to  make  the  presentation  as  connected,  simple,  and, 
particularly,  as  workable  as  I  could.  As  I  deal  with  structure,  and  simi¬ 
larity  of  structure,  of  languages  and  the  empirical  world,  a  definite  selec¬ 
tion  of  topics  is  immediately  suggested.  I  must  give  enough  structural 
data  about  languages  in  general,  and  enough  structural  data  about  the 
empirical  world,  and  then  select,  or,  if  necessary,  build,  my  terminology 
and  system  of  similar  structure. 

The  reader  should  not  be  afraid  if  some  parts  of  the  book  look 
technical  and  mathematical.  In  reality,  they  are  not  so.  Speaking  of  the 
language  called  mathematics,  from  a  structural  point  of  view,  I  have  had 
to  illustrate  what  was  said,  and  the  few  symbols  or  diagrams  are  used 
only  for  that  purpose.  Many  of  the  structural  points  are  of  genuine 
importance  and  interest  to  professional  scientists,  teachers,  and  others, 
who  seldom,  if  ever,  deal  with  such  structural,  linguistic,  and  semantic 
problems  as  are  here  analysed.  The  layman  who  will  read  the  book 
diligently  and  repeatedly,  without  skipping  any  part  of  it,  will  get  at 
least  a  feeling  or  vague  notion  that  such  problems  do  exist ,  which  will 
produce  a  very  important  psycho-logical  effect  or  release  from  the  old 
animalistic  unconditionality  of  responses,  whether  or  not  he  feels  that 
he  has  ‘understood*  them  fully. 

My  earnest  suggestion,  backed  by  experience,  to  the  reader  is  to 
read  the  book  through  several  times,  but  not  to  dwell  on  points  which 
are  not  clear  to  him.  At  each  reading  the  issues  will  become  clearer. 

I.  PRELIMINARIES 

until  they  will  become  entirely  his  own.  Superficial  reading  of  the  book 
is  to  be  positively  discouraged,  as  it  will  prove  to  be  so  much  time  wasted. 
Experience  teaches  me  that  the  number  of  semantic  maladjustments, 
particularly  among  the  white-collar  class,  is  very  large.  At  present,  I 
do  not  know  any  case  where  a  thorough  training  in  such  a  non-aristo- 
telian  semantic  discipline  would  not  give  very  serious  means  for  better 
adjustment.  It  will  quiet  down  affective,  semantic  disturbances,  sharpen 
orientation,  judgement,  the  power  of  observation,  and  so  forth;  it  will 
eliminate  different  psycho-logical  blockages,  help  to  overcome  the  very 
annoying  and  common  ‘inferiority’  feelings ;  it  will  assist  the  outgrow¬ 
ing  of  the  adult  infantile  state ,  which  is  a  nervous  deficiency  practically 
always  connected  with  some  pathological  sex-reactions  or  lack  of  normal 
and  healthy  impulses. 

After  all,  we  should  not  be  surprised  at  this.  Language,  as  such, 
represents  the  highest  and  latest  physiological  and  neurological  function 
of  an  organism.  It  is  unique  with  Smith  and  of  uniquely  human  cir¬ 
cular  structure,  to  use  a  logical  term — or  of  spiral  structure,  to  use  a 
four-dimensional  or  a  physico-chemical-aspect  term.  Before  we  can  use 
the  semantic  nervous  apparatus  properly,  we  must  first  know  how  to 
use  it,  and  so  formulate  this  use. 

In  these  processes  an  ‘effect’  becomes  a  causative  factor  for  future 
effects,  influencing  them  in  a  manner  particularly  subtle,  variable,  flex¬ 
ible,  and  of  an  endless  number  of  possibilities.  ‘Knowing’,  if  taken  as 
an  end-product,  must  be  considered  also  as  a  causative  psychophysio- 
logical  factor  of  the  next  stage  of  the  semantic  response.  The  disregard 
of  this  mechanism  is  potentially  of  serious  danger,  particularly  in  the 
rearing  of  children,  as  it  trains  them  in  unanalysed  linguistic  habits,  the 
more  so  since  the  human  nervous  system  is  not  complete  at  birth.  This 
structural  and  functional  circularity  introduces  real  difficulties  in  our 
analysis,  disregarded  or  neglected  in  the  aristotelian  system.  Human 
life,  in  its  difference  from  animal  life,  involves  many  more  factors  and 
is  inherently  of  different  and  more  complex  structure.  Before  we  can  be 
fully  human  and,  therefore,  ‘sane’,  as  a  ‘normal’  human  being  should  be, 
we  must  first  know  how  to  handle  our  nervous  responses — a  circular 
affair. 

A  non-aristotelian  system  must  not  disregard  this  human-natural  - 
history  structural  fact  of  the.  inherent  circularity  of  all  physiological 
functions  which  in  any  form  involve  human  ‘knowing’.  A  non-aristo¬ 
telian  system  differs  essentially  in  structure  from  its  predecessor,  which, 
by  necessity,  through  the  lack  of  knowledge  characteristic  of  its  epoch, 

AIMS,  MKANS  AND  CONSKQlJKNt'KS 

disregarded  these  structural  semantic  issues  and  so  was  constructed  on 
cruder  animalistic  patterns. 

The  difficulty  in  passing  from  the  old  system  to  another  of  different 
structure  is  not  in  the  non-aristotelian  system  as  such,  which  is  really 
simpler  and  more  in  accord  with  common  sense ;  but  the  serious  difficulty 
lies  rather  in  the  older  habits  of  speech  and  nervous  responses,  and  in 
the  older  semantic  reactions  which  must  be  overcome.  These  difficulties 
are,  perhaps,  more  serious  than  is  generally  realized.  Only  those  who 
have  experienced  the  passing  from  euclidean  to  non-euclidean,  and  from 
newtonian  to  non-newtonian  systems  can  fully  appreciate  this  semantic 
difficulty;  as  a  rule,  it  takes  a  new  generation  to  do  it  painlessly  and 
with  entire  success.  This  applies  to  the  general  public,  but  is  not  an 
excuse  for  scientists,  educators,  and  others  who  are  entrusted  with  the 
education  of,  or  who  otherwise  influence,  the  semantic  reactions  of 
children.  If  any  reader  realizes  his  difficulties  and  seriously  wants  to 
overcome  them,  another  suggestion  may  be  given.  A  structural  diagram 
in  the  present  work,  called  the  Structural  Differential,  shows  the  struc¬ 
tural  difference  between  the  world  of  animal  and  the  world  of  man. 
This  structural  difference  is  not  yet  fully  realized ;  neither  is  its  semantic 
importance  understood,  as  it  has  never  been  formulated  in  a  simple  way 
before ;  yet  the  permanent  and  instinctive  realization  of  these  structural 
differences  is  unconditionally  necessary  for  the  mastering  of  the  present 
theory  of  sanity.  This  diagram,  indeed,  involves  all  the  psychophysio- 
logical  factors  necessary  for  the  transition  from  the  old  semantic  reac¬ 
tions  to  the  new,  and  it  gives  in  a  way  a  structural  summary  of  the  whole 
non-aristotelian  system.  As  the  diagram  is  based  on  the  denial  of  the 
‘is’  of  identity,  its  use  is  practically  indispensable;  it  has  been  made  in 
relief  and  in  printed  forms,  to  be  kept  on  the  wall  or  the  desk  as  a  per¬ 
manent  visual  structural  and  semantic  reminder.  Without  actual  hand¬ 
ling,  pointing  the  finger  or  waving  the  hand  at  it,  seeing  the  order,  and 
so  on,  it  is  practically  impossible,  or  very  difficult,  to  become  trained,  or 
to  explain  the  present  system  to  ourselves  or  others,  because  the  foun¬ 
dation  of  all  'knowing’  is  structural,  and  the  Structural  Differential 
actually  shows  this  structural  difference  between  the  world  of  animal 
and  the  world  of  man. 

One  of  the  best  ways  for  grown-up  persons  to  train  themselves  in 
the  present  theory  of  sanity  is  to  try  to  explain  it  to  others,  repeatedly 
pointing  to  the  Structural  Differential.  In  my  experience,  those  who 
have  disregarded  this  advice  have  always  made  very  slow  progress,  and 
have  never  got  the  full  semantic  benefit  of  their  efforts.  As  regards  the 
verbal  side  of  the  training,  it  is  as  important  to  use  exclusively  the  terms 

I.  PRELIMINARIES 

given  in  this  book,  which  are  non-aristotelian  and  non-elementalistic,  as 
it  is  to  abandon  entirely  the  ‘is’  of  identity  and  some  of  the  elemental^ 
istic  primitive  terms. 

The  reader  should  be  warned  from  the  beginning  of  a  very  funda¬ 
mental  semantic  innovation ;  namely,  of  the  discovery  of  the  mulHordin- 
ality  of  the  most  important  terms  we  have.  This  leads  to  a  conscious 
use  of  these  terms  in  the  multiordinal,  extremely  flexible,  full-of -con¬ 
ditionality  sense.  Terms  like  ‘yes’,  ‘no’,  ‘true’,  ‘false’,  ‘fact’,  ‘reality’, 
‘cause/  ‘effect*,  ‘agreement’,  ‘disagreement*,  proposition’,  ‘number’,  ‘rela¬ 
tion’,  ‘order’,  ‘structure’,  ‘abstraction’,  ‘characteristic’,  ‘love’,  ‘hate’, 
‘doubt’,  etc.,  are  such  that  if  they  can  be  applied  to  a  statement  they  can 
also  be  applied  to  a  statement  about  the  first  statement,  and  so,  ultimately, 
to  all  statements,  no  matter  what  their  order  of  abstraction  is.  Terms  of 
such  a  character  I  call  tnultiordinal  terms .  The  main  characteristic  of 
these  terms  consists  of  the  fact  that  on  different  levels  of  orders  of  ab¬ 
stractions  they  may  have  different  meanings,  with  the  result  that  they 
have  no  general  meaning ;  for  their  meanings  are  determined  solely  by  the 
given  context,  which  establishes  the  different  orders  of  abstractions. 
Fsycho-logically,  in  the  realization  of  the  multiordinality  of  the  most  im¬ 
portant  terms,  we  have  paved  the  way  for  the  specifically  human  full 
conditionality  of  our  semantic  responses.  This  allows  us  great  freedom 
in  the  handling  of  multiordinal  terms  and  eliminates  very  serious  psycho¬ 
logical  fixities  and  blockages,  which  analysis  shows  to  be  animalistic  in 
their  nature,  and,  consequently,  pathological  for  man.  Once  the  reader 
understands  this  multiordinal  characteristic,  this  semantic  freedom  does 
not  result  in  confusion. 

Accidentally,  our  vocabulary  is  enormously  enriched  without  becom¬ 
ing  cumbersome,  and  is  made  very  exact.  Thus  a  ‘yes’  may  have  an 
indefinite  number  of  meanings,  depending  on  the  context  to  which  it  is 
applied.  Such  a  blank  ‘yes’  represents,  in  reality,  ‘yes#,  but  this  includes 
‘yesi\  <yes2*>  ‘yes3’,  etc.,  all  of  which  are,  or  may  be,  different.  All  specu¬ 
lations  about  such  terms  in  general — as,  for  instance,  ‘what  a  fact  or 
reality  is?’ — are  futile,  and,  in  general,  illegitimate,  as  the  only  correct 
answer  is  that  ‘the  terms  are  multiordinal  and  devoid  of  meaning  outside 
of  a  context’.  This  settles  many  knotty  epistemological  and  semantic 
questions,  and  gives  us  a  most  powerful  method  for  promoting  human 
mutual  freedom  of  expression,  thus  eliminating  misunderstandings  and 
blockages  and  ultimately  leading  to  agreement. 

I  suspect  that  without  the  discovery  of  the  multiordinality  of  terms 
the  present  work  could  not  have  been  written,  as  I  needed  a  more  flexible 
language,  a  larger  vocabulary,  and  yet  I  had  to  avoid  confusion.  With 

AIMS,  MEANS  AND  CONSEQUENCES 

the  introduction  of  the  multiordinality  of  terms,  which  is  a  natural  but, 
as  yet,  an  unnoticed  fact,  our  ordinary  vocabulary  is  enormously  en¬ 
riched  ;  in  fact,  the  number  of  words  in  such  a  vocabulary  natural  for 
man  is  infinite.  The  multiordinality  of  terms  is  the  fundamental  mechan¬ 
ism  of  the  full  conditionality  of  human  semantic  reactions ;  it  eliminates 
an  unbelievable  number  of  the  old  animalistic  blockages,  and  is  funda¬ 
mental  for  sanity. 

A  number  of  statements  in  the  present  work  have  definite  meanings 
