for  different  specialists,  often  running  entirely  counter  to  the  accepted 
scientific  creeds.  As  they  followed  naturally  from  the  context,  I  inserted 
them  for  the  specialist,  without  warning,  for  which  I  have  to  apologize 
to  the  general  reader,  although  they  will  be  useful  to  him  also. 

To  make  issues  sharper,  some  words  will  be  repeated  so  often  that 
I  abbreviate  them  as  follows : 

Abbreviation 

Stands  for 

Abbreviation 

Stands  for 

A 

aristotelian 

r 

non-newtonian 

A 

non-aristotelian 

el 

elementalistic 

E 

euclidean 

non~el 

non-elementalistic 

E 

non-euclidean 

m.o  or  (fn.o) 

multiordinal 

N 

newtonian 

s.r  or  ( s.r ) 

semantic  reactions, 
both  singular  and 
plural 

In  some  instances,  for  special  emphasis,  the  words  will  be  spelled 
in  full. 

A  A- system,  being  extensional,  requires  the  enumeration  of  long 
lists  of  names,  which,  in  principle,  cannot  be  exhausted.  Under  such 
conditions,  I  have  to  list  a  few  representatives  followed  by  an  ‘etc.’,  or 
its  equivalents.  As  the  extensional  method  is  characteristic  of  a 
A  treatment,  the  expression  ‘etc/  occurs  so  often  as  to  necessitate  a 
special  A  extensional  punctuation  whenever  the  period  does  not  indicate 
another  abbreviation,  as  follows : 

I.  PKKLIMINARIKS 

Abbreviation 

Stands  for 

•  * 

etc., 

t  • 

,etc. 

•  j 

etc. ; 

Abbreviation 

Stands  for 

etc. : 

etc.? 

etc. ! 

This  book  is  intended  as  a  handbook,  and  I  have  avoided  referring 
the  reader  to  other  books,  but  have  given  as  much  of  structural  data  as 
I  deemed  useful  for  a  general  orientation.  In  a  work  of  such  wide 
scope  and  novelty,  it  seemed  desirable  to  give  a  general  outline  rather 
than  to  elaborate  in  detail  on  some  particular  points,  so  that  this  work 
is  not  exhaustive  in  any  field ;  nor,  at  present,  can  it  be. 

The  notes  at  the  end  of  the  book  are  given  for  the  purposes 
(among  others)  of  indicating  sources  of  information,  as  an  acknowl¬ 
edgement,  and  to  facilitate  the  work  of  the  future  student.  As  much  as 
I  could,  I  have  avoided  direct  quotations  from  other  authors,  because 
usually  it  has  seemed  more  expedient  to  change  the  wording  slightly. 
In  many  instances,  I  have  followed  the  original  wordings  very  closely, 
always  giving  the  proper  credit. 

I  have  not  avoided  repetitions,  because  I  have  found,  through  sad 
experience,  that  many  times,  when  I  was  reproached  for  a  repetition,  the 
hearer  or  reader  was  disregarding  quite  happily  and  unconsciously  the 
said  ‘repetition',  as  if  he  had  never  heard  it  before.  For  such  a  work 
as  the  present  one,  the  standard  literary  habits — ‘avoid  repetitions',  ‘let 
the  reader  discover  it  for  himself'. ,  are  extremely  detrimental  to  the 
understanding  of  a  few  fundamental  issues  and  to  the  acquiring  of  A 
habits  and  new  s.r.  To  facilitate  the  student's  task,  I  had  no  other  choice 
than  to  write  as  I  did. 

In  1933,  scientific  opinion  is  divided  as  to  whether  we  need  more 
science  or  less  science.  Some  prominent  men  even  suggest  that  scientists 
should  take  a  vacation  and  let  the  rest  of  mankind  catch  up  with  their 
achievements.  There  seems  no  doubt  that  the  discrepancy  between 
human  adjustments  and  the  advances  of  science  is  becoming  alarming. 
Is,  then,  such  a  suggestion  justified? 

The  answer  depends  on  the  assumptions  underlying  such  opinions. 
If  humans,  as  such,  have  reached  the  limit  of  their  nervous  development, 
and  if  the  scientific  study  of  man,  as  man,  should  positively  disclose 
these  limitations,  then  such  a  conclusion  would  be  justified.  But  is  this 
the  case? 

AIMS,  MHANS  AND  CONSEOU ENCKS 

The  present  investigation  shows  most  emphatically  that  this  is  not 
the  case.  All  sciences  have  progressed  exclusively  because  they  have 
succeeded  in  establishing  their  own  A  languages.  For  instance,  a  science 
of  thermodynamics  could  not  have  been  built  on  the  terms  of  ‘cold*  and 
!warm\  Another  language,  one  of  relations  and  structure,  was  needed ; 
and,  once  this  was  produced,  a  science  was  born  and  progress  secured. 
Could  modern  mathematics  be  built  on  the  Roman  notation  for  numbers 
— I,  II,  III,  IV,  V.?  No,  it  could  not.  The  simplest  and  most  child¬ 
like  arithmetic  was  so  difficult  as  to  require  an  expert ;  and  all  progress 
was  very  effectively  hampered  by  the  symbolism  adopted.  History  shows 
that  only  since  the  unknown  Hindu  discovered  the  most  revolutionary 
and  modern  principle  of  positional  notation — 1,  10,  100,  1000.,  modern 
mathematics  has  become  possible.  Every  child  today  is  more  skilful  in 
his  arithmetics  than  the  experts  of  those  days.  Incidentally,  let  us  notice 
that  positional  notation  has  a  definite  structure . 

Have  we  ever  attempted  anything  similar  in  the  study  of  man? 
As-a-whole?  In  all  his  activities?  Again,  most  emphatically.  No!  We 
have  never  studied  man-as-a-whole  scientifically.  If  we  make  an  attempt, 
such  as  the  present  one,  for  instance,  we  discover  the  astonishing,  yet 
simple,  fact  that,  even  now,  we  all  copy  animals  in  our  nervous  re¬ 
sponses,  although  these  can  be  brought  to  the  human  level  if  the  differ¬ 
ence  in  the  mechanism  of  responses  is  discovered  and  formulated. 

Once  this  is  understood,  we  must  face  another  necessity.  To  abolish 
the  discrepancy  between  the  advancement  of  science  and  the  power  of 
adjustment  of  man,  we  must  first  establish  the  science  of  man-as-a- 
whole,  embracing  all  his  activities,  science,  mathematics  and  ‘mental’  ills 
not  excluded.  Such  an  analysis  would  help  us  to  discover  the  above- 
mentioned  difference  in  responses,  and  the  s.r  in  man  would  acquire  new 
significance. 

If  the  present  work  has  accomplished  nothing  more  than  to  suggest 
such  possibilities,  I  am  satisfied.  Others,  I  hope,  will  succeed  where  I 
may  have  failed.  Under  such  conditions,  the  only  feasible  resort  is  to 
produce  a  science  of  man,  and  thus  have  not  less,  but  more,  science, 
ultimately  covering  all  fields  of  human  endeavour,  and  thereby  putting 
a  stop  to  the  animalistic  nervous  reactions,  so  vicious  in  their  effects 
on  man. 

At  present,  nowhere  in  the  world  are  there  such  psychophysiological 
researches  being  made.  There  are  large  sums  of  money  invested  in  dif¬ 
ferent  well-established  institutions  for  scientific  research,  for  ‘mental’ 
hygiene,  for  international  peace,  and  so  forth,  but  not  for  what  is  pos¬ 
sibly  the  most  important  of  all  lines  of  research;  namely,  a  general 

I.  PRELIMINARIES 

science  of  man  in  alj  aspects  of  his  behaviour,  science,  mathematics,  and 
‘mental’  ills  included. 

It  is  to  be  hoped  that,  in  the  not-too-distant  future,  some  individuals 
and  universities  will  awaken  to  the  fact  that  language  is  a  fundamental 
psychophysiological  function  of  man,  and  that  a  scientific  investigation 
of  man  in  all  his  activities,  is  a  necessary,  pressing,  very  promising,  and 
practical  undertaking.  Then,  perhaps,  special  chairs  will  be  established 
in  universities,  and  some  such  researches  in  semantic  reactions  and  san¬ 
ity  will  command  as  much  interest  and  public  encouragement  as  other 
scientific  investigations. 

I,  personally,  have  no  doubt  that  this  would  mark  the  beginning  of 
a  new  era,  the  scientific  era ,  in  which  all  human  desirable  characteristics 
would  be  released  from  the  present  animalistic,  psychophysiological,  A 
semantic  blockages,  and  that  sanity  would  prevail. 

That  this  is  not  a  dream,  and  that  such  nervous  mechanisms  pro¬ 
ducing  blockages  do  exist,  has  been  demonstrated  by  Pavlov  on  his  dogs, 
by  all  psychotherapy,  and  the  experiments  now  being  made  on  the 
elimination  of  the  disturbances  of  the  s.r.  The  abundance  of  geniuses 
among  younger  physicists,  since  the  einsteinian  structural  revolution  and 
semantic  release,  is  also  an  important  empirical  evidence  that  different 
man-made  verbal  systems  can  stimulate  or  hamper  the  functioning  of  the 
human  nervous  system. 

What  has  been  said  here  has  very  solid  structural,  neurological 
foundations.  For  our  purpose,  we  may  consider  a  rough  structural  differ¬ 
ence  between  the  nervous  systems  of  man  and  animal.  Briefly,  we  can 
distinguish  in  the  brain  two  kinds  of  nervous  fibres,  the  radiating  pro¬ 
jection  fibres  and  the  tangential  correlation  and  association  fibres.  With 
the  increase  of  complexities  and  modifiability  of  the  behaviour,  we  find 
an  increased  number  and  more  complex  interrelations  of  association 
fibres.  The  main  difference,  for  instance,  between  the  brain  of  a  man 
and  the  brain  of  a  higher  ape  is  found  not  in  the  projection  apparatus, 
but  in  the  association  paths,  which  are  enormously  enlarged,  more  numer¬ 
ous,  and  more  complex  in  man  than  in  any  animal.  Obviously,  if  these 
association  paths  are  blocked  to  the  passage  of  nervous  impulses  by 
some  psychophysiological  process,  the  reactions  of  the  individual  must 
be  of  a  lower  order,  and  such  blockage  must  give  the  effect  of  the  given 
individual’s  being  organically  deficient,  and  must,  therefore,  result  in 
animalistic  behaviour. 

The  present  investigation  discloses  that  the  s.r  may  assume  very 
diversified  forms,  one  of  which  is  the  production  of  very  powerful 
psychophysiological  blockages.  These,  when  once  we  understand  their 
mechanism,  can  be  eliminated  by  proper  education  and  training  in  ap¬ 
propriate  s.r. 

CHAPTER  II 

TERMINOLOGY  AND  MEANINGS 

The  representation  of  mental  phenomena  in  the  form  of  reactions,  con¬ 
ditioned  reflexes,  Bechterew’s  ‘psycho-reflexes/  leads  to  a  truly  physio¬ 
logical  schematization.  .  .  .  (4ii)  henri  piero n 

Now  I  claim  that  the  Ethnographer’s  perspective  is  the  one  relevant 
and  real  for  the  formation  of  fundamental  linguistic  conceptions  and  for 
the  study  of  the  life  of  languages,  whereas  the  Philologist’s  point  of  view 
is  fictitious  and  irrelevant.  ...  To  define  Meaning,  to  explain  the  essential 
grammatical  and  lexical  characters  of  language  on  the  material  furnished 
by  the  study  of  dead  languages,  is  nothing  short  of  preposterous  in  the 
light  of  our  argument.  (332)  b.  Malinowski 

If  he  contend,  as  sometimes  he  will  contend,  that  he  has  defined  all  his 
terms  and  proved  all  his  propositions,  then  either  he  is  a  performer  of 
logical  miracles  or  he  is  an  ass;  and,  as  you  know,  logical  miracles  are  im¬ 
possible.  (264)  CASSIUS  J.  KBYSER 

Finally,  in  semantic  aphasia,  the  full  significance  of  words  and  phrases 
is  lost.  Separately,  each  word  or  each  detail  of  a  drawing  can  be  under¬ 
stood,  but  the  general  significance  escapes;  an  act  is  executed  upon  com¬ 
mand,  though  the  purpose  of  it  is  not  understood.  Reading  and  writing 
are  possible  as  well  as  numeration,  the  correct  use  of  numbers;  but  the 
appreciation  of  arithmetical  processes  is  defective.  ...  A  general  concep¬ 
tion  cannot  be  formulated,  but  details  can  be  enumerated.  (4in 

HENRI  PI&RON 

Moreover,  the  aphasic  patient  in  his  mode  of  life,  in  his  acts  and  in  all 
his  behaviour  may  seem  biologically  and  socially  normal.  But  he  has 
nevertheless  suffered  an  unquestionable  loss,  for  he  no  longer  has  any 
chance  of  undergoing  further  modifications  of  social  origin,  ana  of  reacting 
in  his  turn  as  a  factor  in  evolution  and  progress.  <4U)  henri  pi£ron 

Particularly  it  expresses  that  most  important  step  in  the  treatment,  the 
passing  over  from  a  mere  intellectual  acceptance  of  the  facts  of  the  analysis, 
whether  in  interpretation  of  the  underlying  complexes  or  in  recognition  of 
the  task  to  be  accepted,  to  an  emotional  appreciation  and  appropriation 
of  the  same.  Intellectual  acceptance  can  work  no  cure  but  may  prove  seri¬ 
ously  misleading  to  the  patient  who  is  attempting  to  grasp  the  situation 
and  to  the  beginner  in  analysis  as  well.  (24i)  smith  ely  jelliffe 

Section  A.  On  semantic  reactions . 

The  term  semantic  reaction  is  fundamental  for  the  present  work  and 
non-elementalistic  systems .  The  term  ‘semantic*  is  derived  from  the 
Greek  semantikos,  ‘significant’,  from  semainein  ‘to  signify’,  ‘to  mean*, 
and  was  introduced  into  literature  by  Michel  Breal  in  his  Essai  de 
Semantique .  The  term  has  been  variously  used  in  a  more  or  less  gen¬ 
eral  or  restricted  sense  by  different  writers.  Of  late,  this  term  has  been 
used  by  the  Polish  School  of  Mathematicians,  and  particularly  L.  Chwis- 

I.  PRELIMINARIES 

tek  (see  Supplement  III),  A.  F.  Bentley1,  and  has  been  given  a  medical 
application  by  Henry  Head2  in  the  study  of  different  forms  of  Aphasias. 
‘ Aphasia',  from  the  Greek  aphasia ,  'speechlessness',  is  used  to  describe 
disorders  in  comprehension  or  expression  of  written  and  spoken  lan¬ 
guage  which  result  from  lesions  of  the  brain.  Disturbances  of  the 
semantic  reactions  in  connection  with  faulty  education  and  ignorance 
must  be  considered  in  1933  as  sub-microscopic  colloidal  lesions. 

Among  the  many  subdivisions  of  the  symbolic  disturbance,  we  find 
semantic  aphasia >  to  be  described  (after  Head)  as  the  want  of  recogni¬ 
tion  or  the  full  significance  or  intention  of  words  and  phrases,  combined 
with  the  loss  of  power  of  appreciating  the  'ultimate  or  non-verbal  mean¬ 
ing  of  words  and  phrases'  to  be  investigated  presently,  and  the  failure  to 
recognize  the  intention  or  goal  of  actions  imposed  upon  the  patient. 

The  problems  of  'meaning'  are  very  complex  and  too  little  investi¬ 
gated,  but  it  seems  that  'psychologists'  and  'philosophers'  are  not  entirely 
in  sympathy  with  the  attitude  of  the  neurologists.  It  is  necessary  to  show 
that  in  a  ^-system,  which  involves  a  new  theory  of  meanings  based  on 
non-el  semantics,  the  neurological  attitude  toward  ‘meaning'  is  the  only 
structurally  correct  and  most  useful  one. 

The  explanation  is  quite  simple.  We  start  with  the  negative  A 
premise  that  words  are  not  the  un-speakable  objective  level,  such  as 
the  actual  objects  outside  of  our  skin  and  our  personal  feelings  inside 
our  skin.  It  follows  that  the  only  link  between  the  objective  and  the 
verbal  world  is  exclusively  structural,  necessitating  the  conclusion  that 
the  only  content  of  all  'knowledge'  is  structural.  Now  structure  can  be 
considered  as  a  complex  of  relations,  and  ultimately  as  multi-dimensional 
order. 

From  this  point  of  view,  all  language  can  be  considered  as  names 
either  for  un-speakable  entities  on  the  objective  level,  be  it  things  or 
feelings,  or  as  names  for  relations .  In  fact,  even  objects,  as  such,  could 
be  considered  as  relations  between  the  sub-microscopic  events  and  the 
human  nervous  system.  If  we  enquire  what  the  last  relations  represent, 
we  find  that  an  object  represents  an  abstraction  of  low  order  pro¬ 
duced  by  our  nervous  system  as  the  result  of  the  sub-microscopic  events 
acting  as  stimuli  upon  the  nervous  system.  If  the  objects  represent 
abstractions  of  some  order,  then,  obviously,  when  we  come  to  the  enquiry 
as  to  language,  we  find  that  words  are  still  higher  abstractions  from 
objects.  Under  such  conditions,  a  theory  of  'meaning'  looms  up  natur¬ 
ally.  If  the  objects,  as  well  as  words,  represent  abstractions  of  different 
order,  an  individual,  A,  cannot  know  what  B  abstracts,  unless  B  tells 
him,  and  so  the  'meaning'  of  a  word  must  be  given  by  a  definition.  This 

TKKMINOUXiY  AN!)  MKANINGS 

would  lead  to  the  dictionary  meanings  of  words,  provided  we  could  define 
all  our  words.  But  this  is  impossible.  If  we  were  to  attempt  to  do  so, 
we  should  soon  find  that  our  vocabulary  was  exhausted,  and  we  should 
reach  a  set  of  terms  which  could  not  be  any  further  defined,  from  lack 
of  words.  We  thus  see  that  all  linguistic  schemes,  if  analysed  far 
enough,  would  depend  on  a  set  of  undefined  terms.  If  we  enquire  about 
the  ‘meaning’  of  a  word,  we  find  that  it  depends  on  the  ‘meaning’  of 
other  words  used  in  defining  it,  and  that  the  eventual  new  relations 
posited  between  them  ultimately  depend  on  the  m.o  meanings  of  the 
undefined  terms ,  which,  at  a  given  period,  cannot  be  elucidated  any 
further. 

Naturally,  any  fundamental  theory  of  ‘meaning’  cannot  avoid  this 
issue,  which  must  be  crucial.  Here  a  semantic  experiment  suggests 
itself.  I  have  performed  this  experiment  repeatedly  on  myself  and 
others,  invariably  with  similar  results.  Imagine  that  we  are  engaged 
in  a  friendly  serious  discussion  with  some  one,  and  that  we  decide  to 
enquire  into  the  meanings  of  words.  For  this  special  experiment,  it  is 
not  necessary  to  be  very  exacting,  as  this  would  enormously  and  unneces¬ 
sarily  complicate  the  experiment.  It  is  useful  to  have  a  piece  of  paper 
and  a  pencil  to  keep  a  record  of  the  progress. 

We  begin  by  asking  the  ‘meaning’  of  every  word  uttered,  being 
satisfied  for  this  purpose  with  the  roughest  definitions ;  then  we  ask  the 
‘meaning’  of  the  words  used  in  the  definitions,  and  this  process  is  con¬ 
tinued  usually  for  no  more  than  ten  to  fifteen  minutes,  until  the  victim 
begins  to  speak  in  circles — as,  for  instance,  defining  ‘space’  by  ‘length’ 
and  ‘length’  by  ‘space’.  When  this  stage  is  reached,  we  have  come  usually 
to  the  undefined  terms  of  a  given  individual.  If  we  still  press,  no  matter 
how  gently,  for  definitions,  a  most  interesting  fact  occurs.  Sooner  or 
later,  signs  of  affective  disturbances  appear.  Often  the  face  reddens; 
there  is  a  bodily  restlessness ;  sweat  appears — symptoms  quite  similar  to 
those  seen  in  a  schoolboy  who  has  forgotten  his  lesson,  which  he  ‘knows 
but  cannot  tell’.  If  the  partner  in  the  experiment  is  capable  of  self- 
observation,  he  invariably  finds  that  he  feels  an  internal  affective  pres¬ 
sure ,  connected,  perhaps,  with  the  rush  of  blood  to  the  brain  and  prob¬ 
ably  best  expressed  in  some  such  words  as  ‘what  he  “knows”  but  cannot 
tell’,  or  the  like.  Here  we  have  reached  the  bottom  and  the  foundation 
of  all  non-elementalistic  meanings — the  meanings  of  undefined  terms , 
which  we  ‘know’  somehow,  but  cannot  tell.  In  fact,  we  have  reached  the 
un-speakable  level.  This  ‘knowledge’  is  supplied  by  the  lower  nerve 
centres ;  it  represents  affective  first  order  effects,  and  is  interwoven  and 
interlocked  with  other  affective  states,  such  as  those  called  ‘wishes’, 

I.  PRELIMINARIES 

‘intentions',  ‘intuitions',  ‘evaluation',  and  many  others.  It  should  be 
noticed  that  these  first  order  effects  have  an  objective  character,  as  they 
are  un-speakable — are  not  words. 

‘Meaning'  must  be  considered  as  a  multiordinal  term,  as  it  applies 
to  all  levels  of  abstractions,  and  so  has  no  general  content.  We  can  only 
speak  legitimately  of  ‘meanings'  in  the  plural.  Perhaps,  we  can  speak 
of  the  meanings  of  meanings,  although  I  suspect  that  the  latter  would 
represent  the  un-speakable  first  order  effect,  the  affective,  personal  raw 
material,  out  of  which  our  ordinary  meanings  are  built. 

The  above  explains  structurally  why  most  of  our  ‘thinking'  is  to 
such  a  large  extent  ‘wishful'  and  is  so  strongly  coloured  by  affective 
factors.  Creative  scientists  know  very  well  from  observation  of  them¬ 
selves,  that  all  creative  work  starts  as  a  ‘feeling',  ‘inclination',  ‘suspicion', 
‘intuition',  ‘hunch',  or  some  other  un-speakable  affective  state,  which  only 
at  a  later  date,  after  a  sort  of  nursing,  takes  the  shape  of  a  verbal  ex¬ 
pression,  worked  out  later  in  a  rationalized,  coherent,  linguistic  scheme 
called  a  theory.  In  mathematics  we  have  some  astonishing  examples  of 
intuitively  proclaimed  theorems,  which,  at  a  later  date,  have  been  proven 
to  be  true,  although  the  original  proof  was  false. 

The  above  explanation,  as  well  as  the  neurological  attitude  toward 
‘meaning',  as  expressed  by  Head,  is  non-elementalistic .  We  have  not 
illegitimately  split  organismal  processes  into  ‘intellect'  and  ‘emotions'. 
These  processes,  or  the  reactions  of  the  organism-as-a-whole,  can  be 
contemplated  at  different  neurological  stages  in  terms  of  order,  but  must 
never  be  split  or  treated  as  separate  entities.  This  attitude  is  amply 
justified  structurally  and  empirically  in  daily  and  scientific  life.  For  in¬ 
stance,  we  may  assume  that  educated  Anglo-Saxons  are  familiar  with 
the  Oxford  Dictionary,  although  it  must  be  admitted  that  they  are  handi¬ 
capped  in  the  knowledge  of  their  language  by  being  born  into  it ;  yet  we 
know  from  experience  how  words  which  have  one  standard  definition 
carry  different  meanings  to,  and  produce  different  affective  individual 
reactions  on,  different  individuals.  Past  experiences,  the  knowledge . ,  of 
different  individuals  are  different,  and  so  the  evaluation  (affective)  of 
the  terms  is  different.  We  are  accustomed  to  such  expressions  as  ‘it 
means  nothing  to  me',  even  in  cases  when  the  dictionary  wording  is 
accepted ;  or  ‘it  means  a  great  deal  to  me',  and  similar  expressions  which 
indicate  that  the  meanings  of  meanings  are  somehow  closely  related  to, 
or  perhaps  represent,  the  first  order  un-speakable  affective  states  or 
reactions. 

Since  ‘knowledge',  then,  is  not  the  first  order  un-speakable  objective 
level,  whether  an  object,  a  feeling. ;  structure,  and  so  relations,  becomes 

TKKMlNOUXiY  AN L)  MKAN1NGS 

l ht‘  only  possible  content  of  'knowledge'  and  of  meanings.  On  the  lowest 
Irvel  of  our  analysis,  when  we  explore  the  objective  level  (the  un¬ 
speakable  feelings  in  this  case),  we  must  try  to  define  every  ‘meaning'  as 
;t  conscious  feeling  of  actual,  or  assumed,  or  wished . ,  relations  which 
pertain  to  first  order  objective  entities,  psycho-logical  included,  and  which 
can  be  evaluated  by  personal,  varied,  and  racial — again  un-speakable  first 
order — psychophysiological  effects.  Because  relations  can  be  defined  as 
multi-dimensional  order,  both  of  which  terms  are  non-el applying  to 
‘senses'  and  'mind',  after  naming  the  un-speakable  entities,  all  experience 
ran  be  described  in  terms  of  relations  or  multi-dimensional  order.  The 
meanings  of  meanings,  in  a  given  case,  in  a  given  individual  at  a  given 
moment . ,  represent  composite,  affective  psycho-logical  configurations  of 
all  relations  pertaining  to  the  case,  coloured  by  past  experiences,  state  of 
health,  mood  of  the  moment,  and  other  contingencies. 

If  we  consistently  apply  the  organism-as-a-whole  principle  to  any 
psycho-logical  analysis,  we  must  conjointly  contemplate  at  least  both 
aspects,  the  'emotional'  and  the  'intellectual',  and  so  deliberately  ascribe 
'emotional'  factors  to  any  'intellectual'  manifestation,  and  'intellectual' 
factors  to  any  ‘emotional’  occurrence.  That  is  why,  on  human  levels,  the 
el  term  'psychological'  must  be  abolished  and  a  new  term  psycho-logical 
introduced,  in  order  that  we  may  construct  a  science. 

From  what  has  been  said,  we  see  that  not  only  the  structure  of  the 
world  is  such  that  it  is  made  up  of  absolute  individuals,  but  that  mean¬ 
ings  in  general,  and  the  meanings  of  meanings  in  particular — the  last 
representing  probably  the  un-speakable  first  order  effects — also  share,  in 
common  with  ordinary  objects,  the  absolute  individuality  of  the  objective 
level. 

The  above  explains  why,  by  the  inherent  structure  of  the  world, 
life,  and  the  human  nervous  system,  human  relations  are  so  enormously 
complex  and  difficult;  and  why  we  should  leave  no  stone  unturned  to 
discover  beneath  the  varying  phenomena  more  and  more  general  and 
invariant  foundations  on  which  human  understanding  and  agreement 
may  be  based.  In  mathematics  we  find  the  only  model  in  which  we  can 
study  the  invariance  of  relations  under  transformations,  and  hence  the 
need  for  future  psycho-logicians  to  study  mathematics. 

It  follows  from  these  considerations  that  any  psycho-logical  occur¬ 
rence  has  a  number  of  aspects,  an  'affective',  and  an  ‘intellectual',  a 
physiological,  a  colloidal,  and  what  not.  For  the  science  of  psychophysiol¬ 
ogy,  resulting  in  a  theory  of  sanity,  the  above  four  aspects  are  of  most 
importance.  As  our  actual  lives  are  lived  on  objective,  un-speakable 
levels,  and  not  on  verbal  levels,  it  appears,  as  a  problem  of  evaluation, 

I.  PRELIMINARIES 

that  the  objective  level,  including,  of  course,  our  un-speakable  feelings, 
'emotions’. ,  is  the  most  important,  and  that  the  verbal  levels  are  only 
auxiliary,  sometimes  useful,  but  at  present  often  harmful,  because  of  the 
disregard  of  the  s.r.  The  role  of  the  auxiliary  verbal  levels  is  only  ful¬ 
filled  if  these  verbal  processes  are  translated  back  into  first  order  effects. 
Thus,  through  verbal  intercourse,  in  the  main,  scientists  discover  useful 
first  order  abstractions  (objective),  and  by  verbal  intercourse  again, 
culture  is  built ;  but  this  only  when  the  verbal  processes  affect  the  un¬ 
speakable  psycho-logical  manifestations,  such  as  our  feelings,  'emotions’, . 

Some  extraordinary  parrot  could  be  taught  to  repeat  all  the  verbal 
'wisdom’  of  the  world ;  but,  if  he  survived  at  all,  he  would  be  just  a  par¬ 
rot.  The  repeated  noises  would  not  have  affected  his  first  order  effects — 
his  affects — these  noises  would  'mean’  nothing  to  him. 

Meanings,  and  the  meanings  of  meanings,  with  their  inseparable 
affective  components,  give  us,  therefore,  not  only  the  non-elementalistic 
foundation  on  which  all  civilization  and  culture  depends,  but  a  study  of 
the  non-el  mechanisms  of  meanings,  through  psychophysiology  and 
