general  semantics,  gives  us,  also,  powerful  physiological  means  to  achieve 
a  host  of  desirable,  and  to  eliminate  a  large  number  of  undesirable, 
psycho-logical  manifestations. 

The  physiological  mechanism  is  extremely  simple  and  necessitates  a 
breaking  away  from  the  older  elementalism.  But  it  is  usually  very  diffi¬ 
cult  for  any  given  individual  to  break  away  from  this  older  elementalism, 
as  it  involves  the  established  s.r ,  and  to  be  effective  is,  by  necessity  *  a 
little  laborious.  The  working  tool  of  psychophysiology  is  found  in  the 
semantic  reaction.  This  can  be  described  as  the  psycho-logical  reaction 
of  a  given  individual  to  words  and  language  and  other  symbols  and 
events  in  connection  with  their  meanings ,  and  the  psycho-logical  reac¬ 
tions,  which  become  meanings  and  relational  configurations  the  moment 
the  given  individual  begins  to  analyse  them  or  somebody  else  does  that 
for  him.  It  is  of  great  importance  to  realize  that  the  term  'semantic'  is 
non-elementalistic ,  as  it  involves  conjointly  the  'emotional’  as  well  as 
the  'intellectual’  factors. 

From  the  non-el  point  of  view,  any  affect,  or  impulse,  or  even 
human  instinct,  when  made  conscious  acquires  non-el  meanings,  and 
becomes  ultimately  a  psycho-logical  configuration  of  desirable  or  undesir¬ 
able  to  the  individual  relations,  thus  revealing  a  workable  non-el  mechan¬ 
ism.  Psychotherapy,  by  making  the  unconscious  conscious,  and  by  ver¬ 
balization,  attempts  to  discover  meanings  of  which  the  patient  was  not 
aware.  If  the  attempt  is  successful  and  the  individual  meanings  are 
revealed,  these  are  usually  found  to  belong  to  an  immature  period  of 

TKkMlNOL(X.Y  AND  MKANINDS 

evaluation  in  the  patient's  life.  They  are  then  consciously  revised  and 
rejected,  and  the  given  patient  either  improves  or  is  entirely  relieved. 
The  condition  for  a  successful  treatment  seems  to  be  that  the  processes 
should  be  managed  in  a  non-el ementalistic  way.  Mere  verbal  formalism 
is  not  enough,  because  the  full  non-elementalistic  meanings  to  the  patient 
are  not  divulged ;  consequently,  in  such  a  case,  the  s.r  are  not  affected, 
and  the  treatment  is  a  failure. 

The  non-el  study  of  the  s.r  becomes  an  extremely  general  scientific 
discipline.  The  study  of  relations,  and  therefore  order,  reveals  to  us 
the  mechanism  of  non-el  meanings ;  and,  in  the  application  of  an  ordinal 
physiological  discipline,  we  gain  psychophysiological  means  by  which 
powerfully  to  affect,  reverse,  or  even  annul,  undesirable  s.r.  In  psycho¬ 
physiology  we  find  a  non-el  physiological  theory  of  meanings  and  sanity. 

From  the  present  point  of  view,  all  affective  and  psycho-logical 
responses  to  words  and  other  stimuli  involving  meanings  are  to  be  con¬ 
sidered  as  s.r.  What  the  relation  between  such  responses  and  a  corres¬ 
ponding  persistent  psycho-logical  state  may  be,  is  at  present  not  clear, 
although  a  number  of  facts  of  observation  seem  to  suggest  that  the 
re-education  of  the  s.r  results  often  in  a  beneficial  change  in  some  of 
these  states.  But  further  investigation  in  this  field  is  needed. 

The  realization  of  this  difference  is  important  in  practice,  because 
most  of  the  psycho-logical  manifestations  may  appear  as  evoked  by 
some  event,  and  so  are  to  be  called  responses  or  reflexes.  Such  a 
response,  when  lasting,  should  be  called  a  given  state ,  perhaps  a  semantic 
state,  but  not  a  semantic  reflex.  The  term,  ‘semantic  reaction1,  will  be 
used  as  covering  both  semantic  reflexes  and  states.  In  the  present  work, 
we  are  interested  in  s.r ,  from  a  psychophysiological,  theoretical  and 
experimental  point  of  view,  which  include  the  corresponding  states. 

If,  for  instance,  a  statement  or  any  event  evokes  some  individual’s 
attention,  or  one  train  of  associations  in  preference  to  another,  or  envy, 
or  anger,  or  fear,  or  prejudice . ,  we  would  have  to  speak  of  all  such 
responses  on  psycho-logical  levels  as  s.r.  A  stimulus  was  present,  and  a 
response  followed ;  so  that,  by  definition,  we  should  speak  of  a  reaction. 
As  the  active  factor  in  the  stimulus  was  the  individual  meanings  to 
the  given  person,  and  his  response  had  meanings  to  him  as  a  first  order 
effect,  the  reaction  must  be  called  a  semantic  reaction. 

The  present  work  is  written  entirely  from  the  s.r  point  of  view; 
and  so  the  treatment  of  the  material,  and  the  language  used,  imply,  in 
general,  a  psycho-logical  response  to  a  stimulus  in  connection  with 
meanings,  this  response  being  expressed  by  a  number  of  such  words  as 
‘implies’,  ‘follows’,  ‘becomes’,  ‘evokes’,  ‘results’,  ‘feels’,  ‘reacts’,  ‘evalu- 

1.  PRELIMINARIES 

ates’,  and  many  others.  All  data  taken  from  science  are  selected,  and  only 
those  which  directly  enter  as  factors  in  s.r  are  given  in  an  elementary 
outline.  The  meanings  to  the  individual  are  dependent,  through  the 
influence  of  the  environment,  education,  languages  and  their  structure, 
and  other  factors,  on  racial  meanings  called  science,  which,  to  a  large 
extent,  because  of  the  structural  and  relational  character  of  science, 
become  physiological  semantic  factors  of  the  reactions.  In  fact,  science, 
mathematics,  ‘logic*. ,  may  be  considered  from  a  non-elementcdistic  point 
of  view  as  generalized  results  of  s.r  acceptable  to  the  majority  of  informed 
and  not  heavily  pathological  individuals. 

To  facilitate  the  writing  and  the  reading  of  the  work,  I  am  com¬ 
pelled  to  use  definite  devices.  As  in  case  of  structure,  multiordinal  terms, 
so  in  the  case  of  s.r ,  I  often  employ  an  ordinary  form  of  expression  and 
use  the  words  ‘structural,  ‘multiordinai*,  ‘semantic*,  as  adjectives,  or 
‘structurally*,  ‘semantically*. ,  as  adverbs,  always  implying  the  full  mean¬ 
ings,  that  under  such  and  such  conditions  of  a  given  stimulus,  the  given 
s.r  would  be  such  and  such.  In  many  instances,  the  letters  s.r  or  (j.r) 
will  be  inserted  to  remind  the  reader  that  we  deal  with  semantic  reactions 
or  the  psycho-logical  reactions  in  connection  with  the  meanings  of  the 
problems  analysed.  It  is  not  only  useful,  but  perhaps  essential,  that  the 
reader  should  stop  in  such  places  and  try  to  evoke  in  himself  the  given  s.r. 
The  present  work  leads  to  new  s.r  which  are  beneficial  to  every  one  of  us 
and  fundamental  for  sanity.  The  casual  reading  of  the  present  book  is 
not  enough.  Any  one  who  wants  the  full  or  partial  benefit  of  the  joint 
labours  of  the  author  and  the  reader  must,  even  in  the  reading,  begin  to 
re-train  his  s.r. 

As  the  organism  works  as-a-whole,  and  as  the  training  is  psycho- 
physiological  in  terms  of  order,  reversing  the  reversed  pathological  order. , 
organism-as-a-whole  means  must  be  employed.  For  this  purpose,  the 
Structural  Differential  has  been  developed.  The  reader  will  later  under¬ 
stand  that  it  is  practically  impossible  to  achieve,  without  its  help,  the 
maximum  beneficial  semantic  results. 

From  a  non-el  point  of  view,  which  makes  illegitimate  any  el  verbal 
splitting  of  ‘emotions*  and  ‘intellect*. ,  these  processes  must  be  analysed 
in  terms  of  order,  indicating  the  stages  of  the  psycho-neural  process-as- 
a-whole.  Empirically,  there  is  a  difference  between  an  ‘emotion*  which 
becomes  ‘rationalized*  and  ‘emotions*  invoked  or  produced  by  ‘ideas*. 
The  order  is  different  in  each  instance,  and  if,  in  a  given  nervous  system, 
at  a  given  moment,  or  under  some  special  conditions,  the  lower  or  higher 
nerve  centres  work  defectively,  the  nervous  reactions  are  not  well  bal¬ 
anced  and  the  manifestations  acquire  a  one-sided  character.  The  other 

TERMINOLOGY  AND  MEANINGS 

aspect  is  not  abolished,  but  is  simply  less  prominent  or  less  effective. 
Thus,  in  morons,  imbeciles,  and  in  many  forms  of  infantilism,  the  ‘think¬ 
ing’  is  very  ‘emotional’  and  of  a  low  grade;  in  so-called  ‘moral  imbeciles’, 
and  perhaps  in  ‘schizophrenia’,  the  ‘thinking’  may  be  seemingly  ‘normal’, 
yet  it  does  not  affect  the  ‘feelings’,  which  are  deficient. 

From  the  non-el  semantic  human  point  of  view,  any  affect  only 
gains  meanings  when  it  is  conscious ;  or,  in  other  words,  when  an  actual 
or  assumed  set  of  relations  is  present.  In  an  ideally  balanced  and  efficient 
human  nervous  system,  the  ‘emotions’  would  be  translated  into  ‘ideas’, 
and  ‘ideas’  translated  into  ‘emotions’,  with  equal  facility.  In  other 
words,  the  s.r  of  a  given  individual  would  be  under  full  control  and 
capable  of  being  educated,  influenced,  transformed  quickly  and  efficiently 
— the  very  reverse  of  the  present  situation.  The  present  enquiry  shows 
that  the  lack  of  psychophysiological  methods  for  training  and  lack  of 
analysis  and  understanding  of  the  factors  involved,  are  responsible  for 
this  deplorable  situation. 

The  above  processes  are  quite  obvious  on  racial  grounds,  if  we 
study  science  and  mathematics  from  the  semantic  point  of  view.  With 
very  few  exceptions,  we  only  fail  individually.  For  instance,  a  Euclid 
and  a  Newton  had  ‘hunches’,  ‘intuitions*. ;  then  they  rationalized  and  ver¬ 
balized  them  and  so  affected  the  rest  of  us  and  established  the  ‘natural’ 
feeling  for  E  geometries,  N  mechanics , .  When  new  E  or  R  systems  were 
produced,  many  of  the  older  scientists  could  ‘understand’  them,  could 
even  master  the  new  symbolic  technique ;  yet  their  ‘feelings’. ,  were  sel¬ 
dom  affected.  They  ‘thought’  in  the  new  way,  but  they  continued  to  ‘feel’ 
in  the  old;  their  s.r  did  not  follow  fully  the  transformation  of  their 
‘ideas’,  and  this  produced  a  split  personality. 

Any  fundamentally  new  system  involves  new  s.r;  and  this  is  the 
main  difficulty  which  besets  us  when  we  try  to  master  a  new  system.  We 
must  re-educate,  or  change,  our  older  s.r.  As  a  rule,  the  younger  genera¬ 
tion,  which  began  with  the  new  s.r ,  has  no  such  difficulties  with  the  new 
systems.  Just  the  opposite — the  older  s.r  become  as  difficult  or  impossible 
to  them  as  the  new  were  to  the  older  generation.  To  both  generations, 
with  their  corresponding  s.r ,  the  non-habitual  s.r  are  ‘new’,  no  matter 
what  their  historical  order  and  how  difficult  or  how  simple  they  are. 
However,  there  is  an  important  difference.  The  newer  systems,  as,  for 
instance,  the  E ,  N,  and  the  present  corresponding  ^-system,  are  more 
general:  which  means  that  the  newer  systems  include  the  older  as  particu¬ 
lar  cases,  so  that  the  younger  generation  has  s.r  which  are  more  dexible , 
more  conditional ,  with  a  broader  outlook . ,  semantic  conditions  absent  in 
the  older  systems. 

I.  PRELIMINARIES 

The  problems  connected  with  the  s.r  are  not  new,  because  these  are 
inherent  in  man,  no  matter  on  what  low  or  primitive  level  or  on  what 
high  level  of  development  he  may  be ;  but,  up  to  the  undertaking  of  the 
present  analysis,  the  problems  of  s.r  were  not  formulated,  their  psycho- 
physiological  mechanisms  were  not  discovered,  and  so,  to  the  detriment 
of  all  of  us,  we  have  had  no  workable  educational  means  by  which  to 
handle  them  effectively. 

That  is  why  the  passing  from  one  era  to  another  is  usually  so  diffi¬ 
cult  and  so  painful.  The  new  involves  new  s.r ,  while,  as  a  rule,  the  older 
generations  have  enforced  their  systems,  and,  through  them,  by  means  of 
controlled  education  and  linguistic  structure  and  habits,  the  old  s.r.  This 
the  younger  generation,  always  having  more  racial  experience,  cannot 
accept,  so  that  revolutions,  scientific  or  otherwise,  happen,  and,  when 
successful,  the  new  systems  are  imposed  on  the  older  generation  without 
the  older  generation's  changing  their  s.r.  All  of  which  is  painful  to  all 
concerned.  The  next  generation  after  such  a  ‘revolution'  does  not  have 
similar  difficulties,  because  from  childhood  they  are  trained  in  the  new 
s.r,  and  all  appears  as  ‘natural’  to  them,  and  the  older  as  ‘unthinkable’, 
‘silly’,. 

As  a  descriptive  fact,  the  present  stage  of  human  development  is 
such  that  with  a  very  few  exceptions  our  nervous  systems  do  not  work 
properly  in  accordance  with  their  survival  structure.  In  other  words, 
although  we  have  the  potentialities  for  correct  functioning  in  our  nervous 
system,  because  of  the  neglect  of  the  physiological  control-mechanism  of 
our  s.r ,  we  have  semantic  blockages  in  our  reactions,  and  the  more  bene¬ 
ficial  manifestations  are  very  effectively  prevented. 

The  present  analysis  divulges  a  powerful  mechanism  for  the  control 
and  education  of  s.r ;  and,  by  means  of  proper  evaluation,  a  great  many 
undesirable  manifestations  on  the  psycho-logical  level  can  be  very  effi¬ 
ciently  transformed  into  highly  desirable  ones.  In  dealing  with  such  a 
fundamental  experimental  issue  as  the  s.r ,  which  have  been  with  us  since 
the  dawn  of  mankind,  it  is  impossible  to  say  new  things  all  the  time. 
Very  often  the  issues  involved  become  ‘common  sense’;  but  what  is  the 
use,  in  practice,  of  this  ‘common  sense’,  if  it  is  seldom,  if  ever,  applied, 
and  in  fact  cannot  be  applied  because  of  the  older  lack  of  workable 
psychophysiological  formulations?  For  instance,  what  could  be  simpler 
or  more  ‘common  sense’  than  the  A  premise  that  an  object  is  not  words ; 
yet,  to  my  knowledge,  no  one  fully  applies  this,  or  has  fully  acquired  the 
corresponding  s.r.  Without  first  acquiring  this  new  s.r ,  it  is  impossible  to 
discover  this  error  and  corresponding  s.r  in  others ;  but  as  soon  as  we 
have  trained  ourselves,  it  becomes  so  obvious  that  it  is  impossible  to  miss 

TliKMlNOLCXiY  AND  MEANINGS 

it.  We  shall  see,  later,  that  the  older  s.r  were  due  to  the  lack  of  structural 
investigations,  to  the  old  structure  of  language,  to  the  lack  of  conscious¬ 
ness  of  abstracting,  to  the  low  order  conditionality  of  our  conditional 
reactions  (the  semantic  included),  and  a  long  list  of  other  important  fac¬ 
tors.  All  scientific  discoveries  involve  s.r ,  and  so,  once  formulated,  and 
the  new  reactions  acquired,  the  discoveries  become  ‘common  sense',  and 
we  often  wonder  why  these  discoveries  were  so  slow  in  coming  in  spite 
of  their  ‘obviousness'.  These  explanations  are  given  because  they  also 
involve  some  s.r;  and  we  must  warn  the  reader  that  such  evaluations 
(s.r)  :  ‘Oh,  a  platitude !',  ‘A  baby  knows  that',  are  very  effective  s.r  to 
prevent  the  acquisition  of  the  new  reactions.  This  is  why  the  ‘discovery 
of  the  obvious'  is  often  so  difficult;  it  involves  very  many  of  semantic 
factors  of  new  evaluation  and  meanings. 

A  fuller  evaluation  is  only  reached  at  present  on  racial  grounds  in 
two  or  more  generations,  and  never  on  individual  grounds;  which,  of 
course,  for  personal  generalised  adjustment  and  happiness,  is  very  detri¬ 
mental.  Similarly,  only  in  the  study  of  racial  achievements  called  science 
and  mathematics  can  we  discover  the  appropriate  s.r  and  the  nervous 
mechanism  of  these  so  varied,  so  flexible,  and  so  fundamental  reactions. 

In  fact,  without  a  structural  formulation  and  a  A  revision  based  on 
the  study  of  science  and  mathematics,  it  is  impossible  to  discover,  to  con¬ 
trol,  or  to  educate  these  s.r.  For  this  reason  it  was  necessary  to  analyse 
the  semantic  factors  in  connection  with  brief  and  elementary  considera¬ 
tions  taken  from  modern  science.  But,  when  all  is  said  and  done,  and  the 
important  semantic  factors  discovered,  the  whole  issue  becomes  extremely 
simple,  and  easily  applied,  even  by  persons  without  much  education.  In 
fact,  because  the  objective  levels  are  not  words,  the  only  possible  aim  of 
science  is  to  discover  structure,  which,  when  formulated,  is  always  simple 
and  easily  understood  by  everyone,  with  the  exception,  of  course,  of  very 
pathological  individuals.  We  have  already  seen  that  structure  is  to  be  con¬ 
sidered  as  a  configuration  of  relations,  and  that  relations  appear  as  the 
essential  factors  in  meanings,  and  so  of  s.r.  The  present  enquiry,  because 
structural,  reveals  vital  factors  of  s.r.  The  consequences  are  extremely 
simple,  yet  very  important.  We  see  that  by  a  simple  structural  re-educa< 
tion  of  the  s.ry  which  in  the  great  mass  of  people  are  still  on  the  level  of 
copying  animals  in  their  nervous  reactions,  we  powerfully  affect  the  s.r , 
and  so  are  able  to  impart  very  simply,  to  all,  in  the  most  elementary  edu¬ 
cation  of  the  s.r  of  the  child,  cultural  results  at  present  sometimes 
acquired  unconsciously  and  painfully  in  university  education. 

The  above  considerations  have  forced  upon  me  the  structure  of  the 
present  work  and  the  selection  and  presentation  of  the  material.  Of 

I.  PRELIMINARIES 

course,  the  reader  can  skip  many  parts  and  at  once  plunge  into  Part  VII, 
and  discover  that  it  is  all  ‘childishly  simple’,  ‘obvious*  and  ‘common 
sense*.  Such  a  reader  or  a  critic  with  this  particular  s.r  would  miss  the 
point,  which  can  be  verified  as  an  experimental  fact  in  the  meantime,  that 
in  spite  of  its  seeming  simplicity,  no  one ,  not  even  the  greatest  genius, 
fully  applies  these  ‘platitudes’  outside  of  his  special  work,  which  s.r ,  in 
his  limited  field,  represent  the  semantic  components  that  make  up 
his  genius. 

The  full  acquisition  of  the  new  s.r  requires  special  training;  but, 
when  acquired,  it  solves  for  a  given  individual,  without  any  outside  inter¬ 
ference,  all  important  human  problems  I  know  of.  It  imparts  to  him 
some  of  the  s.r  of  so-called  ‘genius*,  and  thus  enlarges  his  so-called 
‘intelligence*. 

The  problems  of  the  structure  of  a  given  language  are  of  extreme, 
and  as  yet  unrealized,  semantic  importance.  Thus,  for  instance,  the  whole 
Einstein  theory,  or  any  other  fundamental  scientific  theory,  must  be  con¬ 
sidered  as  the  building  of  a  new  language  of  similar  structure  to  the 
empirical  facts  known  at  a  given  date.  In  1933,  the  general  tendency  of 
science,  as  made  particularly  obvious  in  the  works  of  J.  Loeb,  C.  M. 
Child,  psychiatry,  the  Einstein  theory,  the  new  quantum  mechanics . ,  and 
the  present  work,  is  to  build  languages  which  take  into  consideration  the 
many  important  invariant  relations,  a  condition  made  possible  only  by 
the  use  of  non-el  languages.  In  my  case,  I  must  construct  a  non-el  lan¬ 
guage  in  which  ‘senses*  and  ‘mind*,  ‘emotions*  and  ‘intellect*.,  are  no 
longer  to  be  verbally  split,  because  a  language  in  which  they  are  split  is 
not  similar  in  structure  to  the  known  empirical  facts,  and  all  speculations 
in  such  an  el  language  must  be  misleading. 

This  non-el  language  involves  a  new  non-el  theory  of  meanings,  as 
just  explained.  The  term  ‘semantic*,  ‘semantically*,  ‘semantic  reactions*, 
‘semantic  states*. ,  are  non-el ,  as  they  involve  both  ‘emotions*  and  ‘intellect*, 
since  they  depend  on  ‘meanings*,  ‘evaluation*,  ‘significance*,  and  the  like, 
based  on  structure,  relations,  and  ultimately  multi-dimensional  order.  All 
these  terms  apply  equally  to  ‘senses*  and  to  ‘mind*,  to  ‘emotions’  and  to 
‘intellect’ — they  are  not  artificially  split. 

It  is  important  to  preserve  the  non-el  or  organism-as-a-whole  atti¬ 
tude  and  terminology  throughout,  because  these  represent  most  important 
factors  in  our  s.r.  Sometimes  it  is  necessary  to  emphasize  the  origin,  or 
the  relative  importance,  of  a  given  aspect  of  the  impulse  or  reaction,  or  to 
translate  for  the  reader  a  language  not  entirely  familiar  to  him  into  one 
to  which  he  is  more  accustomed.  In  such  cases,  I  use  the  old  el  terms  in 
quotation  marks  to  indicate  that  I  do  not  eliminate  or  disregard  the  other 

TERMINOLOGY  AND  MEANINGS 

aspects — a  disregard  which  otherwise  would  be  implied  by  the  use  of  the 
old  terms. 

The  term  psycho-logical  will  always  be  used  either  with  a  hyphen  to 
indicate  its  non-el  character,  or  in  quotation  marks,  without  a  hyphen, 
when  we  refer  to  the  old  elementalism.  Similarly,  with  the  terms  psycho¬ 
logies,  psycho-logicians,  for  ‘psychology’  and  ‘pyschologist’.  The  terms 
‘mental  ills',  ‘mental  hygiene'  are  unfortunate  ones,  since  they  are  used 
by  the  majority  as  el.  Psychiatrists,  it  is  true,  use  them  in  the  organism- 
as-a-whole  sense  to  include  ‘emotions'.  Because  of  the  great  semantic 
influence  of  the  structure  of  language  on  the  masses  of  mankind,  leading, 
as  it  does,  through  lack  of  better  understanding  and  evaluation  to  specula¬ 
tion  on  terms ,  it  seems  advisable  to  abandon  completely  terms  which 
imply  to  the  many  the  suggested  elementalism,  although  these  terms  are 
used  in  a  proper  non-el  way  by  the  few. 

If  specialists,  to  satisfy  their  s.r ,  disregard  these  issues  and  persist 
in  the  use  of  el  terms,  or  use  such  expressions  as  ‘man  is  an  animal'  and 
the  like,  they  misunderstand  the  importance  of  semantic  factors.  Through 
lack  of  appreciation  or  of  proper  evaluation  of  the  problems  involved, 
they  artificially  and  most  effectively  prevent  the  rest  of  us  from  follow¬ 
ing  their  work  without  being  led  astray  by  the  inappropriate  structure 
of  their  language.  The  harm  done  through  such  practices  is  quite  serious, 
and,  at  present,  mostly  disregarded.  For  this  reason,  I  either  use  quota¬ 
tion  marks  on  the  terms  ‘mental',  'mental'  ills,  ‘mental’  hygiene . ,  or  else  I 
use  the  terms  psycho-logical,  semantic  ills,  psycho-logical  or  semantic 
hygiene,.  The  above  two  terms  are  not  only  non-el  but  also  have  an 
important  advantage  of  being  international.  The  terms  ‘affects',  'affec¬ 
tive'  are  little  used  outside  of  scientific  literature,  where  they  are  used 
mostly  in  the  non-el  ordinal  sense.  I  use  them  in  a  similar  way,  without 
quotation  marks. 

All  the  issues  involved  in  the  present  work  are,  of  necessity,  inter¬ 
connected.  Thus,  order  leads  to  relations,  relations  to  structure,  and 
these,  in  turn,  to  non-el  meanings  and  evaluations,  which  are  the  funda¬ 
mental  factors  of  all  psycho-logical  states  and  responses,  called  more 
specifically  semantic  reactions,  states,  and  reflexes.  The  reader  should 
be  careful  to  remain  at  all  times  aware  of  these  connections  and  implica¬ 
tions.  Whenever  we  find  order,  or  relations,  or  structure,  in  the  outside 
world,  or  in  our  nervous  system,  these  terms,  because  of  their  non-el 
character,  imply  similar  order,  relations,  and  structure  in  our  psycho¬ 
logical  processes,  thus  establishing  meanings,  proper  evaluations . ,  ulti¬ 
mately  leading  toward  appropriate  s.r.  The  reverse  applies  also.  When- 

I.  PRELIMINARIES 

ever  we  speak  of  s.r,  non-el  meanings,  structure,  relations,  and,  finally, 
order,  are  implied. 

The  use  of  non-el  languages  is  seriously  beneficial,  as  it  is  structur¬ 
ally  more  correct  and  establishes  s.r  which  are  more  appropriate,  more 
flexible,  or  of  higher  order  conditionality,  a  necessity  for  the  optimum 
working  of  the  human  nervous  system, — all  of  which  results  follow  auto¬ 
matically  from  the  structure  of  the  language  used. 

A  non-el,  structurally  correct,  but  non-formulated,  attitude  is  a  pri¬ 
vate  benefit.  Once  it  is  formulated  in  a  non-el  language,  it  becomes  a 
public  benefit,  as  it  induces  in  others  the  non-el  attitudes,  thus  transform¬ 
ing  the  former  s.r.  In  this  way,  a  ‘feeling'  has  been  translated  structur¬ 
ally  into  language;  which,  in  turn,  through  structure,  involves  other 
people's  attitudes  and  ‘feelings',  and  so  their  s.r . 

The  whole  process  is  extremely  simple,  elementary,  and  automatic ; 
yet,  before  we  acquire  the  new  s.r ,  we  find  difficulties  because  of  the 
fundamental  novelty  of  these  reactions.  Any  persistent  student  will 
acquire  them  easily,  provided  he  does  not  expect  too  rapid  a  progress. 
The  subject  matter  of  the  present  analysis  is  closely  related  to  the  ‘feel¬ 
ings'  of  everybody ;  yet  the  difficulties  in  acquiring  the  new  reactions  are 
similar  to  those  the  older  scientists  found  in  acquiring  the  s.r  necessary 
for  mastering  the  E  and  R  systems. 

In  physics,  we  often  need  ‘space-like'  or  ‘time-like'  intervals,  although 
the  non-el  implications  of  the  term  ‘interval'  remain.  Similarly,  in  our 
problems  when  we  are  interested  in  the  ‘emotion-like'  or  ‘mind-like* 
aspects  of  the  non-el  s.r ,  we  shall  indicate  the  special  aspects  by  using  the 
old  terms  in  quotation  marks.  This  method  prevents  wasteful  and  futile 
speculations  on  el  terms,  and  serves  as  a  reminder  that  the  other  aspects 
are  present,  although  in  a  given  discussion  we  do  not  deem  them  to  be 
important.  The  above  has,  by  itself,  very  far-reaching  semantic  influence 
on  our  reactions. 

From  what  has  already  been  said,  it  is  clear  that  the  terminology  of 
semantic  reactions . ,  covers  in  a  non-el  way  all  psycho-logical  reactions 
which  were  formerly  covered  by  el  terms  of  ‘emotions'  and  ‘intellect', 
the  reactions  themselves  always  being  on  the  objective  levels  and 
un-speakable.  As  s.r  can  always  be  analysed  into  terms  of  meanings  and 
evaluation,  and  the  latter  into  terms  of  structure,  relations,  and  multi¬ 
dimensional  order,  which  involves  physiological  factors,  the  term  ‘seman¬ 
tic'  ultimately  appears  as  a  physiological  or  rather  psychophysiological 
term.  It  suggests  workable  and  simple  educational  methods  which  will 
be  explained  later.  The  reader  should  notice  that  the  use  of  a  language 

TERMINOLOGY  AND  MEANINGS 

of  a  new  structure  has  led  to  new  results,  which,  in  turn,  directly  affect 
our  s.r. 

An  important  point  should  be  stressed ;  namely,  that  the  issues  are 
fundamentally  simple,  because  they  are  similar  in  structure  to  the  struc¬ 
ture  of  human  ‘knowledge*  and  to  the  nervous  structure  on  which  so-called 
‘human  nature*  depends.  Because  of  this  similarity,  it  is  unconditionally 
necessary  to  become  fully  acquainted  with  the  new  terms  of  new  struc¬ 
ture,  and  to  use  them  habitually.  Only  then  will  the  beneficial  results 
follow.  All  languages  have  some  structure ;  and  so  all  languages  involve 
automatically  the,  of  necessity,  interconnected  s.r.  Any  one  who  tries  to 
translate  the  new  language  into  the  old  while  ‘thinking*  in  the  older 
terms  is  confronted  with  an  inherent  neurological  difficulty  and  involves 
himself  in  a  hopeless  confusion  of  his  own  doing.  The  reader  must  be 
warned  against  making  this  mistake. 

In  the  present  work,  I  have  tried  to  realize  fully  my  duties  toward 
my  reader ;  and  I  am  certain  that  the  reader  who  will  read  the  book  dili¬ 
gently  and  repeatedly  will  be  repaid  for  his  labours.  The  realization  that 
some  problems  do  exist,  even  if  we  do  not  fully  appreciate  or  understand 
them,  has  very  serious  semantic  influence  on  all  of  us.  Realizing  my 
responsibilities  toward  the  reader,  I  have  not  spared  difficult  labour  in 
order  to  bring  these  semantic  facts  to  his  attention.  I  seriously  suggest 
that  no  reader  ought  to  disregard  Parts  VIII,  IX,  and  X,  but  that  he 
should  become  at  least  acquainted  with  the  existence  of  the  problems 
there  discussed.  If  this  is  conscientiously  done,  many  beneficial  s.r  will 
appear  sooner  or  later. 

The  present  system  is  an  interconnected  whole :  the  beginning  implies 
the  end,  and  the  end  implies  the  beginning.  Because  of  this  characteristic, 
the  book  should  be  read  at  least  twice,  and  preferably  oftener.  I  wish 
positively  to  discourage  any  reader  who  intend,0  to  give  it  merely  a 
superficial  reading. 

The  problems  of  s.r  have  not,  so  far,  been  analysed  at  all  from  the 
point  of  view  of  structure,  and  the  present  enquiry  is,  as  far  as  my 
knowledge  goes,  the  first  in  existence.  The  problems  of  meanings  are 
vast,  extremely  important,  and  very  little  analysed.  The  interested  reader 
will  find  some  material  in  the  excellent  critical  review  of  the  problems 
of  meanings  inOgden*s  and  Richards*  The  Meaning  of  Meaning,  in  some 
parts  of  Baldwin’s  Thought  and  Things  or  Genetic  Logic ,  and  in  Lady 
Welby’s  article  in  the  Encyclopaedia  Britannica  on  Signifies.  In  these 
three  studies,  a  partial  literature  of  the  subject  is  given. 

The  present  work  involves  issues  taken  from  many  and  diverse 
branches  of  knowledge  which  have  not  hitherto  been  seen  to  be  connected 

I.  PRELIMINARIES 

What  is  of  importance  is  that  the  issues  presented  should  be  sound  in 
the  main ,  even  if  not  perfect  in  details,  which  often  have  no  bearing  on 
the  subject.  Specialists  in  the  fields  here  analysed  should  pass  their  pro¬ 
fessional  judgement  as  to  the  soundness  of  their  special  parts  of  the  sys¬ 
tem.  They  do  not  need  even  to  be  enthusiastic,  it  is  enough  if  they 
approve  it.  The  main  issue  is  the  building  of  a  ^-system,  which 
co-ordinates  many  disconnected  fields  of  knowledge  on  the  basis  of  struc¬ 
ture,  from  the  special  point  of  view  of  non-el  s.r .  If  these  results  have 
been  accomplished,  the  author  is  satisfied. 

Section  B.  On  the  un-speakable  objective  level . 

The  term  ‘un-speakable*  expresses  exactly  that  which  we  have  up 
to  now  practically  entirely  disregarded;  namely,  that  an  object  or  feeling, 
say,  our  toothache,  is  not  verbal,  is  not  words.  Whatever  we  may  say 
will  not  be  the  objective  level,  which  remains  fundamentally  un-speakable. 
Thus,  we  can  sit  on  the  object  called  ‘a  chair’,  but  we  cannot  sit  on  the 
noise  we  made  or  the  name  we  applied  to  that  object.  It  is  of  utmost 
importance  for  the  present  ^-system  not  to  confuse  the  verbal  level  with 
the  objective  level,  the  more  so  that  all  our  immediate  and  direct  ‘mental* 
and  ‘emotional*  reactions,  and  all  s.r,  states,  and  reflexes,  belong  to  the 
un-speakable  objective  levels,  as  these  are  not  words.  This  fact  is  of 
great,  but  unrealized,  importance  for  the  training  of  appropriate  s.r.  We 
can  train  these  reactions  simply  and  effectively  by  ‘silence  on  the  objec¬ 
tive  levels’,  using  familiar  objects  called  ‘a  chair*  or  ‘a  pencil*,  and  this 
training  automatically  affects  our  ‘emotions*,  ‘feelings’,  as  well  as  other 
psycho-logical  immediate  responses  difficult  to  reach,  which  are  also  not 
words.  We  can  train  simply  and  effectively  the  s.r  inside  our  skins  by 
training  on  purely  objective  and  familiar  grounds  outside  our  skins, 
avoiding  unnecessary  psycho-logical  difficulties,  yet  achieving  the  desired 
semantic  results.  The  term  ‘un-speakable*  is  used  in  its  strict  English 
meaning.  The  objective  level  is  not  words,  can  not  be  reached  by  words 
alone,  and  has  nothing  to  do  with  ‘good*  or  ‘bad’;  neither  can  it  be 
understood  as  ‘non-expressible  by  words*  or  ‘not  to  be  described  by 
words’,  because  the  terms  ‘expressible’  or  ‘described’  already  presuppose 
words  and  symbols.  Something,  therefore,  which  we  call  ‘a  chair*  or  ‘a 
toothache*  may  be  expressed  or  described  by  words ;  yet,  the  situation  is 
not  altered,  because  the  given  description  or  expression  will  not  be  the 
actual  objective  level  which  we  call  ‘a  chair’  or  ‘a  toothache’. 

Semantically,  this  problem  is  genuinely  crucial.  Any  one  who  misses 
that — and  it  is  unfortunately  easily  missed — will  miss  one  of  the  most 

