TERM  1  N()L( )GY  AND  MEANINGS 

important  psycho-logical  factors  in  all  s.r  underlying  sanity.  This  omis¬ 
sion  is  facilitated  greatly  by  the  older  systems,  habits  of  thought,  older 
s.r ,  and,  above  all,  by  the  primitive  structure  of  our  A  language  and  the 
use  of  the  ‘is’  of  identity.  Thus,  for  instance,  we  handle  what  we  call  a 
pencil.  Whatever  we  handle  is  un-speakable ;  yet  we  say  ‘this  is  a  pencil , 
which  statement  is  unconditionally  false  to  facts,  because  the  object 
appears  as  an  absolute  individual  and  is  not  words.  Thus  our  s.r  are  at 
once  trained  in  delusional  values,  which  must  be  pathological. 

I  shall  never  forget  a  dramatic  moment  in  my  experience.  I  had  a 
very  helpful  and  friendly  contact  prolonged  over  a  number  of  years  with 
a  very  eminent  scientist.  After  many  discussions,  I  asked  if  some  of  the 
special  points  of  my  work  were  clear  to  him.  His  answer  was,  ‘Yes,  it  is 
all  right,  and  so  on,  but,  how  can  you  expect  me  to  follow  your  work  all 
through,  if  I  still  do  not  know  what  an  object  is?  It  was  a  genuine 
shock  to  me.  The  use  of  the  little  word  ‘is’  as  an  identity  term  applied 
to  the  objective  level  had  paralysed  most  effectively  a  great  deal  of  hard 
and  prolonged  work.  Yet,  the  semantic  blockage  which  prevented  him 
from  acquiring  the  new  s.r  is  so  simple  as  to  seem  trifling,  in  spite  of  the 
semantic  harm  done.  The  definite  answer  may  be  expressed  as  follows : 
‘Say  whatever  you  choose  about  the  object,  and  whatever  you  might  say 
is  not  it.’  Or,  in  other  words:  ‘Whatever  you  might  say  the  object  “is”, 
well  it  is  not /  This  negative  statement  is  final,  because  it  is  negative. 

I  have  enlarged  upon  this  subject  because  of  its  crucial  semantic 
importance.  Whoever  misses  this  point  is  missing  one  of  the  most  vital 
factors  of  practically  all  s.r  leading  toward  sanity.  The  above  is  easily 
verified.  In  my  experience  I  have  never  met  any  one,  even  among  scien¬ 
tists,  who  would  fully  apply  this  childish  ‘wisdom’  as  an  instinctive  ‘feel¬ 
ing’  and  factor  in  all  his  s.r.  I  want  also  to  show  the  reader  the  extreme 
simplicity  of  a  ^-system  based  on  the  denial  of  the  ‘is’  of  identity,  and  to 
forewarn  him  against  very  real  difficulties  induced  by  the  primitive  struc¬ 
ture  of  our  language  and  the  s.r  connected  with  it.  Our  actual  lives  are 
lived  entirely  on  the  objective  levels,  including  the  un-speakable  ‘feelings’, 
‘emotions’. ,  the  verbal  levels  being  only  auxiliary,  and  effective  only  if 
they  are  translated  back  into  first  order  un-speakable  effects,  such  as  an 
object,  an  action,  a  ‘feeling’. ,  all  on  the  silent  and  un-speakable  objective 
levels.  In  all  cases  of  which  I  know  at  present,  where  the  retraining  of 
our  s.r  has  had  beneficial  effects,  the  results  were  obtained  when  this 
‘silence  on  the  objective  levels’  has  been  attained,  which  affects  all  our 
psycho-logical  reactions  and  regulates  them  to  the  benefit  of  the  organism 
and  of  his  survival  adaptation. 

1.  PRELIMINARIES 

Section  C.  On  ' copying ’  in  our  nervous  reactions. 

The  selection  of  the  term  'copying’  was  forced  upon  me  after  much 
meditation.  Its  standard  meaning  implies  'reproduction  after  a  model’, 
applicable  even  to  mechanical  processes,  and  although  it  does  not  exclude, 
it  does  not  necessarily  include  conscious  copying.  It  is  not  generally 
realized  to  what  an  important  extent  copying  plays  its  role  in  higher 
animals  and  man. 

Some  characteristics  are  inborn,  some  are  acquired.  Long  ago, 
Spalding  made  experiments  with  birds.  Newly  hatched  birds  were 
enclosed  in  small  boxes  which  did  not  allow  them  to  stretch  their  wings 
or  to  see  other  birds  fly.  At  the  period  when  usually  flying  begins,  they 
were  released  and  began  to  fly  at  once  with  great  skill,  showing  that 
flying  in  birds  is  an  inborn  function.  Other  experiments  were  made  by 
Scott  to  find  out  if  the  characteristic  song  of  the  oriole  was  inborn  or 
acquired.  When  orioles,  after  being  hatched,  were  kept  away  from  their 
parents,  at  a  given  period  they  began  to  sing ;  but  the  peculiar  melody  of 
their  songs  was  different  from  the  songs  of  their  parents.  Thus,  singing 
is  an  inborn  characteristic,  but  the  special  melody  is  due  to  copying 
parents,  and  so  is  acquired.3 

In  our  human  reactions,  speech  in  general  is  an  inborn  characteristic, 
but  what  special  language  or  what  special  structure  of  language  we 
acquire  is  due  to  environment  and  copying — much  too  often  to  uncon¬ 
scious  and,  therefore,  uncritical  copying.  As  to  the  copying  of  animals 
in  our  nervous  reactions,  this  is  quite  a  simple  problem.  Self-analysis, 
which  is  rather  a  difficult  affair,  necessitating  a  serious  and  efficient 
‘mentality’,  was  impossible  in  the  primitive  stage.  Copying  parents  in 
many  respects  began  long  before  the  appearance  of  man,  who  has 
naturally  continued  this  practice  until  the  present  day.  The  results, 
therefore,  are  intimately  connected  with  reactions  of  a  pre-human  stage, 
transmitted  from  generation  to  generation.  But  for  our  present  purpose, 
the  most  important  form  of  the  copying  of  animals  was,  and  is,  the 
copying  of  the  comparative  unconditionality  of  their  conditional  reflexes, 
or  lower  order  conditionality ;  the  animalistic  identification  or  confusion 
of  orders  of  abstractions,  and  the  lack  of  consciousness  of  abstracting, 
which,  while  natural,  normal,  and  necessary  with  animals,  becomes  a 
source  of  endless  semantic  disturbances  for  humans.  More  about  copying 
will  be  explained  as  we  proceed. 

It  should  be  noticed  also  that  because  of  the  structure  of  the  nervous 
system  and  the  history  of  its  development,  the  more  an  organism  became 
‘conscious’,  the  more  this  copying  became  a  neurological  necessity,  as 

TERMINOLOGY  AND  MEANINGS 

sxemplified  in  parrots  and  apes.  With  man,  owing  to  the  lack  of  con¬ 
sciousness  of  abstracting,  his  copying  capacities  became  also  much  more 
pronounced  and  often  harmful.  Even  the  primitive  man  and  the  child 
are  ‘intelligent'  enough  to  observe  and  copy,  but  not  informed  enough  in 
the  racial  experiences  usually  called  science,  which,  for  him,  are  non¬ 
existent,  to  discriminate  between  the  reactions  on  the  ‘psychological' 
levels  of  animals  and  the  typical  responses  which  man  with  his  more  com¬ 
plex  nervous  system  should  have.  Only  an  analysis  of  structure  and 
semantic  reactions t  resulting  in  consciousness  of  abstracting,  can  free 
us  from  this  unconscious  copying  of  animals,  which,  let  us  repeat,  must 
be  pathological  for  man,  because  it  eliminates  a  most  vital  regulating 
factor  in  human  nervous  and  s.r ,  and  so  vitiates  the  whole  process.  This 
factor  is  not  simply  additive,  so  that,  when  it  is  introduced  and  super¬ 
imposed  on  any  response  of  the  human  nervous  system  allowing  such 
superimposition,  the  whole  reaction  is  fundamentally  changed  in  a 
beneficial  way. 

CHAPTER  III 

INTRODUCTION 

And  so  far  as  the  actual,  fundamental,  biological  structure  of  our  society 
is  concerned  and  notwithstanding  its  stupendous  growth  in  size  and  all  the 
tinkering  to  which  it  has  been  subjected,  we  are  still  in  much  the  same 
infantile  stage.  But  if  the  ants  are  not  despondent  because  they  have  failed 
to  produce  a  new  social  invention  or  convention  in  65  million  years,  why 
should  we  be  discouraged  because  some  of  our  institutions  and  castes  have 
not  been  able  to  evolve  a  new  idea  in  the  past  fifty  centuries?  (553) 

WILLIAM  MORTON  WHEELER 

The  ancient  who  desired  to  illustrate  illustrious  virtue  throughout  the 
empire,  first  ordered  well  their  own  state.  Wishing  to  order  well  their  own 
state,  they  first  regulated  their  families.  Wishing  to  regulate  their  families, 
they  first  cultivated  their  own  persons.  Wishing  to  cultivate  their  persons, 
they  first  rectified  their  heart.  Wishing  to  rectify  their  hearts,  they  first 
sought  to  be  sincere  in  their  thoughts.  Wishing  to  be  sincere  in  their 
thoughts,  they  extended  their  knowledge  to  the  utmost;  and  this  exten¬ 
sion  of  knowledge  lay  in  the  investigation  of  things.  Things  being  investi¬ 
gated,  knowledge  became  complete.  Their  knowledge  being  complete,  their 
thoughts  were  sincere.  Their  thoughts  being  sincere,  their  hearts  were 
then  rectified.  Their  heart  being;  rectified,  their  persons  were  cultivated. 
Their  persons  being  cultivated,  their  families  were  regulated.  Their  family 
being  regulated,  their  states  were  rightly  governed.  Their  states  being 
rightly  governed,  their  whole  empire  was  made  tranquil  and  happy.  From 
the  emperor  down  to  the  mass  of  the  people,  all  must  consider  the  cultiva¬ 
tion  of  the  person,  the  root  of  every  thing  besides.  Confucius 

My  service  at  the  front  during  the  World  War  and  an  intimate 
knowledge  of  life-conditions  in  Europe  and  the  United  States  of  Amer¬ 
ica  have  convinced  me  that  a  scientific  revision  of  all  our  notions  about 
ourselves  is  needed.  Investigation  disclosed  that  all  disciplines  dealing 
with  the  affairs  of  man  either  do  not  have  a  definition  of  man,  or,  if  they 
do,  that  it  is  formulated  in  metaphysical,  el,  subject-predicate  languages, 
which,  are  unscientific  and  ultimately  semantically  harmful. 

As  we  have,  at  present,  no  general  science  of  man  embracing  all 
his  functions,  language,  mathematics,  science  and  ‘mental*  ills  included, 
I  believed  that  to  originate  such  a  science  would  be  useful.  This  task 
I  began  in  my  Manhood  of  Humanity,  and  have  continued  in  the  present 
volume.  The  selection  of  a  name  for  such  a  science  is  difficult.  The  only 
really  appropriate  name,  ‘Anthropology*,  is  already  pre-empted  to  cover 
a  most  fundamental  and  sound  discipline,  without  which  even  modern 
psychiatry  would  be  impossible.  This  name,  at  present,  is  used  in  a 
restricted  sense  to  signify  the  animalistic  natural  history  of  man,  dis¬ 
regarding  the  fact  that  the  natural  history  of  man  must  include  factors 
non-existent  in  the  animal  world,  but  which  are  his  natural  functions, 

INTRODUCTION 

such  as  language  and  its  structure,  the  building  of  his  institutions,  laws, 
doctrines,  science,  mathematics . ,  which  condition  his  environment,  his 
s.r,  which,  in  their  turn,  influence  and  determine  his  development. 

We  see  that  the  ‘natural  history'  of  animals  differs  greatly  in  struc¬ 
ture  from  a  future  scientific  ‘ natural  history/  of  man,  a  structural  differ¬ 
ence  very  seldom  fully  realized.  I  propose,  then,  to  call  the  very  valuable 
existing  Anthropology  the  Restricted  Anthropology,  and  to  call  the 
generalized  science  of  man  General  Anthropology,  so  as  to  include 
all  his  natural  functions,  of  which  those  covered  by  the  Restricted  An¬ 
thropology  would  be  a  part. 

Such  a  definite  General  Anthropology  would  be  very  different  from 
the  existing  restricted  one.  It  would  include  all  disciplines  of  human 
interest  from  a  special  anthropological  and  semantic  point  of  view. 
Very  often  an  anthropological  discipline — for  instance,  anthropological 
psycho-logics,  anthropological  sociology,  law,  history,  or  ‘philosophy’ — 
would  turn  out  to  be  a  comparative  discipline.  Such,  by  necessity,  would 
have  to  use  a  language  of  four-dimensional  structure,  which  would 
necessitate,  as  a  preliminary,  a  fundamental  revision  of  the  structure  of 
the  language  they  use — a  semantic  factor  which,  up  to  now,  has  been 
largely  neglected. 

It  is  to  be  frankly  admitted  that  the  present  enquiry  has  led  to  some 
quite  unexpected  and  startling  results.  In  my  Manhood  of  Humanity, 
I  defined  man  functionally  as  a  time-binder,  a  definition  based  on  a 
non-el  functional  observation  that  the  human  class  of  life  differs  from 
animals  in  the  fact  that,  in  the  rough,  each  generation  of  humans,  at  least 
potentially,  can  start  where  the  former  generation  left  off — a  definition 
which,  in  the  language  of  this  particular  structure,  is  sharp,  and  corre¬ 
sponds  to  empirical  facts.  We  should  notice,  also,  that  in  the  case  of 
primitive  tribes  which  apparently  have  not  progressed  at  all  for  many 
thousands  of  years,  we  always  find,  among  other  reasons,  some  special 
doctrines  or  creeds,  which  proclaim  very  efficiently,  often  by  killing  off 
individuals  (who  always  are  responsible  for  progress  in  general),  that 
any  progress  or  departure  from  ‘time  honoured’  habits  or  prejudices  ‘is 
a  mortal  sin’  or  what  not.  Even  in  our  own  case  we  are  not  free  from 
such  semantic  tendencies.  Only  the  other  day,  historically  speaking,  the 
‘holy  inquisition’  burned  or  silenced  scientists.  The  discovery  of  the 
microscope  and  telescope,  for  instance,  was  delayed  for  a  long  time 
because  the  inventor,  in  fear  of  priestly  persecution,  was  afraid  to  write 
his  scientific  discoveries  in  plain  language.  He  had  to  write  them  in 
cipher — a  fact  discovered  only  a  few  years  ago.  Those  afflicted  with 
diseases  can  easily  realize  where  our  science  in  general,  and  medical 

I.  PRELIMINARIES 

science  in  particular,  might  be  today  if  not  for  the  holy  zeal  of  powerful 
enemies  of  science  who  vehemently  and  ruthlessly  sponsored  ignorance, 
old  s.rt  and  so  disease. 

In  some  countries,  even  at  present,  science  is  persecuted,  and  the 
attempt  is  made  to  starve  scientists,  a  device  often  quite  as  effective  as 
burning  at  the  stake,  of  which  the  Tennessee  trial  and  others  are 
examples.  But,  in  spite  of  all  these  primitive  semantic  tendencies,  which, 
unfortunately,  are  often  very  efficient,  the  general  time-binding  charac¬ 
teristic  of  man  remains  unaltered,  although  its  rate  can  be  slowed  down 
by  the  ignorance  of  those  who  control  our  symbolism — words,  money, . 

The  failure  to  understand  these  problems  is  due  to  the  fundamental 
fact  that,  until  now,  we  have  had  no  scientific  functional  non-el  defini¬ 
tion  of  man ;  neither  have  we  originated  any  scientific  enquiry  into  the 
inherent  ‘nature  of  man',  which  is  impossible  if  we  disregard  s.r .  We 
should  remember  that  in  this  commercialized  era  we  offer  large  incomes 
to  those  who  preach  with  great  zeal  how  ‘evil'  ‘human  nature  is’,  and 
who  tell  us  how,  without  their  services,  all  kinds  of  dreadful  things  will 
happen  to  a  given  individual. 

In  the  light  of  modern  enquiry,  the  above  issues  come  to  a  very 
sharp  focus.  Either  these  apostles  do  know  that  what  they  promise  has 
only  delusional  value,  yet  they  want  to  retain  their  incomes,  or  else  they 
live  in  delusional  worlds,  and  a  sane  mankind  should  take  care  of  them. 
In  either  case,  they  are  unfit  to  be  any  longer  entrusted  with  the  care  of 
the  further  development  of  culture  and  the  future  of  mankind.  Sooner 
or  later,  we  must  meet  this  semantic  situation  squarely,  as  too  many 
factors  of  human  sanity  are  at  stake. 

In  my  Manhood  of  Humanity ,  it  is  shown  that  the  canons  of  what 
we  call  ‘civilization'  or  ‘civilizations'  are  based  on  animalistic  generaliza¬ 
tions  taken  from  the  obvious  facts  of  the  lives  of  cows,  horses,  dogs, 
pigs . ,  and  applied  to  man.  Of  course,  such  generalizations  started  with 
insufficient  datat  The  generalizations  had  to  be  primitive,  superficial ;  and 
when  applied  in  practice,  periodical  collapses  were  certain  to  follow. 
No  bridge  would  stand  or  could  even  be  built,  if  we  tried  to  apply  rules 
of  surfaces  to  volumes.  The  rules  or  generalizations  in  the  two  cases 
are  different,  and  so  the  results  of  such  primitive  semantic  confusion 
must  be  disastrous  to  all  of  us. 

The  present  enquiry  began  with  the  investigation  of  the  character¬ 
istic  difference  between  animal  and  man;  namely,  the  mechanism  of 
time-binding.  This  analysis,  because  of  the  different  structure  of  the 
language  used,  had  to  be  carried  on  independently  and  anew.  The 
results  are,  in  many  instances,  new,  unexpected  even  by  myself,  and 

INTRODUCTION 

they  show  unmistakably  that,  to  a  large  extent,  even  now  we  nearly  all 
copy  animals  in  our  nervous  processes.  Investigation  further  shows  that 
such  nervous  reactions  in  man  lead  to  non-survival,  pathological  states 
of  general  infantilism ,  infantile  private  and  public  behaviour,  infantile 
institutions,  infantile  ‘civilizations'  founded  on  strife,  fights,  brute  com¬ 
petitions  . ,  these  being  supposedly  the  ‘natural’  expression  of  ‘human 
nature’,  as  different  commercialists  and  their  assistants,  the  militarists 
and  priests,  would  have  us  believe. 

As  always  in  human  affairs,  in  contrast  to  those  ot  animals,  the 
issues  are  circular.  Our  rulers,  who  rule  our  symbols,  and  so  rule  a 
symbolic  class  of  life,  impose  their  own  infantilism  on  our  institutions, 
educational  methods,  and  doctrines.  This  leads  to  nervous  maladjust¬ 
ment  of  the  incoming  generations  which,  being  born  into,  are  forced  to 
develop  under  the  un-natural  (for  man)  semantic  conditions  imposed 
on  them.  In  turn,  they  produce  leaders  afflicted  with  the  old  animalistic 
limitations.  The  vicious  circle  is  completed ;  it  results  in  a  general  state 
of  human  un-sanity,  reflected  again  in  our  institutions.  And  so  it  goes, 
on  and  on. 

At  first,  such  a  discovery  is  shocking.  On  second  consideration, 
however,  it  seems  natural  that  the  human  race,  being  relatively  so  recent, 
and  having  passed  through  different  low  levels  of  development,  should 
misunderstand  structurally  their  human  status,  should  misuse  their 
nervous  system , .  The  present  work,  which  began  as  the  ‘Manhood  of 
Humanity’  turned  out  to  be  the  ‘Adulthood  of  Humanity’,  for  it  dis¬ 
closes  a  psychophysiological  mechanism  of  infantilism,  and  so  points 
toward  its  prevention  and  to  adulthood. 

The  term  ‘infantilism’  is  often  used  in  psychiatry.  No  one  who  has 
had  any  experience  with  the  ‘mentally’  ill,  and  studied  them,  can  miss  the 
ract  that  they  always  exhibit  some  infantile  symptoms.  It  is  also  known 
that  an  adult,  otherwise  considered  ‘normal’,  but  who  exhibits  marked 
infantile  semantic  characteristics,  cannot  be  a  fully  adjusted  individual, 
and  usually  wrecks  his  own  and  other  persons’  lives. 

In  the  present  investigation,  we  have  discovered  and  formulated  a 
definite  psychophysiological  mechanism  which  is  to  be  found  in  all  cases 
of  ‘mental’  ills,  infantilism,  and  the  so-called  ‘normal’  man.  The  differ¬ 
ences  between  such  neural  disturbances  in  different  individuals  turn  out 
to  vary  only  in  degree,  and  as  they  resemble  closely  the  nervous  responses 
of  animals,  which  are  necessarily  regressive  for  man,  we  must  conclude 
that,  generally,  we  do  not  use  our  nervous  system  properly,  and  that  we 
have  not,  as  yet,  entirely  emerged  from  a  very  primitive  semantic  stage 
of  development,  in  spite  of  our  technical  achievements. 

I.  PRELIMINARIES 

Indeed,  experience  shows  that  the  more  technically  developed  a 
nation  or  race  is,  the  more  cruel,  ruthless,  predatory,  and  commercial¬ 
ized  its  systems  tend  to  become.  These  tendencies,  in  turn,  colour  and 
vitiate  international,  national,  capital-labour,  and  even  family,  relations. 

Is,  then,  the  application  of  science  at  fault?  No,  the  real  difficulty 
lies  in  the  fact  that  different  primitive,  animalistic,  un-revised  doctrines 
and  creeds  with  corresponding  s.r  have  not  advanced  in  an  equal  ratio 
with  the  technical  achievements.  When  we  analyse  these  creeds  semanti¬ 
cally,  we  find  them  to  be  based  on  structural  assumptions  which  are  false 
to  facts,  but  which  are  strictly  connected  with  the  unrevised  structure 
of  the  primitive  language,  all  of  which  is  the  more  dangerous  because  it 
works  unconsciously. 

When  we  study  comparatively  the  nervous  responses  of  animals 
and  man,  the  above  issues  become  quite  clear,  and  we  discover  a  definite 
psychophysiological  mechanism  which  marks  this  difference.  That  the 
above  has  not  been  already  formulated  in  a  workable  way  is  obviously 
due  to  the  fact  that  the  structure  of  the  old  language  successfully  pre¬ 
vented  the  discovery  of  these  differences,  and,  indeed,  has  been  largely 
responsible  for  these  human  semantic  disturbances.  Similarly,  in  the 
present  ^-system,  the  language  of  a  new  and  modern  structure,  as  exem¬ 
plified  by  terms  such  as  ‘time-binding’,  ‘orders  of  abstractions’,  ‘multi¬ 
ordinal  terms’,  ‘semantic  reactions’. ,  led  automatically  to  the  disclosure 
of  the  mechanism,  pointing  the  way  toward  the  means  of  control  of  a 
special  therapeutic  and  preventive  character. 

The  net  results  are,  in  the  meantime,  very  promising.  Investigation 
shows  that,  in  general,  the  issues  raised  are  mostly  linguistic ,  and  that, 
in  particular,  they  are  based  on  the  analysis  of  the  structure  of  languages 
in  connection  with  s.r.  All  statements,  therefore,  which  are  made  in  this 
work  are  about  empirical  facts,  language  and  its  structure.  We  deal  with 
an  obvious  and  well-known  inherent  psychophysiological  function  of  the 
human  organism,  and,  therefore,  all  statements  can  be  readily  verified 
or  eventually  corrected  and  refined,  allowing  easy  application,  and  auto¬ 
matically  eliminating  primitive  mythologies  and  s.r . 

After  all  is  done  and  said,  one  can  only  wonder  why  such  a  simple 
fact  that  language  represents  a  very  important,  unique,  and  inherent 
psychophysiological  function  of  the  human  organism  has  been  neglected 
so  long. 

The  answer  seems  to  be  that:  (1)  the  daily  language  is  structurally 
extremely  complex ;  (2)  it  is  humanly  impossible  to  analyse  its  structure 
by  using  the  language  of  A  structure,  so  that  before  anything  can  be 
done  at  all  in  this  field  a  ^-system  must  first  be  formulated ;  (3)  there  is 

INTRODUCTION 

a  general  innocence  on  the  part  of  nearly  all  specialists,  a  very  few 
mathematicians  excepted,  of  the  structural  and  semantic  role  of  the 
simplest — although  still  inadequate—^  language  called  mathematics; 
(4)  all  these  issues  involve  most  powerful  unconscious  factors  which 
work  automatically  against  any  revision,  and  (5)  the  building  of  a 
A- system  in  1933  is  an  extremely  laborious  enterprise,  to  say  the  least, 
and,  in  all  probability,  really  beyond  the  power  of  any  single  man  to 
complete. 

The  last  point  is  quite  important ;  and,  although  I  have  no  intention 
to  apologize  or  present  any  alibis,  because  any  thoughtful  reader  will 
understand  it,  I  must  explain,  nevertheless,  briefly  why  the  present  work 
has  probably  fallen  far  short  of  what  it  eventually  could  be. 

In  the  days  of  Aristotle,  we  knew  extremely  little  of  science  in  the 
1933  sense.  Aristotle,  in  his  writings,  formulated  for  us  a  whole  scien¬ 
tific  program,  which  we  followed  until  very  lately.  Whoever,  in  1933, 
attempts  to  build  a  ^-system,  must,  by  internal  necessity,  connected  with 
the  problems  of  the  structure  of  language,  do  something  similar.  Obvi¬ 
ously,  in  1933,  with  the  overwhelming  number  of  most  diversified  facts 
known  to  science,  the  question  is  no  more  to  sketch  a  scientific  program 
for  the  future,  but  to  build  a  system  which,  at  least  in  structure,  is 
similar  to  the  structure  of  the  known  facts  from  all  branches  of 
knowledge. 

Let  me  repeat:  the  necessity  is  internal,  and  connected  with  the 
structure  of  language  as  such,  involving  new  s.r,  and  so  no  one  can  avoid 
it,  as  this  whole  work  shows  in  detail. 

Now  such  structural  adjustment  requires  an  immense  amount  of 
study  of  diverse  empirical  facts,  and  then  it  must  depend  on  new  gen¬ 
eralizations,  concerned  in  the  main  with  structure.  Many  statements  of 
scientists,  when  even  accepted  as  reliable,  still  have  to  be  translated  into 
a  special  language  in  which  structural  issues  are  made  quite  obvious, 
divulging  factors  in  s.r .  This  is  a  very  serious  difficulty,  particularly 
when  many  branches  of  knowledge  are  drawn  upon,  as  each  uses  its 
own  special  language;  so  that  such  a  unitary  translation  in  terms  of 
structure  imposes  a  serious  burden  on  the  memory  of  the  translator, 
and  often  little  details  escape  attention  in  the  implications  of  the  transla¬ 
tion,  although  they  may  be  well  known  to  the  translator.  As  this  is 
probably  the  chief  difficulty,  it  is  in  this  field  that  the  main  corrections 
will  have  to  be  made. 

I  admit  that  I  started  this  enquiry  without  fully  realizing  its  inher¬ 
ent  difficulties,  or  whither  it  would  eventually  lead.  The  more  I  advanced, 
the  more  special  knowledge  was  required.  I  had  to  go  to  sources,  and, 

I.  PRELIMINARIES 

in  a  way,  partially  specialize  in  many  branches  of  science  which  were 
never  connected  before.  The  progress  was  extremely  slow ;  in  fact,  it 
has  taken  ten  years  to  write  this  book,  but  I  had  to  go  through  the 
necessary  preliminaries  or  abandon  the  whole  enterprise. 

Now  I  present  the  results  of  this  work  to  the  public.  It  is  the  best 
I  can  do,  although  I  fully  realize  its  limitations  and  imperfections.  The 
unexpected  drama  of  such  an  enterprise  is  found,  in  that  a  ^-system, 
like  its  predecessor,  involves  full-fledged  structural  metaphysics  of  some 
sort,  to  be  explained  later. 

The  A -system  involved  primitive  structural  metaphysics ;  a  A- sys¬ 
tem,  to  be  of  any  semantic  value  at  all,  must  start  with  the  structural 
metaphysics  or  structural  assumptions  as  given  by  science  1933.  The 
first  step  in  building  such  a  system  is  to  study  science  1933  and  mathe¬ 
matics,  and  so  to  know  these  structural  data  (and  assumptions  where 
we  lack  data) .  Such  a  study  is  very  laborious,  slow,  and  even  ungrate¬ 
ful,  because  the  issues  with  which  we  are  concerned  are  structural . 
Thus,  years  of  patient  and  sometimes  painful  labour  often  result  merely 
in  a  very  few  and  brief,  but  important,  sentences. 

The  active,  and  only  very  lately  relaxed,  persecution  of  those  schol¬ 
ars  who  dared  to  attempt  the  revision  of  Aristotle  has  been  very  effective 
in  keeping  the  primitive  s.r.  There  are  in  this  field  practically  no  im¬ 
portant  works  of  a  critical  character,  and  this  fact,  naturally,  made  my 
own  work  more  difficult. 

It  appears  that,  during  the  last  few  years,  most  of  the  physiological 
functions  of  the  human  organism  have  been  investigated,  with  the 
exception  of  psychophysiological  semantic  reactions  and  their  disturb¬ 
ances  from  the  present  point  of  view. 

The  study  of  aphasia  is  rather  recent,  and  that  of  semantic  aphasia 
still  more  so.  Only  since  the  World  War  has  much  new  knowledge 
been  accumulated  in  this  field.  With  the  1933  scientific  outlook,  macro¬ 
scopic  structure  becomes  a  function  of  the  sub-microscopic  dynamic 
structure,  and  the  considerations  of  colloidal  structure  and  disturbances 
become  extremely  important.  We  must,  therefore,  enlarge  the  study  of 
semantic  aphasia  as  connected  with  macroscopic  lesions,  to  include 
semantic  phasic  (not  only  a-phasic)  sub-microscopic  functional  disturb¬ 
ances  connected  with  order,  natural  survival  order  and  its  pathological 
reversal,  the  disturbances  of  the  multiordinal  semantic  reactions. 

It  is  known  that  ‘mental*  ills  or  difficulties  often  disturb  physio¬ 
logical  functions  of  the  human  organism,  and  vice  versa.  Something 
similar  appears  to  be  true  about  the  last  and  little-investigated  s.r.  In 
this  case,  more  and  special  difficulties  arise,  because  of  the  fact  that 

INTRODUCTION 

these  particular  reactions  are  strictly  connected  with  different  ‘emotional* 
or  affective  responses,  which  are  due  to  the  knowledge  (or  lack  of 
knowledge)  of  their  mechanism.  They  are  circular,  as  all  functions  con¬ 
nected  with  knowledge  are.  This  difficulty  is  very  serious  and  closely 
connected  with  the  structure  of  language ,  disclosing  also  a  tnost  impor¬ 
tant  fact,  that  languages  may  have  structure.  This  subject  could  not 
have  been  even  suggested  by  the  ^-system ;  nor  could  it  have  been 
analysed  by  A  means. 

The  most  encouraging  feature  of  this  work  is  the  fact  that  it  is 
experimental ,  and  that  in  cases  where  it  has  been  applied,  it  worked 
remarkably  well.  It  appears  that  all  desirable  human  characteristics,  high 
mentality*  included,  have  a  definite  psychophysiological  mechanism, 
easily  understood  and  easily  trained.  One  should  not  expect  this  train¬ 
ing  to  be  more  quickly  acquired  than  the  mastering  of  spelling,  or  driving 
a  car,  or  typewriting.  Practice  shows  that  it  requires  approximately  as 
much  diligence  and  persistence  as  learning  to  spell  or  to  typewrite.  The 
results  accomplished  in  the  field  of  ‘mental*  health,  widened  horizons,  and 
unlimited  possibilities  for  personal  and  public  adjustment,  justify  so 
small  a  price.  This  applies  to  adults,  but  in  a  different  way  is  true  for 
children.  From  an  educational  point  of  view,  it  is  as  simple  or  as  com¬ 
plex  to  train  children  in  the  improper  use  of  an  important  physiological 
function,  such  as  language,  as  to  train  them  in  the  proper  use  of  the 
nervous  system  and  appropriate  s.r.  In  fact,  the  new  is  simpler  and 
easier,  if  we  start  with  it,  because  it  is  in  accordance  with  ‘human 
nature*.  In  theory,  it  plays  a  most  important  role  in  the  prevention  of 
many  future  eventual  break-downs,  which  the  old  misuse  of  the  func¬ 
tion  was  certain  to  involve. 

The  problems  of  a  A- system  are,  to  the  best  of  my  knowledge, 
novel.  They  are  of  two  kinds:  (1)  scientific,  leading  to  a  theoretical, 
general  structural  revision  of  all  systems,  and  (2)  purely  practical,  such 
as  can  be  grasped  and  applied  by  any  individual  who  will  spend  the  time 
and  effort  necessary  to  master  this  system  and  acquire  the  correspond¬ 
ing  s.r. 

The  results  are  far-reaching.  They  help  any  individual  to  solve  his 
problems  by  himself,  to  his  own  and  others*  satisfaction.  They  also 
build  up  an  affective  semantic  foundation  for  personal  as  well  as  for 
national  and  international  agreement  and  adjustment. 

Some  of  the  results  are  quite  unexpected.  For  instance,  it  is  shown 
that  the  older  systems,  with  their  linguistic  methods  of  handling  our 
nervous  system,  led  inevitably  to  ‘universal  disagreement*.  In  individual 
