life  this  led  to  pathological  conflicts  with  ourselves ;  in  private  life,  to 

I.  PRELIMINARIES 

family  strifes  and  unhappiness,  and  so  to  nervous  disturbances;  in 
national  life,  to  political  strifes,  revolutions . ;  in  international  affairs,  to 
mutual  misunderstanding,  suspicion,  impossibility  to  agree,  wars,  World 
Wars,  'trade  wars’. ,  ultimately  ending  in  slaughter,  general  unemploy¬ 
ment,  and  an  unnecessarily  great  amount  of  general  unrest,  worry,  con¬ 
fusion,  and  suffering  in  different  degrees  for  all,  helping  again  to  dis¬ 
turb  the  proper  working  of  the  human  nervous  system. 

The  subject  of  this  work  is  ultimately  'speaking  about  speaking’. 
As  all  human  institutions  depend  upon  speaking— even  the  World  War 
could  not  have  been  staged  without  speaking — and  as  all  science  is  ulti¬ 
mately  verbal,  such  an  analysis  must  cover  a  large  field.  In  such  an 
attempt,  therefore,,  we  must  first  understand  the  speaking  of  scientists, 
of  different  specialists.,  and  so  must  get  acquainted  with  their  languages, 
and  what  they  are  talking  about.  This  is  the  semantic  reason  why  I  have 
had  to  explain  to  the  reader  many  simple,  yet  necessary,  scientific  struc¬ 
tural  issues. 

The  present  book  is  written  on  the  level  of  the  average  intelligent 
reader,  and  any  such  reader  will  get  the  full  benefit  for  his  labour  pro¬ 
vided  he  is  willing  to  put  into  it  the  necessary  work  and  persistence. 
Perhaps  a  word  of  warning  is  necessary.  My  own  personal  experience 
is  that,  when  once  we  have  acquired  a  bad  habit,  let  us  say  in  making 
errors  in  typewriting,  this  bad  habit  is  very  difficult  to  eliminate.  A 
similar  remark  applies  to  the  old  habits  of  speech,  and  of  the  semantic 
responses  connected  with  them.  A  re-education  is  simple  in  principle, 
but  it  requires  a  great  deal  of  persistent  effort  to  overcome  undesirable 
s.r.  My  experience  convinces  me  that  the  self-satisfied,  the  'happy’ 
person,  who  has  no  problems  at  all,  if  there  is  such  a  person,  should 
not  attempt  to  read  this  book.  He  will  waste  just  so  much  effort.  But  I 
can  confidently  promise  that  any  one  who  has  any  problems  to  solve, — 
be  they  personal  difficulties  with  himself,  his  family,  or  his  associates — 
the  scientist,  the  teacher,  or  the  professional  person  who  wants  to  become 
more  efficient  in  his  own  work,  will  be  amply  repaid  for  spending  the 
necessary  'time’  in  mastering  the  linguistic,  and  so  neurological  problems 
involved  in  such  a  structural  semantic  re-education. 

This  investigation  has  turned  out  to  be  a  general  introduction  to  a 
theory  of  sanity,  the  first  ever  made,  as  far  as  I  know.  When  applied,  it 
genuinely  works;  but,  of  course,  we  have  to  apply  it  fully.  Mere  lip- 
service  will  not  do;  because  while  superficial  agreement  is  quite  easy, 
yet  physiologically,  on  a  deeper  level,  we  continue  to  follow  the  older 
harmful  s.r.  In  such  a  case  nothing  is  actually  changed ;  the  old  neuro- 
logically  harmful  animalistic  responses  persist.  For  this  the  author  and 

INTRODUCTION 

the  present  work  must  not  be  held  responsible;  the  fault  will  lie  in  the 
disregard  of  fundamental  conditions  by  the  reader  or  the  students. 

From  an  educational  point  of  view,  these  problems  are  particularly 
important.  If  teachers  disregard  the  structural  linguistic  semantic  issues, 
they  disregard  a  most  powerful  and  effective  educational  method.  If 
they  train  in  structurally  and  physiologically  harmful  A  habits,  after  this 
mechanism  has  been  disclosed,  such  teachers,  to  my  understanding,  do 
not  honestly  perform  their  very  serious  social  obligations.  Ignorance  is 
no  excuse  when  once  we  know  that  ignorance  is  the  only  possible  excuse. 

The  present  ^-system  is  far  from  perfect.  Such  a  work  as  this 
has,  of  necessity,  to  be  altered  with  the  years,  as  the  structure  of  the 
language  used  has  to  be  continually  adjusted  to  newly  discovered  empiri¬ 
cal  structural  data.  But  the  present  enquiry  at  least  shows  that  in  the 
researches  in  the  linguistic  and  structural  semantic  fields  there  are  un¬ 
dreamed-of  possibilities  of  tremendous  power,  and  the  circularity  of 
human  knowledge  is  made  to  work  with  an  increasing  acceleration  in  a 
constructive  way  toward  the  adulthood  of  man. 

In  Chapter  I,  I  have  given  a  tentative  list  of  some  results  following 
from  the  present  work.  Among  them  we  found  a  new  and  semantic 
definition  of  number  and  mathematics,  to  be  explained  in  Chapter  XVIII. 
This  has  very  far-reaching  consequences,  because  the  existing  definition 
of  number  is  A,  in  terms  of  classes,  and  makes  the  importance  of  mathe¬ 
matics  still  more  mysterious.  With  the  discovery  that  the  only  content 
of  knowledge  is  structural,  understood  as  a  complex  of  relations  and 
multiordinal  and  multi-dimensional  order,  and  that  the  structure  of  the 
nervous  system  is  such  that  only  in  mathematics  do  we  find  a  language 
of  similar  structure ,  the  importance  of  mathematics,  considered  as  a 
language,  becomes  of  fundamental  semantic  significance  for  a  theory 
of  sanity.  But  to  show  that,  and  to  be  able  to  apply  this  fact  in  practice, 
we  must  clarify  or  rather  eliminate  the  mystery  which  surrounds  num¬ 
ber  and  measurement.  The  semantic  definition  of  number  is  given  in 
terms  of  relations,  and  so  number  and  measurement  become  the  most 
potent  factors  for  supplying  us  with  information  about  structure,  which 
we  know  already  gives  the  only  content  of  knowledge. 

At  this  point,  I  feel  it  essential  to  refer  to  the  unique  and  astonish¬ 
ing  work  of  Oswald  Spengler,  The  Decline  of  the  West.  This  work  is 
a  product  of  such  unusual  scholarship  and  breadth  of  vision  that,  in 
many  instances,  the  details  do  not  matter.  Its  method,  its  scope,  and 
the  complete  novelty  of  its  general  point  of  view,  combined  with  such 
tremendous  erudition,  are  of  main  importance.  The  work  is  labeled  by 
the  author  as  a  ‘philosophy  of  history*,  or  a  morphology  of  history,  or 

1.  PRELIMINARIES 

morphology  of  cultures.  The  word  ‘morphology’  is  used  as  implying  the 
study  of  forms,  and  the  term  ‘form’  appears  very  frequently  through¬ 
out  the  book. 

The  main  contention  of  this  work — and  it  is  an  entirely  justified 
observation — is  that  the  behaviour  of  the  organisms  called  humans  is 
such  that,  at  different  periods,  they  have  produced  definite  aggregates  of 
achievements,  which  we  dissect  and  label  ‘science’,  ‘mathematics’,  archi¬ 
tecture’,  ‘sculpture’,  ‘music’. ,  and  that  at  any  given  period  all  these 
achievements  are  interconnected  by  a  psycho-logical  necessity.  To  this 
statement  I  would  add :  the  structure  of  languages  of  a  given  period 
which  affect  the  s.r  should  not  be  disregarded. 

Spengler  is  a  mathematician,  an  extremely  well  and  generally  in¬ 
formed  mathematician  at  that,  with  a  great  vision.  He  surveys  these 
aggregates  as  definite  units  and  shows  the  necessary  psycho-logical  con¬ 
nections  between  all  the  achievements  and  the  evolution  of  the  notion 
of  number.  It  does  not  matter  whether  all  his  connections  are  always 
beyond  criticism.  That  some  such  connections  do  exist,  seems  beyond 
doubt.  All  human  achievements  have  been  accomplished  in  some  definite 
period,  and  they  have  been  accomplished  at  a  definite  period  only  because 
of  the  necessary  psycho-logical  attitude  and  s.r  of  that  period. 

With  regard  to  the  method  followed  in  this  work  of  Spengler,  we 
must  notice,  first  of  all,  that  the  attitude  of  the  work  is  frankly  anthro¬ 
pological,  in  the  sense  of  General  Anthropology ;  namely,  as  the  natural 
history  of  man ,  not  disregarding  man’s  natural  behaviour,  such  as  build¬ 
ing  up  sciences,  mathematics,  arts  and  institutions,  and  creating  new 
environments,  which  again  influence  his  development.  Morphology 
means  ‘study  of  forms’,  which  carries  static  implications.  Taken  from 
the  dynamic  point  of  view  1933,  when  we  know  that  the  dynamic  unit, 
out  of  which  the  world  and  ourselves  appear  to  be  built,  is  found  in  the 
dynamic  atom  of  ‘action’ ;  his  ‘form’  becomes  four-dimensional  dynamic 
structure ,  the  equivalent  of  ‘function’ ;  and  then  the  whole  outlook  of 
Spengler  becomes  a  structural  enquiry  into  the  world  of  man,  including 
all  his  activities. 

This  ‘form’,  or  rudimentary  structural  point  of  view,  or  feeling,  or 
inclination,  or  tendency,  or  s.r — call  it  what  you  choose — Spengler,  the 
mathematician  and  historian,  acquires  from  the  deep  study  of  mathe¬ 
matics  considered  as  a  form  of  human  behaviour;  which,  in  turn,  is  a 
part  of  his  behaviour  when  he  was  planning  and  accomplishing  his  work, 
a  natural  expression  of  the  strivings  of  his  epoch,  which  is  also  our  own. 
In  my  own  work,  I  have  attempted  to  formulate  these  vague  strivings  of 
our  epoch  in  the  form  of  a  general  semantic  psychophysiological  theory. 

INTRODUCTION 

From  this  point  of  view,  his  achievement  is  momentous,  a  great 
description  of  the  childhood  of  humanity.  In  spite  of  the  title,  there  is 
nothing  pessimistic  about  it,  although  most  of  his  readers  understood  it 
in  that  way.  The  Decline  of  the  West'  implies  the  birth  of  a  new  era, 
perhaps  the  adulthood  of  humanity.  There  is  no  doubt  in  1933  that  the 
collapses  of  the  older  systems  which  we  witness  are  probably  irrevocable. 
Sir  Auckland  Geddes,  the  British  Ambassador  to  the  United  States 
of  America,  foresaw  them  when  he  said  in  1920:  ‘In  Europe,  we  know 
that  an  age  is  dying.  Here  it  would  be  easy  to  miss  the  signs  of  coming 
changes,  but  I  have  little  doubt  that  it  will  come.  A  realization  of  the 
aimlessness  of  life  lived  to  labour  and  to  die,  having  achieved  nothing 
but  avoidance  of  starvation,  and  the  birth  of  children  also  doomed  to  the 
weary  treadmill,  has  seized  the  minds  of  millions/ 

In  1932  Ambassador  Mellon,  of  the  United  States  of  America  to 
Great  Britain,  said: 

Tart  of  our  difficulty  arises  because  we  look  on  the  present  indus¬ 
trial  economic  crisis  as  merely  a  sporadic  illness  of  the  body  politic  due  to 
conditions  in  some  particular  country  or  section  of  the  world  which 
can  be  cured  by  applications  of  some  magic  formula.  Greater  difficulty 
arises  because  we  who  are  left  over  from  the  last  century  continue  to 
look  on  the  last  decade  as  merely  a  prolongation  of  all  that  is  gone 
before.  We  insist  upon  trying  to  make  life  flow  in  the  same  channels 
as  before  the  war,  whereas  in  the  years  since  the  war  ended  are,  in  real¬ 
ity,  the  beginning  of  a  new  era,  not  the  end  of  the  old/ 

To  this  statement  of  Ambassador  Mellon,  the  newspapers  comment 
as  follows: 

This  is  an  important  utterance,  since,  as  far  as  we  know,  it  is  the 
first  admission  from  the  ruling  forces  in  this  country  that  the  present 
panic  is  not  “just  another  panic”/ 

No  doubt,  a  period  of  human  development  has  ended.  The  only 
sensible  way  is  to  look  forward  to  a  full  understanding  of  the  next 
phase,  get  hold  of  this  understanding,  keep  it  under  conscious  and  scien¬ 
tific  control,  and  avoid  this  time,  perhaps  for  the  first  time  in  human 
history,  the  unnecessary  decay,  bewilderment,  apathy,  individual  and 
mass  suffering  in  a  human  life-period,  animalistically  believed,  up  to 
now,  to  be  unavoidable  in  the  passing  of  an  era.  Instead  of  being  swept 
down  by  animalistic  resistance  to  the  humanly  unavoidable  change,  we 
must  analyse,  understand,  and  so  keep  conscious  control  of  one  change 
to  another,  and,  as  yet,  always  higher  state  of  human  culture. 

This  is  no  place  to  analyse  these  issues  in  detail.  Volumes  have 
already  been  written  about  the  work  of  Spengler.  More  volumes  will 

T.  PRELIMINARIES 

be  necessary  to  analyse  the  issues  raised,  and  not  always  solved,  in  this 
present  volume. 

I  want  to  make  clear  only  that  words  are  not  the  things  spoken 
about,  and  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  an  object  in  absolute  isolation. 
These  assertions  are  negative  and  experimental  and  cannot  be  success¬ 
fully  denied  by  any  one,  except  by  producing  positive  evidence,  which  is 
impossible. 

We  must  realize  that  structure,  and  structure  alone ,  is  the  only  link 
between  languages  and  the  empirical  world.  Starting  with  undeniable 
negative  premises,  we  can  always  translate  them  into  positive  terms,  but 
such  translation  has  a  new  and  hitherto  unprecedented  security.  In  the 
era  which  is  passing,  positive  premises  were  supposed  to  be  important, 
and  we  did  not  know  that  a  whole  ^-system  can  be  built  on  negative 
premises.  The  new  era  will  have  to  revaluate  these  data,  and  build  its 
systems  on  negative  premises,  which  are  of  much  greater  security.  A 
priori,  we  cannot  know  if  such  systems  can  be  built  at  all,  for  in  this 
field  the  only  possible  ‘proof*  is  actual  performance  and  the  exhibition 
of  a  sample. 

This  has  been  attempted  in  my  work,  and  so  the  possibility  of  such 
systems  becomes  a  fact  on  record. 

In  the  new  era,  the  role  of  mathematics  considered  as  a  form  of 
human  behaviour  and  as  a  language  will  come  to  the  fore.  Means  can 
be  found,  as  exemplified  in  the  present  volume,  to  impart  mathematical 
structure  to  language  without  any  technicalities.  It  is  enough  to  under¬ 
stand  the  above-mentioned  negative  premises  and  the  role  of  structure, 
and  to  produce  systems  from  this  angle. 

The  role  of  mathematics  has  been  and,  in  general,  is  still  misunder¬ 
stood,  perhaps  because  of  the  very  unsatisfactory  definition  of  number. 
Even  Spengler  asserts  that  ‘If  mathematics  were  a  mere  science,  like 
astronomy  or  mineralogy,  it  would  be  possible  to  define  their  object. 
This,  man  is  not,  and  never  has  been,  able  to  do.’  The  facts  are  that 
mathematicians  have  been  prone  to  impress  us  with  some  religious  awe 
of  mathematics;  meanwhile,  by  definition,  whatever  has  symbols  and 
propositions  must  be  considered  a  language .  All  mystery  vanishes  in 
this  field,  and  the  only  question  is  as  to  what  kind  of  language  mathe¬ 
matics  represents.  From  the  structural  point  of  view,  the  answer  is 
simple  and  obvious.  Mathematics,  although  in  daily  life  it  appears  as  a 
most  insufficient  language,  seems  to  be  the  only  language  ever  produced 
by  man,  which,  in  structure,  is  similar,  or  the  most  similar  known,  to  the 
structure  of  the  world  and  of  our  nervous  system .  To  be  more  explicit, 

INTRODUCTION 

let  me  say  at  once  that  in  this  'similarity  of  structure’  we  find  the  only 
positive  ‘knowledge*  of  1933,  and,  perhaps,  of  any  date. 

So  far,  I  am  in  full  agreement  with  the  great  work  of  Spengler. 
More  than  that,  The  Decline  of  the  West  may  be  considered  as  a  pre¬ 
liminary  and  preparatory  survey  of  the  great  cultural  spasms  which  have 
rocked  mankind.  It  may  be  instructive,  in  the  meantime,  to  point  out 
some  differences,  and  the  eventual  difference  of  conclusions,  between  the 
present  work  and  the  work  of  Spengler. 

The  difference,  to  start  with,  is  in  language.  Spengler  announces  his 
work  as  'intuitive  and  depictive  through  and  through,  which  seeks  to 
present  objects  and  relations  illustratively  instead  of  offering  an  army 
of  ranked  concepts*. 

My  own  aim  is  not  merely  descriptive,  but  structural  and  analytical, 
and  so  I  must  use  a  different  language,  helping  to  discover  semantic 
psychophysiological  mechanisms  of  the  events  of  which  Spengler  is  giving 
us  a  very  exceptional  picture . 

Spengler  missed  two  points :  that  mathematics  must  be  considered  a 
language ;  and  that  the  connection  which  he  asserts  between  the  mathe¬ 
matics  of  each  period  and  other  achievements  is  more  general  than  he 
suspects  and  applies  to  the  inherent  structure  of  languages,  in  general, 
and  the  s.r  of  each  period,  in  particular. 

Although  his  analysis  is  in  effect  A,  yet  the  A  issues  are  not  formu¬ 
lated  clearly  or  consciously ;  nor  does  he  mention  that  the  present-day 
accepted  definition  of  number  in  terms  of  classes  is  still  A .  It  is  true 
that  he  considers  'forms*  and  the  use  of  number  as  relations,  but  he 
does  not  emphasize  that  number  has  not  been  formally  defined  as  a  rela¬ 
tion,  which  is  essential  in  a  ^-system.  His  'form*  is  still  static  and  not 
dynamic  structure ;  nor  did  he  discover  that  the  only  possible  content  of 
knowledge  is  structural,  a  fact  which  is  the  semantic  factor  responsible 
for  'cultures*,  and  'periods',  and  everything  else  in  human  development. 

This  present  work  is  in  great  sympathy  with  the  momentous  work 
of  Spengler ;  but,  as  it  culminates  in  a  ^-system,  it  goes  further  than  his, 
and  is  more  workable  and  more  practical,  confirming  the  general  con¬ 
tention  of  Spengler,  that  cultures  have  their  periods  of  growth  and 
development  and  that,  so  far,  without  conscious  human  intention,  they 
are  superseded  by  others. 

We  should  notice  once  more  in  this  respect  that  the  issues  we  deal 
with,  whenever  human  psycho-logical  reactions  are  involved,  are  circu¬ 
lar,  as  distinguished  from  animal  reactions.  Human  structures,  in 
language  or  in  stone,  reflect  the  psycho-logical  status,  feelings,  intuitions, 
structural  metaphysics,  and  other  s.rt  of  their  makers  and  periods ;  and, 

I.  PRELIMINARIES 

vice  versa,  once  these  structural  strivings  and  tendencies  are  formulated 
as  such,  they  help  to  quicken  and  transform  one  period  into  the  next  one. 

To  the  best  of  my  knowledge,  the  general  analysis  of  this  most  fun¬ 
damental  structural  semantic  problem  of  human  knowledge  is  here 
formulated  for  the  first  time.  It  will  allow,  as  a  result,  the  making  of 
human  progress  conscious ;  it  will  enable  us  to  control  it  and  so  to  make 
it  uninterrupted  by  the  painful  and  wasteful  semantic  periods  of  hope¬ 
lessness  and  helplessness  so  characteristic  of  the  older  periods  of 
transition. 

If  it  is  an  historical  fact  and  also  a  psycho-logical  fact  that  a  time¬ 
binding  class  of  life  has  to  have  periods  of  development,  let  us  have 
them !  Let  us  investigate  the  mechanism  of  time-binding,  of  j.r,  which 
are  the  dynamic  factors  of  those  changes  and  developments !  Let  us  direct 
that  development  consciously,  and  this  will  lead  to  the  elimination  of 
unnecessary  and  painful  panics,  unrest,  and  the  often  bloody  bursting 
of  those  animalistic  barriers  self-imposed  on  the  dynamic  class  of  life 
called  ‘man’. 

When  all  is  said  and  done,  one  cannot  but  see,  at  least  as  far  as 
the  white  race  is  concerned,  that  a  change  from  an  A  to  a  ^-system 
must  be  momentous.  Such  a  change  will  mark  the  difference  between  a 
period  when  the  mystery  of  ‘human  knowledge’  was  not  solved  and  a 
period  when  it  has  been  solved.  This  inherent  human  circular  character¬ 
istic  has,  so  far,  been  neurologically  abused.  We  have  not  known  how 
to  handle  our  nervous  structure.  We  have  imposed  upon  and  hampered 
human  development  by  animalistic  methods.  The  solving  of  the  prob¬ 
lems  of  the  content  of  ‘human  knowledge’  will  open  a  new  era  of  man 
as  a  man ,  leading  toward  proper  handling  of  his  capacities,  and  an  era 
scientific  in  all  respects,  not  merely  in  a  few  exact  sciences.  Psycho¬ 
logically,  it  will  be  an  era  of  sanity,  and,  therefore,  of  human  general 
adjustment,  agreement,  and  co-operation.  The  dreams  of  Leibnitz  will 
become  sober  reality. 

The  only  determined  attempt  made,  so  far,  to  deal  with  the  sym¬ 
bolic  problems  whose  importance  is  emphasized  in  the  present  work  is 
that  of  the  Orthological  Institute  ( 10  King’s  Parade,  Cambridge,  Eng¬ 
land).  This  research  organization,  founded  by  C.  K.  Ogden,  editor  of 
‘The  International  Library  of  Psychology’,  is  concerned  with  the  influ¬ 
ence  of  language  on  ‘thought’  in  all  its  bearings ;  and  it  is  to  be  hoped 
that  further  endowment  may  be  forthcoming  to  enable  the  scope  of  its 
enquiries  to  be  extended  to  include  structure ,  non-elementalistic  semantic 
reactions ,  and  non-aristotelian  systems.  Reference  to  International  Lan¬ 
guages  or  a  Universal  Language  will  be  found  in  the  notes.1 

PART  II 

GENERAL  ON  STRUCTURE 

The  relativity  theory  of  physics  reduces  everything  to  relations;  that  is 
to  say,  it  is  structure,  not  material,  which  counts.  The  structure  cannot 
be  built  up  without  material;  but  the  nature  of  the  material  is  of  no  im¬ 
portance.  (147)  A.  S.  EDDINGTON 

Structure  and  function  are  mutually  related.  Function  produces  struc¬ 
ture  and  structure  modifies  and  determines  the  character  of  function.  <90> 

CHARLES  M.  CHILD 

These  difficulties  suggest  to  my  mind  some  such  possibility  as  this:  that 
every  language  has,  as  Mr.  Wittgenstein  says,  a  structure  concerning  which, 
in  the  language ,  nothing  can  be  said,  but  that  there  may  be  another  language 
dealing  with  the  structure  of  the  first  language,  and  having  itself  a  new 
structure,  and  that  to  this  hierarchy  of  languages  there  may  be  no  limit. 
Mr.  Wittgenstein  would  of  course  reply  that  his  whole  theory  is  applicable 
unchanged  to  the  totality  of  such  languages.  1  he  only  retort  would  be  to 
deny  that  there  is  any  such  totality.  (456)  bertrand  russell 

CHAPTER  IV 

ON  STRUCTURE 

No  satisfactory  justification  has  ever  been  given  for  connecting  in  any 
way  the  consequences  of  mathematical  reasoning  with  the  physical  world, 

(22)  E.  T.  BELL 

Any  student  of  science,  or  of  the  history  of  science,  can  hardly 
miss  two  very  important  tendencies  which  pervade  the  work  of  those 
who  have  accomplished  most  in  this  field.  The  first  tendency  is  to  base 
science  more  and  more  on  experiments ;  the  other  is  toward  greater  and 
more  critical  verbal  rigour.  The  one  tendency  is  to  devise  more  and  bet¬ 
ter  instruments,  and  train  the  experimenters;  the  other  is  to  invent 
better  verbal  forms,  better  forms  of  representation  and  of  theories,  so 
as  to  present  a  more  coherent  account  of  the  experimental  facts. 

The  second  tendency  has  an  importance  equal  to  that  of  the  first ; 
a  number  of  isolated  facts  does  not  produce  a  science  any  more  than  a 
heap  of  bricks  produces  a  house.  The  isolated  facts  must  be  put  in 
order  and  brought  into  mutual  structural  relations  in  the  form  of  some 
theory.  Then,  only,  do  we  have  a  science,  something  to  start  from,  to 
analyse,  ponder  on,  criticize,  and  improve.  Before  this  something  can 
be  criticized  and  improved ,  it  must  first  be  produced,  so  the  investigator 
who  discovers  some  fact,  or  who  formulates  some  scientific  theory,  does 
not  often  waste  his  time.  Even  his  errors  may  be  useful,  because  they 
may  stimulate  other  scientists  to  investigate  and  improve. 

Scientists  found  long  ago  that  the  common  language  in  daily  use 
is  of  little  value  in  science.  This  language  gives  us  a  form  of  representa¬ 
tion  of  very  old  structure  in  which  we  find  it  impossible  to  give  a  full, 
coherent  account  of  ourselves  or  of  the  world  around  us.  Each  science 
has  to  build  a  special  terminology  adapted  to  its  own  special  purposes. 
This  problem  of  a  suitable  language  is  of  serious  importance.  Too  little 
do  we  realize  what  a  hindrance  a  language  of  antiquated  structure  is. 
Such  a  language  does  not  help,  but  actually  prevents,  correct  analysis 
through  the  semantic  habits  and  structural  implications  embodied  in  it. 
The  last  may  be  of  great  antiquity  and  bound  up,  by  necessity,  with 
primitive-made  structural  implications,  or,  as  we  say,  metaphysics, 
involving  primitive  s.r. 

The  above  explains  why  the  popularization  of  science  is  such  a 
difficult  and,  perhaps,  even  a  semantically  dangerous  problem.  We  at¬ 
tempt  to  translate  a  creative  and  correct  language  which  has  a  structure 

IL  GENERAL  ON  STRUCTURE 

similar  to  the  structure  of  the  experimental  facts  into  a  language  of 
different  structure,  entirely  foreign  to  the  world  around  us  and  our¬ 
selves.  Although  the  popularization  of  science  will  probably  remain  an 
impossible  task,  it  remains  desirable  that  the  results  of  science  should 
be  made  accessible  to  the  layman,  if  means  could  be  found  which  do  not, 
by  necessity,  involve  misleading  accounts.  It  seems  that  such  methods 
are  at  hand  and  these  involve  structural  and  semantic  considerations. 

The  term  ‘structure*  is  frequently  used  in  modern  scientific  litera¬ 
ture,  but,  to  the  best  of  my  knowledge,  only  Bertrand  Russell  and  Witt¬ 
genstein  have  devoted  serious  attention  to  this  problem,  and  much 
remains  to  be  done.  These  two  authors  have  analysed  or  spoken  about 
the  structure  of  propositions,  but  similar  notions  can  be  generalized  to 
languages  considered  as-a-whole.  To  be  able  to  consider  the  structure 
of  one  language  of  a  definite  structure,  we  must  produce  another  lan¬ 
guage  of  a  different  structure  in  which  the  structure  of  the  first  can  be 
analysed.  This  procedure  seems  to  be  new  when  actually  performed, 
although  it  has  been  foreseen  by  Russell.1  If  we  produce  a  ^-system 
based  on  ‘relations*,  ‘order*,  ‘structure*. ,  we  shall  be  able  to  discuss  profit¬ 
ably  the  ^-system,  which  does  not  allow  asymmetrical  relations,  and  so 
cannot  be  analysed  by  A  means. 

The  dictionary  meaning  of  ‘structure*  is  given  somewhat  as  follows : 
Structure:  Manner  in  which  a  building  or  organism  or  other  complete 
whole  is  constructed,  supporting  framework  or  whole  of  the  essential 
parts  of  something  (the  structure  of  a  house,  machine,  animal,  organ, 
poem,  sentence ;  sentence  of  loose  structure,  its  structure  is  ingenious ; 
ornament  should  emphasize  and  not  disguise  the  lines  of  structure) , . 
The  implications  of  the  term  ‘structure*  are  clear,  even  from  its  daily 
sense.  To  have  ‘structure*  we  must  have  a  complex  of  ordered  and 
interrelated  parts. 

‘Structure*  is  analysed  in  Principia  Mathematica  and  is  also  simply 
explained  in  Russell’s  more  popular  works.2  The  Tractatus  of  Wittgen¬ 
stein  is  built  on  structural  considerations,  although  not  much  is  explained 
about  structure,  for  the  author  apparently  assumes  the  reader’s  acquaint¬ 
ance  with  the  works  of  Russell.3 

One  of  the  fundamental  functions  of  ‘mental*  processes  is  to  dis¬ 
tinguish.  We  distinguish  objects  by  certain  characteristics,  which  are 
usually  expressed  by  adjectives.  If,  by  a  higher  order  abstraction,  we 
consider  individual  objects,  not  in  some  perfectly  fictitious  ‘isolation’, 
but  as  they  appear  empirically,  as  members  of  some  aggregate  or  col¬ 
lection  of  objects,  we  find  characteristics  which  belong  to  the  collection 

ON  STRUCTURE 

and  not  to  an  "isolated1  object.  Such  characteristics  as  arise  from  the 
fact  that  the  object  belongs  to  a  collection  are  called  ‘relations'. 

In  such  collections,  we  have  the  possibility  of  ordering  the  objects, 
and  so,  for  instance,  we  may  discover  a  relation  that  one  object  is  ‘be¬ 
fore'  or  ‘after'  the  other,  or  that  A  is  the  father  of  B.  There  are  many 
ways  in  which  we  can  order  a  collection,  and  many  relations  which  we 
can  find.  It  is  important  to  notice  that  ‘order'  and  ‘relations’  are,  for 
the  most  part,  empirically  present  and  that,  therefore,  this  language 
is  fit  to  represent  the  facts  as  we  know  them.  The  structure  of  the  actual 
world  is  such  that  it  is  impossible  entirely  to  isolate  an  object.  An  A 
subject-predicate  language,  with  its  tendency  to  treat  objects  as  in  isola¬ 
tion  and  to  have  no  place  for  relations  (impossible  in  complete  ‘isola¬ 
tion'),  obviously  has  a  structure  not  similar  to  the  structure  of  the 
world,  in  which  we  deal  only  with  collections,  of  which  the  members 
are  related. 

Obviously,  under  such  empirical  conditions,  only  a  language  origi¬ 
nating  in  the  analysis  of  collections,  and,  therefore,  a  language  of  ‘rela¬ 
tions’,  ‘order’. ,  would  have  a  similar  structure  to  the  world  around  us. 
From  the  use  of  a  subject-predicate  form  of  language  alone,  many  of 
our  fallacious  anti-social  and  ‘individualistic’  metaphysics  and  sr  follow, 
which  we  will  not  analyse  here,  except  to  mention  that  their  structural 
implications  follow  the  structure  of  the  language  they  use. 

If  we  carry  the  analysis  a  step  further,  we  can  find  relations 
between  relations,  as,  for  instance,  the  similarity  of  relations.  We  fol¬ 
low  the  definition  of  Russell.  Two  relations  are  said  to  be  similar  if 
there  is  a  one-one  correspondence  between  the  terms  of  their  fields, 
which  is  such  that,  whenever  two  terms  have  the  relation  P,  their  cor¬ 
relates  have  the  relation  Q,  and  vice  versa.  For  example,  two  series  are 
similar  when  their  terms  can  be  correlated  without  change  of  order,  an 
accurate  map  is  similar  to  the  territory  it  represents,  a  book  spelt  pho¬ 
netically  is  similar  to  the  sounds  when  read ,  * 

When  two  relations  are  similar,  we  say  that  they  have  a  similar 
structure ,  which  is  defined  as  the  class  of  all  relations  similar  to  the 
given  relation. 

We  see  that  the  terms  ‘collection’,  ‘aggregate’,  ‘class’,  ‘order’,  ‘rela¬ 
