tions',  ‘structure’  are  interconnected,  each  implying  the  others.  If  we 
decide  to  face  empirical  ‘reality’  boldly,  we  must  accept  the  Einstein- 
Minkowski  four-dimensional  language,  for  ‘space’  and  ‘time’  cannot  be 
separated  empirically ,  and  so  we  must  have  a  language  of  similar  struc¬ 
ture  and  consider  the  facts  of  the  world  as  series  of  interrelated  ordered 
events ,  to  which,  as  above  explained,  we  must  ascribe  ‘structure’.  Ein- 

II.  GENERAL  ON  STRUCTURE 

5K 

stein’s  theory,  in  contrast  to  Newton’s  theory,  gives  us  such  a  language , 
similar  in  structure  to  the  empirical  facts  as  revealed  by  science  1933 
and  common  experience . 

The  above  definitions  are  not  entirely  satisfactory  for  our  purpose. 
To  begin  with,  let  us  give  an  illustration,  and  indicate  in  what  direction 
some  reformulation  could  be  made. 

Let  us  take  some  actual  territory  in  which  cities  appear  in  the  fol¬ 
lowing  order:  Paris,  Dresden,  Warsaw,  when  taken  from  the  West  to 
the  East.  If  we  were  to  build  a  map  of  this  territory  and  place  Paris 
between  Dresden  and  Warsaw  thus : 

Actual  territory  * - * - - * 

Paris  Dresden  Warsaw 

Map  * — — - - * - * 

Dresden  Paris  Warsaw 

we  should  say  that  the  map  was  wrong,  or  that  it  was  an  incorrect  map, 
or  that  the  map  has  a  different  structure  from  the  territory.  If,  speak¬ 
ing  roughly,  we  should  try,  in  our  travels,  to  orient  ourselves  by  such  a 
map,  we  should  find  it  misleading.  It  would  lead  us  astray,  and  we 
might  waste  a  great  deal  of  unnecessary  effort.  In  some  cases,  even,  a 
map  of  wrong  structure  would  bring  actual  suffering  and  disaster,  as, 
for  instance,  in  a  war,  or  in  the  case  of  an  urgent  call  for  a  physician. 

Two  important  characteristics  of  maps  should  be  noticed.  A  map 
is  not  the  territory  it  represents,  but,  if  correct,  it  has  a  similar  structure 
to  the  territory,  which  accounts  for  its  usefulness.  If  the  map  could  be 
ideally  correct,  it  would  include,  in  a  reduced  scale,  the  map  of  the  map ; 
the  map  of  the  map,  of  the  map;  and  so  on,  endlessly,  a  fact  first  noticed 
by  Royce. 

If  we  reflect  upon  our  languages,  we  find  that  at  best  they  must 
be  considered  only  as  maps .  A  word  is  not  the  object  it  represents  ;  and 
languages  exhibit  also  this  peculiar  self-reflexiveness,  that  we  can 
analyse  languages  by  linguistic  means.  This  self-reflexiveness  of  lan¬ 
guages  introduces  serious  complexities,  which  can  only  be  solved  by  the 
theory  of  multiordinality,  given  in  Part  VII.  The  disregard  of  these 
complexities  is  tragically  disastrous  in  daily  life  and  science. 

It  has  been  mentioned  already  that  the  known  definitions  of  struc¬ 
ture  are  not  entirely  satisfactory.  The  terms  ‘relation’,  ‘order’,  ‘struc¬ 
ture’  are  interconnected  by  implication.  At  present,  we  usually  consider 
order  as  a  kind  of  relation.  With  the  new  four-dimensional  notions 
taken  from  mathematics  and  physics,  it  may  be  possible  to  treat  relations 
and  structure  as  a  form  of  multi-dimensional  order .  Perhaps,  theoreti¬ 
cally,  such  a  change  is  not  so  important,  but,  from  a  practical,  applied, 

ON  STRUCT UR K 

educational,  and  semantic  point  of  view,  it  seems  very  vital.  Order  seems 
neurologically  simpler  and  more  fundamental  than  relation.  It  is  a  char¬ 
acteristic  of  the  empirical  world  which  we  recognize  directly  by  our 
lower  nervous  centres  (‘senses’),  and  with  which  we  can  deal  with  great 
accuracy  by  our  higher  nervous  centres  (‘thinking’).  This  term  seems 
most  distinctly  of  the  organism-as-a-whole  character,  applicable  both  to 
the  activities  of  the  higher,  as  well  as  lower,  nervous  centres,  and  so 
structurally  it  must  be  fundamental. 

The  rest  of  this  volume  is  devoted  to  showing  that  the  common, 
A -system  and  language  which  we  inherited  from  our  primitive  ancestors 
differ  entirely  in  structure  from  the  well-known  and  established  1933 
structure  of  the  world,  ourselves  and  our  nervous  systems  included. 
Such  antiquated  map-language,  by  necessity,  must  lead  us  to  semantic 
disasters,  as  it  imposes  and  reflects  its  unnatural  structure  on  the  struc¬ 
ture  of  our  doctrines  and  institutions.  Obviously,  under  such  linguistic 
conditions,  a  science  of  man  was  impossible ;  differing  in  structure  from 
our  nervous  system,  such  language  must  also  disorganize  the  function¬ 
ing  of  the  latter  and  lead  us  away  from  sanity. 

This  once  understood,  we  shall  see  clearly  that  researches  into  the 
structure  of  language  and  the  adjustment  of  this  structure  to  the  struc¬ 
ture  of  the  world  and  ourselves,  as  given  by  science  at  each  date,  must 
lead  to  new  languages,  new  doctrines,  institutions.,  and,  in  fine,  may 
result  in  a  new  and  saner  civilization,  involving  new  s.r  which  may  be 
called  the  scientific  era. 

The  introduction  of  a  few  new,  and  the  rejection  of  some  old, 
terms  suggests  desirable  structural  changes,  and  adjusts  the  structure  of 
the  language-map  to  the  known  structure  of  the  world,  ourselves,  and 
the  nervous  system,  and  so  leads  us  to  new  s.r  and  a  theory  of  sanity. 

As  words  are  not  the  objects  which  they  represent,  structure,  and 
structure  alone,  becomes  the  only  link  which  connects  our  verbal  processes 
with  the  empirical  data.  To  achieve  adjustment  and  sanity  and  the  con¬ 
ditions  which  follow  from  them,  we  must  study  structural  characteristics 
of  this  world  iirst,  and,  then  only,  build  languages  of  similar  structure, 
instead  of  habitually  ascribing  to  the  world  the  primitive  structure  of 
our  language.  All  our  doctrines,  institutions . ,  depend  on  verbal  argu¬ 
ments.  If  these  arguments  are  conducted  in  a  language  of  wrong  and 
unnatural  structure,  our  doctrines  and  institutions  must  reflect  that  lin¬ 
guistic  structure  and  so  become  unnatural,  and  inevitably  lead  to 
disasters. 

That  languages,  as  such,  all  have  some  structure  or  other  is  a  new 
and,  perhaps,  unexpected  notion.  Moreover,  every  language  having  a 

II.  GENERAL  ON  STRUCTURE 

structure,  by  the  very  nature  of  language,  reflects  in  its  own  structure 
that  of  the  world  as  assumed  by  those  who  evolved  the  language.  In 
other  words,  we  read  unconsciously  into  the  world  the  structure  of  the 
language  we  use.  The  guessing  and  ascribing  of  a  fanciful,  mostly 
primitive-assumed,  structure  to  the  world  is  precisely  what  ‘philosophy’ 
and  ‘metaphysics’  do.  The  empirical  search  for  world-structure  and  the 
building  of  new  languages  (theories),  of  necessary,  or  similar,  structure, 
is,  on  the  contrary,  what  science  does.  Any  one  who  will  reflect  upon 
these  structural  peculiarities  of  language  cannot  miss  the  semantic  point 
that  the  scientific  method  uses  the  only  correct  language-method.  It 
develops  in  the  natural  order,  while  metaphysics  of  every  description 
uses  the  reversed,  and  ultimately  a  pathological,  order. 

Since  Einstein  and  the  newer  quantum  mechanics,  it  has  become 
increasingly  evident  that  the  only  content  of  ‘knowing’  is  of  a  structural 
character ;  and  the  present  theory  attempts  a  formulation  of  this  fact  in 
a  generalized  way.  If  we  build  a  ^-system  by  the  aid  of  new  terms  and 
of  methods  excluded  by  the  ^-system,  and  stop  some  of  our  primitive 
habits  of  ‘thought’  and  s.rt  as,  for  instance,  the  confusion  of  order  of 
abstractions,  reverse  the  reversed  order,  and  so  introduce  the  natural 
order  in  our  analysis,  we  shall  then  find  that  all  human  ‘knowing’  ex¬ 
hibits  a  structure  similar  to  scientific  knowledge,  and  appears  as  the 
' knowing *  of  structure.  But,  in  order  to  arrive  at  these  results,  we  must 
depart  completely  from  the  older  systems,  and  must  abandon  permanently 
the  use  of  the  ‘is’  of  identity. 

It  would  seem  that  the  overwhelming  importance  for  mankind  of 
systems  based  on  ‘relations’,  ‘order’,  ‘structure’.,  depends  on  the  fact 
that  such  terms  allow  of  an  exact  and  ‘logical’  treatment,  as  two  rela¬ 
tions  of  similar  structure  have  all  their  logical  characteristics  in  com¬ 
mon.  It  becomes  obvious  that,  as  in  the  /I -system  we  could  not  deal  in 
such  terms,  higher  rationality  and  adjustment  were  impossible.  It  is  not 
the  human  ‘mind’  and  its  ‘finiteness’  which  is  to  be  blamed,  but  a  primi¬ 
tive  language,  with  a  structure  foreign  to  this  world,  which  has  wrought 
havoc  with  our  doctrines  and  institutions. 

The  use  of  the  term  ‘structure’  does  not  represent  special  difficulties 
when  once  we  understand  its  origin  and  its  meanings.  The  main  dif¬ 
ficulty  is  found  in  the  old  A  habits  of  speech,  which  do  not  allow  the 
use  of  structure,  as,  indeed,  this  notion  has  no  place  in  a  complete  A 
sub j  ect-predicati  vism . 

Let  us  repeat  once  more  the  two  crucial  negative  premises  as  estab¬ 
lished  firmly  by  all  human  experience:  (1)  Words  are  not  the  things 

ON  STRUCTURE 

we  are  speaking  about;  and  (2)  There  is  no  such  thing  as  an  object  in 
absolute  isolation. 

These  two  most  important  negative  statements  cannot  be  denied 
if  any  one  chooses  to  deny  them,  the  burden  of  the  proof  falls  on  him. 
He  has  to  establish  what  he  affirms,  which  is  obviously  impossible.  We 
see  that  it  is  safe  to  start  with  such  solid  negative  premises,  translate 
them  into  positive  language,  and  build  a  ^-system. 

If  words  are  not  things,  or  maps  are  not  the  actual  territory,  then, 
obviously,  the  only  possible  link  between  the  objective  world  and  the 
linguistic  world  is  found  in  structure,  and  structure  alone .  The  only  use¬ 
fulness  of  a  map  or  a  language  depends  on  the  similarity  of  structure 
between  the  empirical  world  and  the  map-languages.  If  the  structure  is 
not  similar,  then  the  traveller  or  speaker  is  led  astray,  which,  in  serious 
human  life-problems,  must  become  always  eminently  harmful , .  If  the 
structures  are  similar,  then  the  empirical  world  becomes  ‘rational’  to  a 
potentially  rational  being,  which  means  no  more  than  that  verbal,  or 
map-predicted  characteristics,  which  follow  up  the  linguistic  or  map- 
structure,  are  applicable  to  the  empirical  world. 

In  fact,  in  structure  we  find  the  mystery  of  rationality,  adjust¬ 
ment.,  and  we  find  that  the  whole  content  of  knowledge  is  exclusively 
structural.  If  we  want  to  be  rational  and  to  understand  anything  at  all, 
we  must  look  for  structure,  relations,  and,  ultimately,  multi-dimensional 
order,  all  of  which  was  impossible  in  a  broader  sense  in  the  ^-system, 
as  will  be  explained  later  on. 

Having  come  to  such  important  positive  results,  starting  with  unde¬ 
niable  negative  premises,  it  is  interesting  to  investigate  whether  these 
results  are  always  possible,  or  if  there  are  limitations.  The  second  nega¬ 
tive  premise ;  namely,  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  an  object  in  absolute 
isolation,  gives  us  the  answer.  If  there  is  no  such  thing  as  an  absolutely 
isolated  object,  then,  at  least,  we  have  two  objects,  and  we  shall  always 
discover  some  relation  between  them,  depending  on  our  interest,  ingenu¬ 
ity,  and  what  not.  Obviously,  for  a  man  to  speak  about  anything  at  all, 
always  presupposes  two  objects  at  least ;  namely,  the  object  spoken  about 
and  the  speaker,  and  so  a  relation  between  the  two  is  always  present. 
Even  in  delusions,  illusions,  and  hallucinations,  the  situation  is  not 
changed ;  because  our  immediate  feelings  are  also  un-speakable  and  not 
words. 

The  semantic  importance  of  the  above  should  not  be  minimized.  If 
we  deal  with  organisms  which  possess  an  inherent  activity,  such  as  eat¬ 
ing,  breathing . ,  and  if  we  should  attempt  to  build  for  them  conditions 

II.  GENERAL  ON  STRUCTURE 

where  such  activity  would  be  impossible  or  hampered,  these  imposed  con¬ 
ditions  would  lead  to  degeneration  or  death. 

Similarly  with  ‘rationality’.  Once  we  find  in  this  world  at  least 
potentially  rational  organisms,  we  should  not  impose  on  them  conditions 
which  hamper  or  prevent  the  exercise  of  such  an  important  and  inherent 
function.  The  present  analysis  shows  that,  under  the  all-pervading  aristo- 
telianism  in  daily  life,  asymmetrical  relations,  and  thus  structure  and 
order,  have  been  impossible,  and  so  we  have  been  linguistically  prevented 
from  supplying  the  potentially  ‘rational’  being  with  the  means  for  ration¬ 
ality.  This  resulted  in  a  semi-human  so-called  ‘civilization’,  based  on  our 
copying  animals  in  our  nervous  process,  which,  by  necessity,  involves 
us  in  arrested  development  or  regression,  and,  in  general,  disturbances 
of  some  sort. 

Under  such  conditions,  which,  after  all,  may  be  considered  as  firmly 
established,  because  this  investigation  is  based  on  undeniable  negative 
premises,  there  is  no  way  out  but  to  carry  the  analysis  through,  and  to 
build  up  a  ^ -system  based  on  negative  fundamental  premises  or  the 
denial  of  the  ‘is’  of  identity  with  which  rationality  will  be  possible. 

Perhaps  an  illustration  will  make  it  clearer,  the  more  that  the  old 
subject-predicate  language  rather  conceals  structure.  If  we  take  a  state¬ 
ment,  ‘This  blade  of  grass  is  green’,  and  analyse  it  only  as  a  statement, 
superficially,  we  can  hardly  see  how  any  structure  could  be  implied  by 
it.  This  statement  may  be  analysed  into  substantives,  adjectives,  verb.; 
yet  this  would  not  say  much  about  its  structure.  But  if  we  notice  that 
these  words  can  also  make  a  question,  ‘Is  this  blade  of  grass  green  ?’,  we 
begin  to  realize  that  the  order  of  the  words  plays  an  important  role  in 
some  languages  connected  with  the  meanings,  and  so  we  can  immediately 
speak  of  the  structure  of  the  sentence.  Further  analysis  would  disclose 
that  the  sentence  under  consideration  has  the  subject-predicate  form  or 
structure. 

If  we  went  to  the  objective,  silent,  un-speakable  level,  and  analysed 
this  objective  blade  of  grass,  we  should  discover  various  structural  char¬ 
acteristics  in  the  blade ;  but  these  are  not  involved  in  the  statement  under 
consideration,  and  it  would  be  illegitimate  to  speak  about  them.  How¬ 
ever,  we  can  carry  our  analysis  in  another  direction.  If  we  carry  it  far 
enough,  we  shall  discover  a  very  intricate,  yet  definite,  relation  or  com¬ 
plex  of  relations  between  the  objective  blade  of  grass  and  the  observer. 
Rays  of  light  impinge  upon  the  blade,  are  reflected  from  it,  fall  on  the 
retina  of  our  eye,  and  produce  within  our  skins  the  feeling  of  ‘green’. ,  an 
extremely  complex  process  which  has  some  definite  structure. 

ON  STRUCTURE 

We  see,  thus,  that  any  statement  referring  to  anything  objective  in 
this  world  can  always  be  analysed  into  terms  of  relations  and  structure, 
and  that  it  involves  also  definite  structural  assumptions.  More  than  that, 
as  the  only  possible  content  of  knowledge  and  science  is  structural, 
whether  we  like  it  or  not,  to  know  anything  we  must  search  for  struc¬ 
ture,  or  posit  some  structure.  Every  statement  can  also  be  analysed  until 
we  come  to  definite  structural  issues.  This  applies,  however,  with  cer¬ 
tainty  only  to  significant  statements,  and,  perhaps,  not  to  the  various 
noises  which  we  can  make  with  our  mouth  with  the  semblance  of  words, 
but  which  are  meaningless,  as  they  are  not  symbols  for  anything.  It 
must  be  added  that  in  the  older  systems  we  did  not  discriminate  between 
words  (symbols)  and  noises  (not  symbols).  In  a  ^-system  such  a  dis¬ 
crimination  is  essential. 

The  structure  of  the  world  is,  in  principle,  unknown;  and  the  only 
aim  of  knowledge  and  science  is  to  discover  this  structure.  The  struc¬ 
ture  of  languages  is  potentially  known,  if  we  pay  attention  to  it.  Our 
only  possible  procedure  in  advancing  our  knowledge  is  to  match  our 
verbal  structures,  often  called  theories,  with  empirical  structures,  and  see 
if  our  verbal  predictions  are  fulfilled  empirically  or  not,  thus  indicating 
that  the  two  structures  are  either  similar  or  dissimilar. 

We  see,  thus,  that  in  the .  investigation  of  structure  we  find  not 
only  means  for  rationality  and  for  adjustment,  and  so  sanity,  but  also 
a  most  important  tool  for  exploring  this  world  and  scientific  advance. 

From  the  educational  point  of  view,  also,  the  results  of  such  an 
investigation  seem  to  be  unusually  important,  because  they  are  extremely 
simple,  automatic  in  their  working,  and  can  be  applied  universally  in 
elementary  education.  As  the  issue  is  merely  one  of  linguistic  structure, 
it  is  enough  to  train  children  to  abandon  the  ‘is*  of  identity,  in  the 
habitual  use  of  a  few  new  terms,  and  to  warn  them  repeatedly  against 
the  use  of  some  terms  of  antiquated  structure.  We  shall  thus  eliminate 
the  pre-human  and  primitive  semantic  factors  included  in  the  structure 
of  a  primitive  language.  The  moralizing  and  combating  of  primitive- 
made  metaphysics  is  not  effectual;  but  the  habitual  use  of  a  language 
of  modern  structure,  free  from  identity,  produces  semantic  results 
where  the  old  failed.  Let  us  repeat  again,  a  most  important  point,  that 
the  new  desirable  semantic  results  follow  as  automatically  as  the  old 
undesirable  ones  followed. 

It  should  be  noticed  that  terms  such  as  'collection*,  'fact*,  ‘reality*, 
'function*,  ‘relation*,  ‘order*,  ‘structure*,  ‘characteristics*,  ‘problem*. , 
must  be  considered  as  multiordinal  terms  (see  Part  VII),  and  so,  in  gen¬ 
eral  oo-valued  and  ambiguous.  They  become  specific  and  one-valued 

II.  GENERAL  ON  STRUCTURE 

only  in  a  given  context,  or  when  the  orders  of  abstractions  are  dis¬ 
tinguished. 

In  the  following  enquiry  an  attempt  to  build  a  science  of  man,  or  a 
non-aristotelian  system,  or  a  theory  of  sanity,  is  made,  and  it  will  be 
necessary  to  introduce  a  few  terms  of  new  structure  and  to  abide  by 
them. 

Let  me  be  entirely  frank  about  it :  the  main  issues  are  found  in  the 
structure  of  language,  and  readers  who  are  interested  in  this  work  will 
facilitate  their  task  if  they  make  themselves  familiar  with  these  new 
terms  and  use  them  habitually.  This  work  will  then  appear  simple,  and 
often  self-evident.  For  those  other  readers  who  insist  on  translating 
the  new  terms  with  new  structural  implications  into  their  old  habitual 
language,  and  choose  to  retain  the  old  terms  with  old  structural  impli¬ 
cations  and  old  s.r. ,  this  work  will  not  appear  simple. 

Examples  illustrating  what  has  just  been  said  abound;  here  I  shall 
mention  only  that  the  E  geometries,  the  new  revision  of  mathematics 
originated  by  Brouwer  and  Weyl,  the  Einstein  theory,  and  the  newer 
quantum  mechanics.,  have  similar  main  aims;  namely,  to  produce 
non-el  statements  which  are  structurally  closer  to  the  empirical  facts 
than  the  older  theories,  and  to  reject  those  unwarranted  structural  as¬ 
sumptions  which  vitiated  the  old  theories.  The  reader  should  not  be 
surprised  to  learn  that  these  new  theories  are  not  a  passing  whim  of 
scientists,  but  represent  lasting  advances  in  method .  Whether  these 
attempts  at  restatements  are  finally  found  to  be  Valid  or  not,  they  remain 
steps  in  the  right  direction. 

It  is  quite  natural  that  with  the  advance  of  experimental  science 
some  generalizations  should  appear  to  be  established  from  the  facts  at 
hand.  Occasionally,  such  generalizations,  when  further  analysed,  are 
found  to  contain  serious  structural,  epistemological  and  methodological 
implications  and  difficulties.  In  the  present  work  one  of  these  empirical 
generalizations  becomes  of  unusual  importance,  so  important,  indeed, 
that  Part  III  of  this  work  is  devoted  to  it.  Here,  however,  it  is  only 
possible  to  mention  it,  and  to  show  some  rather  unexpected  consequences 
which  it  entails. 

That  generalization  states :  that  any  organism  must  be  treated  as-a- 
whole;  in  other  words,  that  the  organism  is  not  an  algebraic  sum,  a 
linear  function  of  its  elements,  but  always  more  than  that.  It  is  seem¬ 
ingly  little  realized,  at  present,  that  this  simple  and  innocent-looking 
statement  involves  a  full  structural  revision  of  our  language,  because 
that  language,  of  great  pre-scientific  antiquity,  is  elementalistic,  and  so 
singularly  inadequate  to  express  non-elementalistic  notions.  Such  a  point 

ON  STRUCTURE 

of  view  involves  profound  structural,  methodological,  and  semantic 
changes,  vaguely  anticipated,  but  never  formulated  in  a  definite  theory. 
The  problems  of  structure,  ‘more',  and  ‘non-additivity'  are  very  important 
and  impossible  to  analyse  in  the  old  way. 

If  this  generalization  be  accepted — and  on  experimental,  structural, 
and  epistemological  grounds  we  cannot  deny  its  complete  structural  justi¬ 
fication — some  odd  consequences  follow ;  that  is  to  say,  odd,  as  long  as 
we  are  not  accustomed  to  them.  For  instance,  we  see  that  ‘emotion'  and 
‘intellect'  cannot  be  divided,  that  this  division  structurally  violates  the 
organism-as-a-whole  generalization.  We  must,  then,  choose  between  the 
two:  we  must  either  abandon  the  organism-as-a-whole  principle,  or 
abandon  accepted  speculations  couched  in  el  verbal  terms  which  create 
insoluble  verbal  puzzles.  Something  similar  could  be  said  about  the  dis¬ 
tinction  of  ‘body'  versus  ‘soul',  and  other  verbal  splittings  which  have 
hampered  sane  advance  in  the  understanding  of  ourselves,  and  have  filled 
for  thousands  of  years  the  libraries  and  tribunes  of  the  world  with  hol¬ 
low  reverberations. 

The  solution  of  these  problems  lies  in  the  field  of  structural,  sym¬ 
bolic,  linguistic,  and  semantic  research,  as  well  as  in  the  fields  of  physics, 
chemistry,  biology,  psychiatry.,  because  from  their  very  nature  these 
problems  are  structural. 

CHAPTER  V 

GENERAL  LINGUISTIC 

...  to  be  an  abstraction  does  not  mean  that  an  entity  is  nothing.  It 
merely  means  that  its  existence  is  only  one  factor  of  a  more  concrete  ele¬ 
ment  of  nature.  (573)  a.  n.  whitehead 

In  my  opinion  the  answer  to  this  question  is  briefly,  this: — As  far  as  the 
laws  of  mathematics  refer  to  reality,  they  are  not  certain;  and  as  far  as 
they  are  certain,  they  do  not  refer  to  reality,  (isi)  A.  einstein 

Thus  it  would  seem  that,  wherever  we  infer  from  perceptions,  it  is  only 
structure  that  we  can  validly  infer;  and  structure  is  what  can  be  expressed 
by  mathematical  logic,  which  includes  mathematics.  (457) 

BERTRAND  RUSSELL 

The  current  accounts  of  perception  are  the  stronghold  of  modern  meta¬ 
physical  difficulties.  They  nave  their  origin  in  the  same  misunderstanding 
which  led  to  the  incubus  of  the  substance-quality  categories.  The  Greeks 
looked  at  a  stone,  and  perceived  that  it  was  grey.  Tne  Greeks  were  ig¬ 
norant  of  modern  physics;  but  modern  philosophers  discuss  perception  in 
terms  of  categories  derived  from  the  Greeks.  <574>  A.  N.  whitehead 

To  the  biochemist,  biophysicist,  biologist,  and  physiological  psychologist, 
however,  life  and  mind  are  so  amazingly  complex  and  comprise  so  many 
heterogeneous  processes  that  their  blanket  designation  as  two  emergent 
levels  cannot  seem  very  illuminating,  and  to  the  observer  who  contemplates 
the  profuse  and  unabated  emergence  of  idiots,  morons,  lunatics,  criminals, 
and  parasites  in  our  midst,  Alexander’s  prospect  of  the  emergence  of  deity 
is  about  as  imminent  as  the  Greek  kalends.  (555) 

WILLIAM  MORTON  WHEELER 

In  speaking  of  linguistic  researches,  I  do  not  mean  only  an  analysis 
of  printed  ‘canned  chatter’,  as  Clarence  Day  would  call  it,  but  I  mean  the 
behaviour,  the  performance,  s.r  of  living  Smiths  and  Browns  and  the 
connections  between  the  noises  uttered  by  them  and  their  behaviour.  No 
satisfactory  analysis  has  been  made,  and  the  reason  seems  to  be  in  the 
fact  that  each  existing  language  really  represents  a  conglomeration  of 
different  languages  with  different  structures  and  is,  therefore,  extremely 
complex  as  long  as  structure  is  disregarded.  That  ‘linguists’,  ‘psycholo¬ 
gists’,  ‘logicians’. ,  were,  and  usually  are,  very  innocent  of  mathematics, 
a  type  of  language  of  the  greatest  simplicity  and  perfection,  with  a  clear- 
cut  structure,  similar  to  the  structure  of  the  world,  seems  to  be  re¬ 
sponsible  for  this  helplessness.  Without  a  study  of  mathematics,  the 
adjustment  of  structure  seems  impossible. 

We  should  not  be  surprised  to  find  that  mathematics  must  be 
considered  a  language.  By  definition,  whatever  has  symbols  and  proposi¬ 
tions  is  called  a  language,  a  form  of  representation  for  this  something- 

GENERAL  LINGUISTIC 

going-on  which  we  call  the  world  and  which  is  admittedly  not  words . 
Several  interesting  statements  can  be  made  about  mathematics  considered 
as  a  language.  First  of  all,  mathematics  appears  as  a  form  of  human 
behaviour,  as  genuine  a  human  activity  as  eating  or  walking,  a  function 
in  which  the  human  nervous  system  plays  a  very  serious  part.  Second, 
from  an  empirical  point  of  view  a  curious  question  arises :  why,  of  all 
forms  of  human  behaviour,  has  mathematizing  proved  to  be  at  each  his¬ 
torical  period  the  most  excellent  human  activity,  producing  results  of 
such  enormous  importance  and  unexpected  validity  as  not  to  be  com¬ 
parable  with  any  other  musings  of  man  ?  Briefly,  it  may  be  said  that  the 
secret  of  this  importance  and  the  validity  of  mathematics  lie  in  the 
mathematical  method  and  structure,  which  the  mathematizing  Smith, 
Brown,  and  Jones  have  used — we  may  even  say,  were  forced  to  use.  It  is 
not  necessary  to  assume  that  the  mathematicians  were  ‘superior'  men.  We 
will  see  later  that  mathematics  is  not  a  very  superior  activity  of  the 
‘human  mind’,  but  it  is  perhaps  the  easiest,  or  simplest  activity;  and, 
therefore,  it  has  been  possible  to  produce  a  structurally  perfect  product 
of  this  simple  kind. 

The  understanding  and  proper  evaluation  of  what  has  been  said 
about  the  structure  and  method  of  mathematics  will  play  a  serious  seman¬ 
tic  role  all  through  this  work,  and,  therefore,  it  becomes  necessary  to 
enlarge  upon  the  subject.  We  shall  have  to  divide  the  abstractions  we 
make  into  two  classes:  (1)  objective  or  physical  abstractions,  which 
include  our  daily-life  notions;  and  (2)  mathematical  abstractions,  at 
present  taken  from  pure  mathematics,  in  a  restricted  sense,  and  later 
generalized.  As  an  example  of  a  mathematical  abstraction,  we  may  take 
a  mathematical  circle.  A  circle  is  defined  as  the  locus  of  all  points  in  a 
plane  at  equal  distance  from  a  point  called  the  centre.  If  we  enquire 
whether  or  not  there  is  such  an  actual  thing  as  a  circle,  some  readers  may 
be  surprised  to  find  that  a  mathematical  circle  must  be  considered  a  pure 
fiction,  having  nowhere  any  objective  existence.  In  our  definition  of  a 
mathematical  circle,  all  particulars  were  included,  and  whatever  we  may 
find  about  this  mathematical  circle  later  on  will  be  strictly  dependent  on 
this  definition,  and  no  new  characteristics,  not  already  included  in  the 
definition,  will  ever  appear.  We  see,  here,  that  mathematical  abstractions 
are  characterized  by  the  fact  that  they  have  all  particulars  included . 

If,  on  the  other  hand,  we  draw  an  objective  ‘circle'  on  a  blackboard 
or  on  a  piece  of  paper,  simple  reflection  will  show  that  what  we  have 
drawn  is  not  a  mathematical  circle,  but  a  ring .  It  has  colour,  temperature, 
thickness  of  our  chalk  or  pencil  mark , .  When  we  draw  a  ‘circle',  it  is  no 
longer  a  mathematical  circle  with  all  particulars  included  in  the  definition. 

11.  GENERAL  ON  STRUCTURE 

but  it  becomes  a  physical  ring  in  which  new  characteristics  appear  not 
listed  in  our  definition. 

From  the  above  observations,  very  important  consequences  follow. 
Mathematizing  represents  a  very  simple  and  easy  human  activity,  because 
it  deals  with  fictitious  entities  with  all  particulars  included,  and  we  pro¬ 
ceed  by  remembering.  The  structure  of  mathematics,  because  of  this 
over-simplicity,  yet  structural  similarity  with  the  external  world,  makes 
it  possible  for  man  to  build  verbal  systems  of  remarkable  validity. 

Physical  or  daily-life  abstractions  differ  considerably  from  mathe¬ 
matical  abstractions.  Let  us  take  any  actual  object ;  for  instance,  what  we 
call  a  pencil.  Now,  we  may  describe  or  ‘define*  a  ‘pencil*  in  as  great 
detail  as  we  please,  yet  it  is  impossible  to  include  all  the  characteristics 
which  we  may  discover  in  this  actual  objective  pencil.  If  the  reader  will 
try  to  give  a  ‘complete*  description  or  a  ‘perfect’  definition  of  any  actual 
physical  object,  so  as  to  include  ‘all*  particulars,  he  will  be  convinced 
that  this  task  is  humanly  impossible.  These  would  have  to  describe, 
not  only  the  numerous  rough,  macroscopic  characteristics,  but  also  the 
microscopic  details,  the  chemical  composition  and  changes,  sub-micro¬ 
scopic  characteristics  and  the  endlessly  changing  relationship  of  this 
objective  something  which  we  have  called  pencil  to  the  rest  of  the  uni¬ 
