verse.,  an  inexhaustible  array  of  characteristics  which  could  never  be 
terminated.  In  general,  physical  abstractions,  including  daily-life  abstrac¬ 
tions  are  such  that  particulars  are  left  out — we  proceed  by  a  process  of 
forgetting.  In  other  words,  no  description  or  ‘definition*  will  ever  include 
all  particulars. 

Linguistic  abstractions  from 
objective  levers,  particulars  left 
out.  Deductions  work  relatively, 
no  matter  how  correctly  made, 
x 

X 
X 

Particulars  left  out. 

Fig.  1. 

GENERAL  LINGUISTIC 

Only  and  exclusively  in  mathematics  does  deduction,  if  correct, 
work  absolutely,  for  no  particulars  are  left  out  which  may  later  be  discov¬ 
ered  and  force  us  to  modify  our  deductions. 

Not  so  in  abstracting  from  physical  objects.  Here,  particulars  are 
left  out ;  we  proceed  by  forgetting,  our  deductions  work  only  relatively, 
and  must  be  revised  continuously  whenever  new  particulars  are  discov¬ 
ered.  In  mathematics,  however,  we  build  for  ourselves  a  fictitious  and 
over-simplified  verbal  world,  with  abstractions  which  have  all  particulars 
included.  If  we  compare  mathematics,  taken  as  a  language,  with  our 
daily  language,  we  see  readily  that  in  both  verbal  activities  we  are  build¬ 
ing  for  ourselves  forms  of  representation  for  this  something-going-on, 
which  is  not  words. 

Considered  as  a  language,  mathematics  appears  as  a  language  of  the 
highest  perfection,  but  at  its  lowest  development.  Perfect,  because  the 
structure  of  mathematics  makes  it  possible  to  be  so  (all  characteristics 
included,  and  no  physical  content),  and  because  it  is  a  language  of 
relations  which  are  also  found  in  this  world.  At  the  lowest  development, 
because  we  can  speak  in  it  as  yet  about  very  little  and  that  in  a  very  nar¬ 
row,  restricted  field,  and  with  limited  aspects. 

Our  other  languages  would  appear,  then,  as  the  other  extreme,  as 
the  highest  mathematics,  but  also  at  their  lowest  development— highest 
mathematics,  because  in  them  we  can  speak  about  everything ;  at  their 
lowest  development  because  they  are  still  A  and  not  based  on  asymmet¬ 
rical  relations.  Between  the  two  languages  there  exists  as  yet  a  large 
unbridged  structural  gap.  The  bridging  of  this  gap  is  the  problem  of  the 
workers  of  the  future.  Some  will  work  in  the  direction  of  inventing  new 
mathematical  methods  and  systems,  bringing  mathematics  closer  in  scope 
and  adaptability  to  ordinary  language  (for  instance,  the  tensor  calculus, 
the  theory  of  groups,  the  theory  of  sets,  the  algebra  of  states  and  observ¬ 
ables,.).  Others  will  undertake  linguistic  researches  designed  to  bring 
ordinary  language  closer  to  mathematics  (  for  instance,  the  present  work) . 
When  the  two  forms  of  representation  meet  on  relational  grounds,  we 
shall  probably  have  a  simple  language  of  mathematical  structure,  and 
mathematics,  as  such,  might  then  even  become  obsolete. 

It  is  not  desirable  that  the  reader  should  be  under  the  impression 
that  all  mathematical  ‘thinking'  is  low-grade  ‘thinking'.  The  mathema¬ 
ticians  who  discover  or  invent  new  methods  for  relating  and  structures 
are  the  biggest  ‘mental'  giants  we  have  had,  or  ever  shall  have.  Only 
the  technical  interplay  of  symbols,  to  find  out  some  new  possible  combina¬ 
tion,  can  be  considered  as  low-grade  ‘thinking'. 

II.  GENERAL  ON  STRUCTURE 

From  what  has  now  been  said,  it  is  probably  already  obvious  that  if 
any  one  wants  to  work  scientifically  on  problems  of  such  enormous  com¬ 
plexity  that  they  have  so  far  defied  analysis,  he  would  be  helped  enor¬ 
mously  if  he  would  train  his  s.r  in  the  simplest  forms  of  correct 
'thinking' ;  that  is,  become  acquainted  with  mathematical  methods.  The 
continued  application  of  this  relational  method  should  finally  throw  some 
light  on  the  greatest  complexities,  such  as  life  and  man.  In  contrast  to 
enormous  advances  in  all  technical  fields,  our  knowledge  of  'human 
nature’  has  advanced  very  little  beyond  what  primitives  knew  about  them¬ 
selves.  We  have  tried  to  analyse  the  most  baffling  phenomena  while  dis¬ 
regarding  structural  peculiarities  of  languages  and  thus  failing  to  provide 
sufficient  fundamental  training  in  new  s.r .  In  practically  all  universities 
at  present,  the  mathematical  requirements,  even  for  scientists,  are 
extremely  low,  much  lower,  indeed,  than  is  necessary  for  the  progress  of 
these  scientists  themselves.  Only  those  who  specialize  in  mathematics 
receive  an  advanced  training,  but,  even  with  them,  little  attention  is 
devoted  to  method  and  structure  of  languages  as  such.  Until  lately, 
mathematicians  themselves  were  not  without  responsibility  for  this.  They 
treated  mathematics  as  some  kind  of  'eternal  verity’,  and  made  a  sort  of 
religion  out  of  it ;  forgetting,  o*  not  knowing,  that  these  'eternal  verities’ 
last  only  so  long  as  the  nervous  systems  of  Smiths  and  Browns  are  not 
altered.  Besides,  many,  even  now,  disclaim  any  possible  connection 
between  mathematics  and  human  affairs.  Some  of  them  seem,  indeed,  in 
their  religious  zeal,  to  try  to  make  their  subjects  as  difficult,  unattractive, 
and  mysterious  as  possible,  to  overawe  the  student.  Fortunately,  a  strong 
reaction  against  such  an  attitude  is  beginning  to  take  place  among  the 
members  of  the  younger  mathematical  generation.  This  is  a  very  hopeful 
sign,  as  there  is  little  doubt  that,  without  the  help  of  professional  mathe¬ 
maticians  who  will  understand  the  general  importance  of  structure  and 
mathematical  methods ,  we  shall  not  be  able  to  solve  our  human  problems 
in  time  to  prevent  quite  serious  break-downs,  since  these  solutions  ulti¬ 
mately  depend  on  structural  and  semantic  considerations. 

The  moment  we  abandon  the  older  theological  attitude  toward  mathe¬ 
matics,  and  summon  the  courage  to  consider  it  as  a  form  of  human 
behaviour  and  the  expression  of  generalised  s.rt  some  quite  interesting 
problems  loom  up.  Terms  like  logic’  or  'psychology*  are  applied  in 
many  different  senses,  but,  among  others,  they  are  used  as  labels  for 
certain  disciplines  called  sciences.  'Logic’  is  defined  as  the  'science  of 
the  laws  of  thought’.  Obviously,  then,  to  produce  'logic’  we  should  have 
to  study  all  forms  of  human  behaviour  connected  directly  with  menta¬ 
tion  ;  we  should  have  to  study  not  only  the  mentations  in  the  daily  life  of 

GENERAL  LINGUISTIC 

the  average  Smiths,  Browns . ,  but  we  should  have  to  study  the  menta¬ 
tions  of  Joneses  and  Whites  when  they  use  their  ‘mind’  at  its  best  ; 
namely,  when  they  mathematize,  scientize . ,  and  we  should  also  have  to 
study  the  mentations  of  those  whom  we  call  ‘insane’,  when  they  use  their 
‘mind’  at  its  worst.  It  is  not  our  aim  to  give  a  detailed  list  of  these  forms 
of  human  behaviour  which  we  should  study,  since  all  should  be  studied. 
It  is  enough  for  our  purpose  to  emphasize  the  two  main  omissions ; 
namely,  the  study  of  mathematics  and  the  study  of  ‘insanity’. 

As  a  similar  reasoning  applies  to  ‘psychology’,  we  must  sadly  admit 
that  we  have  as  yet  no  general  theory  which  deserves  the  name  of  ‘logic’ 
or  psycho-logics.  What  has  passed  under  the  name  of  ‘logic’,  for  instance, 
is  not  ‘logic’  according  to  its  own  definition,  but  represents  a  philosoph¬ 
ical  grammar  of  a  primitive-made  language,  of  a  structure  different  from 
the  structure  of  the  world,  unfit  for  serious  use.  If  we  try  to  apply  the 
rules  of  the  old  ‘logic’,  we  find  ourselves  blocked  by  ridiculous  impasses. 
So,  naturally,  we  discover  that  we  have  no  use  for  such  a  ‘logic’. 

It  follows  also  that  any  one  who  has  any  serious  intention  of  becom¬ 
ing  a  ‘logician*  or  a  psycho-logician  must,  first  of  all,  be  a  thorough 
mathematician  and  must  also  study  ‘insanity’.  Only  with  such  prepara¬ 
tion  is  there  any  possibility  of  becoming  a  psycho-logician  or  semantician. 
Sometimes  it  is  useful  to  stop  deceiving  ourselves ;  and  it  is  deceiving 
ourselves  if  we  claim  to  be  studying  human  psycho-logics,  or  human 
‘logic’,  when  we  are  generalizing  only  from  those  forms  of  human 
behaviour  which  we  have  in  common  with  the  animals  and  neglect  other 
forms,  especially  the  most  characteristic  forms  of  human  behaviour,  such 
as  mathematics,  science,  and  ‘insanity’.  If,  as  psycho-logicians,  we  want 
to  be  ‘behaviourists’,  it  is  clear  that  we  must  study  all  known  forms  of 
human  behaviour.  But  it  seems  never  to  have  occurred  to  the  ‘behaviour¬ 
ists’  that  mathematics  and  ‘insanity’  are  very  characteristic  forms  of 
human  behaviour. 

Some  readers  may  be  puzzled  by  my  calling  the  daily  forms  of  rep¬ 
resentation  we  use  ‘primitive-made’.  Let  me  illustrate  what  I  mean  by  a 
classical  example.  For  more  than  two  thousand  years  the  famous  para¬ 
dox  of  Zeno  has  puzzled  ‘philosophers’,  without  any  solution,  and  only  in 
our  own  day  has  it  been  solved  by  mathematicians.  The  paradox  reads : 
Achilles  was  supposed  to  be  a  very  swift  runner,  and  in  a  race  with  a 
tortoise,  which  was  given  the  benefit  of  starting  first,  Achilles  could 
never  overtake  his  slow  competitor,  because,  the  argument  runs,  before 
he  could  overtake  the  tortoise  he  would  have  to  halve  the  distance  between 
them,  and  again  halve  the  remaining  half,  and  so  on.  No  matter  how 
long  this  might  last,  there  still  would  be  some  distance  to  halve,  and  so 

II.  GENERAL  ON  STRUCTURE 

it  was  concluded  he  could  never  pass  the  tortoise.  Now  any  child  knows 
that  this  conclusion  is  not  true ;  yet  the  verbal  argument  for  the  untrue 
conclusion  remained,  in  the  hands  of  'philosophers’  and  'logicians’,  per¬ 
fectly  valid  for  more  than  two  thousand  years.  This  instance  throws 
light  on  the  stage  of  development  which  we  have  reached  and  of  which 
we  often  boast. 

Having,  then,  no  scientific  general  theory  of  'logic’  and  psycho-logics 
to  guide  us,  the  task  of  an  enquiry  like  the  present  is  very  much  handi¬ 
capped.  We  must  merely  go  ahead  groping  and  pioneering;  and  this  is 
always  a  difficult,  blundering  task. 

It  is  indeed  very  important  that  not  only  the  scientists  but  also  the 
intelligent  public,  as  a  whole,  should  understand  that  at  present  we  have 
no  general  theory  which  may  be  called  'logic’  or  psycho-logics.  Perhaps 
an  illustration  will  help  to  bring  home  this  really  shocking  state  of  affairs. 
Imagine,  for  example,  that  we  should  try  to  study  dinosaurs  exhaus¬ 
tively.  The  standard  methods  of  study  would  centre  about  the  actual 
fossil  remains  when  such  are  available ;  but,  in  the  case  of  those  extinct 
forms  of  which  the  fossil  remains  are  very  meagre,  or  entirely  lacking, 
much  information  is  obtained  from  the  study  of  the  tracks  which  have 
been  left  on  the  mud  flats  that  have  become  rocks.  It  seems  undeniable 
that  such  a  study  of  fossil  tracks  would  contribute  a  large  share  to  the 
formulation  of  any  'general  theory’  of  the  characteristics  of  dinosaurs. 
We  could  go  further  and  say  that  no  ‘general  theory’  could  be  complete 
if  such  study  were  entirely  neglected. 

Now,  that  is  precisely  the  situation  in  which  ‘psychologists’  and 
‘logicians’  find  themselves ;  they  have  made  many  studies,  and  gathered 
some  facts,  but  they  have  entirely  disregarded  as  yet  these  unique  and 
peculiar  black  tracks  which  the  mathematicians  and  others  have  left  on 
white  paper  when  they  mathematized  or  scientized.  The  old  ‘psychologi¬ 
cal’  generalizations  were  made  from  insufficient  data,  in  spite  of  the  fact 
that  sufficient  data ;  namely,  these  black  marks  on  white  paper,  exist,  and 
have  existed  for  a  long  time.  But  these  marks  the  ‘psychologists’  and 
‘logicians’  were  not  able  properly  to  read,  analyse,  and  interpret. 

Under  such  circumstances,  it  should  not  be  surprising  to  find  that, 
in  the  study  of  animals,  we  have  vitiated  our  researches  by  reading  into 
the  animals  our  own  activities,  and  that  we  have  vitiated  our  own  under¬ 
standing  of  ourselves  by  faulty  generalizations  from  a  few  data  taken 
mostly  from  those  activities  which  we  have  in  common  with  animals. 
Thus  we  measure  ourselves  by  animalistic  standards.  This  error  is  mainly 
due  to  the  ignorance  of  mathematical  method  and  the  disregard  of  struc¬ 
tural  problems  by  those  who  deal  with  human  affairs.  Indeed,  as  I  have 

GENERAL  LINGUISTIC 

already  shown  in  my  Manhood  of  Humanity ,  what  we  call  ‘civilization’ 
rests  upon  faulty  generalizations  taken  from  the  lives  of  cows,  horses, 
cats,  dogs,  pigs . ,  and  self-imposed  upon  Smith  and  Brown. 

The  main  thesis  of  this  ^-system  is  that  as  yet  we  all  ( with  ex¬ 
tremely  few  exceptions )  copy  animals  in  our  nervous  processes ,  and  that 
practically  all  human  difficulties,  ‘mental*  ills  of  all  degrees  included, 
have  this  characteristic  as  a  component.  I  am  glad  to  be  able  to  report 
that  a  number  of  experiments  undertaken  with  ‘mentally*  or  nervously 
ill  individuals  have  shown  decided  benefit  in  cases  where  it  proved  possi¬ 
ble  to  re-educate  them  to  appropriate  human  s.r . 

Here,  perhaps,  it  may  be  advisable  to  interpolate  a  short  explanation. 
When  we  deal  with  human  affairs  and  man,  we  sometimes  use  the  term 
‘ought’,  which  is  very  often  used  arbitrarily,  dogmatically,  and  absolutis- 
tically,  and  so  its  use  has  become  discredited.  In  many  quarters,  this 
term  is  very  unpopular,  and,  it  must  be  admitted,  justly  so.  My  use  of 
it  is  that  of  the  engineer,  who  undertakes  to  study  a  machine  entirely 
unknown  to  him — let  us  say,  a  motorcycle.  He  would  study  and  analyse 
its  structure,  and,  finally,  would  give  a  verdict  that  with  such  a  structure, 
under  certain  circumstances,  this  machine  ought  to  work  in  a  particular 
way. 

In  the  present  volume,  this  engineering  attitude  is  preserved.  We 
shall  investigate  the  structure  of  human  knowledge,  and  we  shall  con¬ 
clude  that  with  such  a  structure  it  should  work  in  this  particular  way.  In 
the  motorcycle  example,  the  proof  of  the  correctness  of  the  reasoning  of 
the  engineer  would  be  to  fill  the  tank  with  gasoline  and  make  the  motor¬ 
cycle  go.  In  our  analogous  task,  we  have  to  apply  the  information  we  get 
and  see  if  it  works.  In  the  experiments  mentioned  above,  the  ^-system 
actually  has  worked,  and  so  there  is  some  hope  that  it  is  correct.  Further 
investigations  will,  of  course,  add  to,  or  modify,  the  details,  but  this  is 
true  of  all  theories. 

Another  reason  why  a  non-mathematician  cannot  study  psycho¬ 
logical  phenomena  adequately  is  that  mathematics  is  the  only  science 
which  has  no  physical  content  and,  therefore,  when  we  study  the  per¬ 
formances  of  Smiths  and  Browns  when  they  mathematize,  we  study  the 
only  available  working  of  ‘pure  mind*.  Moreover,  mathematics  is  the 
only  language  which  at  present  has  a  structure  similar  to  that  of  the 
world  and  the  nervous  system.  It  must  be  obvious  that  from  such  a 
study  we  should  learn  more  than  by  the  study  of  any  other  ‘mental 
activity.  In  some  quarters  it  is  believed,  I  think  erroneously,  that  ‘psy¬ 
chology’  and  ‘logic*  have  no  ‘physical  content*.  ‘Psychology*  and  ‘logic* 
have  a  very  definite  content — Smith,  Brown  . , — and  we  should  treat  these 

II.  GENERAL  ON  STRUCTURE 

disciplines  in  relation  to  the  living  organism.  Quite  probably,  when  the 
above  issues  are  fully  realized,  these  specialists,  future  psycho-logicians 
and  semanticians,  will  begin  to  study  mathematical  methods  and  pay 
attention  to  structure,  and  a  number  of  mathematicians,  in  their  turn, 
will  become  psycho-logicians,  psychiatrists,  semanticians,.  When  this 
happens,  we  may  expect  marked  advance  in  these  lines  of  endeavour.* 

In  the  course  of  this  book,  it  will  be  shown  that  the  structure  of 
human  knowledge  precludes  any  serious  study  of  ‘mental*  problems  with¬ 
out  a  thorough  mathematical  training.  We  shall  take  for  granted  all  the 
partial  light  thrown  on  man  by  existing  disciplines  and  shall  make  some 
observations  from  the  study  of  the  neglected  forms  of  human  behaviour, 
such  as  mathematics,  exact  sciences,  and  ‘insanity*,  and  with  these  new 
data  re- formulate,  in  the  rough,  all  available  data  at  hand  in  1933. 

At  the  present  early  stage  of  our  enquiry,  we  must,  of  necessity,  be 
often  vague.  Before  we  give  the  new  data,  it  is  impossible  to  speak  in  a 
more  definite  way.  Besides,  in  such  a  general  survey,  we  shall  have  to 
use  what  I  call  multiordinal  terms.  At  present,  all  the  most  humanly 
important  and  interesting  terms  are  multiordinal,  and  no  one  can  evade 
the  use  of  such  terms.  Multiordinality  is  inherent  in  the  structure  of 
‘human  knowledge*.  This  multiordinal  mechanism  gives  the  key  to  many 
seemingly  insoluble  contradictions,  and  explains  why  we  have  scarcely 
progressed  at  all  in  the  solution  of  many  human  affairs. 

The  main  characteristic  of  these  multiordinal  terms  is  found  in  that 
they  have  different  meanings  in  general,  depending  on  the  order  of 
abstractions.  Without  the  level  of  abstraction  being  specified,  a  m.o  term 
is  only  ambiguous;  its  use  involves  shifting  meanings,  variables,  and 
therefore  generates,  not  propositions,  but  propositional  functions.  It  may 
not  be  an  exaggeration  to  say  that  the  larger  number  of  human  tragedies, 
private,  social,  racial . ,  are  intimately  connected  with  the  non-realization 
of  this  multiordinality  of  the  most  important  terms  we  use. 

A  similar  confusion  between  orders  of  abstractions  is  to  be  found 
in  all  forms  of  ‘insanity*,  from  the  mildest,  which  afflicts  practically 

♦There  are  already  signs  that  the  more  serious  workers,  as,  for  instance,  the 
Gestalt  ‘psychologists’,  begin  to  feel  their  handicaps.  Others,  as  yet,  do  not  seem 
to  realize  the  hopelessness  of  their  endeavours — as  best  exemplified  by  the  Ameri¬ 
can  school  of  Behaviourists,  who  seem  to  think  that  the  splendid  name  they  have 
selected  will  solve  their  problems.  It  would  be  very  interesting  to  see  the  Behav¬ 
iourists  deny  that  the  writing  of  a  mathematical  treatise,  or  of  some  new  theory  of 
quantum  mechanics  represents  a  form  of  human  behaviour  which  they  should  study. 
Some  day  they  must  face  the  fact  that  they  have  neglected  to  consider  a  great 
many  forms  of  human  behaviour— -the  most  characteristic  forms  at  that— -and  that, 
therefore,  they  could  not  produce  an  adequate  theory  of  the  nature  of  the  ‘human 
mind. 

(iKNKRAL  LINGUISTIC 

every  one  of  us,  to  the  most  pronounced  and  violent.  Indeed,  the  discov¬ 
ery  of  this  mechanism  leads  conversely  to  a  theory  of  sanity.  Imperfect 
as  this  theory  of  sanity  probably  is,  it  opens  a  wide  field  of  possibilities 
which  I  myself,  at  this  stage,  am  unable  fully  to  appreciate. 

There  seems  one  thing  certain,  at  present;  namely,  that  the  old 
theories  and  methods  tended  strongly  to  produce  morons  and  ‘insane* 
persons,  while  ‘geniuses*  were  only  born  in  spite  of  these  handicaps. 
Perhaps  in  the  future  we  shall  be  able  to  produce  ‘geniuses*,  while 
morons  and  ‘insane*  persons  will  be  born  only  in  spite  of  our  precautions. 
If  this  should  actually  prove  to  be  true,  and  the  experimental  results 
seem  to  give  some  hope  in  this  direction,  this  world  would  then  become 
quite  a  different  place  in  which  to  live. 

CHAPTER  VI 

ON  SYMBOLISM 

Philosophers  have  worried  themselves  about  remote  consequences,  and 
the  inductive  formulations  of  science.  They  should  confine  attention  to 
the  rush  of  immediate  transition.  Their  explanations  would  then  be  seen 
in  their  native  absurdity.  (578)  a.  n.  whitehead 

It  is  often  said  experiments  must  be  made  without  a  preconceived  idea. 
That  is  impossible.  Not  only  would  it  make  all  experiment  barren,  but  that 
would  be  attempted  which  could  not  be  done.  Every  one  carries  in  his  mind 
his  own  conception  of  the  world,  of  which  he  can  not  so  easily  rid  himself. 
We  must,  for  instance,  use  language;  and  our  language  is  made  up  only  of 
preconceived  ideas  and  can  not  be  otherwise.  Only  these  are  unconscious 
preconceived  ideas,  a  thousand  times  more  dangerous  than  the  others. 

(417)  H.  POINCAR& 

.  .  .  the  patriotic  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  found  it  advisable — ’ ** 
“Found  what?”  said  the  Duck. 

“Found  it"  the  Mouse  replied,  rather  crossly:  “of  course  you  know 
what  ‘it’  means." 

know  what  *it’  means  well  enough,  when  I  find  a  thing,"  said  the 
Duck:  it  s  generally  a  frog,  or  a  worm."*  lewis  carroll 

...  psychiatry  works  specifically  on  the  social  organ  of  man  itself — 
the  person  s  assets  and  behavior,  that  which  we  must  adjust  before  we 
can  expect  the  individual  to  make  proper  use  of  most  of  our  help,** 

ADOLF  MEYER 

Perhaps,  as  has  often  been  said,  the  trouble  with  people  is  not  so  much 
with  their  ignorance  as  it  is  with  their  knowing  so  many  things  that  are 
n°j  ??*:*•  S°  that  it  is  always  important  to  find  out  about  these  fears, 
and  if  they  are  based  upon  the  knowledge  of  something  that  is  not  so,  they 
may  perhaps  be  corrected.  (568>  william  a.  white 

The  affairs  of  man  are  conducted  by  our  own,  man-made  rules  and 
according  to  man-made  theories.  Man’s  achievements  rest  upon  the  use 
of  symbols.  For  this  reason,  we  must  consider  ourselves  as  a  symbolic, 
semantic  class  of  life,  and  those  who  rule  the  symbols,  rule  us.  Now, 
the  term  'symbol’  applies  to  a  variety  of  things,  words  and  money 
included.  A  piece  of  paper,  called  a  dollar  or  a  pound,  has  very  little 
value  if  the  other  fellow  refuses  to  take  it ;  so  we  see  that  money  must 
be  considered  as  a  symbol  for  human  agreement,  as  well  as  deeds  to 
property,  stocks,  bonds , .  The  reality  behind  the  money-symbol  is  doc¬ 
trinal,  'mental’,  and  one  of  the  most  precious  characteristics  of  mankind. 
But  it  must  be  used  properly ;  that  is,  with  the  proper  understanding  of 

*  Alice  in  Wonderland. 

♦♦Historical  Sketch  and  Outlook  of  Psychiatric  Social  Work.  Hosp.  Sac.  Serv.  V,  1922.  221. 

ON  SYMBOLISM 

its  structure  and  ways  of  functioning.  It  constitutes  a  grave  danger 
when  misused. 

When  we  say  ‘our  rulers*,  we  mean  those  who  are  engaged  in  the 
manipulation  of  symbols.  There  is  no  escape  from  the  fact  that  they  do, 
and  that  they  always  will,  rule  mankind,  because  we  constitute  a  sym¬ 
bolic  class  of  life,  and  we  cannot  cease  from  being  so,  except  by  regress¬ 
ing  to  the  animal  level. 

The  hope  for  the  future  consists  in  the  understanding  of  this  fact ; 
namely,  that  we  shall  always  be  ruled  by  those  who  rule  symbols,  which 
will  lead  to  scientific  researches  in  the  field  of  symbolism  and  s.r .  We 
would  then  demand  that  our  rulers  should  be  enlightened  and  carefully 
selected.  Paradoxical  as  it  may  seem,  such  researches  as  the  present 
work  attempts,  will  ultimately  do  more  for  the  stabilization  of  human 
affairs  than  legions  of  policemen  with  machine  guns,  and  bombs,  and 
jails,  and  asylums  for  the  maladjusted. 

A  complete  list  of  our  rulers  is  difficult  to  give ;  yet,  a  few  classes  of 
them  are  quite  obvious.  Bankers,  priests,  lawyers  and  politicians  consti¬ 
tute  one  class  and  work  together.  They  do  not  produce  any  values,  but 
manipulate  values  produced  by  others,  and  often  pass  signs  for  no  values 
at  all.  Scientists  and  teachers  also  comprise  a  ruling  class.  They  pro¬ 
duce  the  main  values  mankind  has,  but,  at  present,  they  do  not  realize 
this.  They  are,  in  the  main,  themselves  ruled  by  the  cunning  methods 
of  the  first  class. 

In  this  analysis  the  ‘philosophers*  have  been  omitted.  This  is  be¬ 
cause  they  require  a  special  treatment.  As  an  historical  fact,  many  ‘phil¬ 
osophers*  have  played  an  important  and,  to  be  frank,  sinister  role  in 
history.  At  the  bottom  of  any  historical  trend,  we  find  a  certain  ‘phil¬ 
osophy*,  a  structural  implication  cleverly  formulated  by  some  ‘philoso¬ 
pher*.  The  reader  of  this  work  will  later  find  that  most  ‘philosophers* 
gamble  on  multiordinal  and  el  terms,  which  have  no  definite  single  ( one- 
valued)  meaning ,  and  so,  by  cleverness  in  twisting,  can  be  made  to 
appear  to  mean  anything  desired.  It  is  now  no  mystery  that  some  quite 
influential  ‘philosophers*  were  ‘mentally*  ill.  Some  ‘mentally*  ill  persons 
are  tremendously  clever  in  the  manipulation  of  words  and  can  sometimes 
deceive  even  trained  specialists.  Among  the  clever  concoctions  which 
appear  in  history  as  ‘philosophic*  systems,  we  can  find  flatly  opposing 
doctrines.  Therefore,  it  has  not  been  difficult  at  any  period  for  the  rulers 
to  select  a  cleverly  constructed  doctrine  perfectly  fitting  the  ends  they 
desired. 

One  of  the  main  characteristics  of  such  ‘philosophers*  is  found  in 
the  delusion  of  grandeur,  the  ‘Jehovah  complex*.  Their  problems  have 

II.  GENERAL  ON  STRUCTURE 

appeared  to  them  to  be  above  criticism  or  assistance  by  other  human 
beings,  and  the  correct  procedure  known  only  to  super-men  like  them¬ 
selves.  So  quite  naturally  they  have  usually  refused  to  make  enquiries. 
They  have  refused  even  to  be  informed  about  scientific  researches  car¬ 
ried  on  outside  the  realms  of  their  ‘philosophy’.  Because  of  this  ignor¬ 
ance,  they  have,  in  the  main,  not  even  suspected  the  importance  of  the 
problems  of  structure. 

In  all  fairness,  it  must  be  said  that  not  all  so-called  'philosophy* 
represents  an  episode  of  semantic  illness,  and  that  a  few  'philosophers* 
really  do  important  work.  This  applies  to  the  so-called  'critical  phil¬ 
osophy*  and  to  the  theory  of  knowledge  or  epistemology .  This  class  of 
workers  I  call  epistemologists,  to  avoid  the  disagreeable  implications  of 
the  term  philosopher .  Unfortunately,  epistemological  researches  are 
most  difficult,  owing  mainly  to  the  lack  of  scientific  psycho-logics,  general 
semantics,  and  investigations  of  structure  and  s,r .  We  find  only  a  very 
few  men  doing  this  work,  which,  in  the  main,  is  still  little  known  and 
unapplied.  It  must  be  granted  that  their  works  do  not  make  easy  read¬ 
ing.  They  do  not  command  headlines;  nor  are  they  aided  and  stimu¬ 
lated  by  public  interest  and  help. 

It  must  be  emphasized  again  that  as  long  as  we  remain  humans 
(which  means  a  symbolic  class  of  life),  the  rulers  of  symbols  will  rule 
us,  and  that  no  amount  of  revolution  will  ever  change  this.  But  what 
mankind  has  a  right  to  ask — and  the  sooner  the  better — is  that  our  rulers 
should  not  be  so  shamelessly  ignorant  and,  therefore,  pathological  in  their 
reactions.  If  a  psychiatrical  and  scientific  enquiry  were  to  be  made  upon 
our  rulers,  mankind  would  be  appalled  at  the  disclosures. 

We  have  been  speaking  about  ‘symbols*,  but  we  have  not  yet  dis¬ 
covered  any  general  theory  concerning  symbols  and  symbolism.  Usually, 
we  take  terms  lightly  and  never  'think*  what  kind  of  implication  and  s.r 
one  single  important  term  may  involve.  ‘Symbol*  is  one  of  those  impor¬ 
tant  terms,  weighty  in  meanings.  If  we  use  the  term  'food*,  for  instance, 
the  presupposition  is  that  we  take  for  granted  the  existence  of  living 
beings  able  to  eat ;  and,  similarly,  the  term  ‘symbol*  implies  the  existence 
of  intelligent  beings.  The  solution  of  the  problem  of  symbolism,  there¬ 
fore,  presupposes  the  solution  of  the  problem  of  ‘intelligence*  and  struc¬ 
ture.  So,  we  see  that  the  issues  are  not  only  serious  and  difficult,  but, 
also,  that  we  must  investigate  a  semantic  field  in  which  very  little  has 
been  done. 

In  the  rough,  a  symbol  is  defined  as  a  sign  which  stands  for  some¬ 
thing.  Any  sign  is  not  necessarily  a  symbol.  If  it  stands  for  something, 
it  becomes  a  symbol  for  this  something.  If  it  does  not  stand  for  some- 

ON  SYMBOLISM 

thing,  then  it  becomes  not  a  symbol  but  a  meaningless  sign.  This  applies 
to  words  just  as  it  does  to  bank  cheques.  If  one  has  a  zero  balance  in 
the  bank,  but  still  has  a  cheque-book  and  issues  a  cheque,  he  issues  a 
sign  but  not  a  symbol,  because  it  does  not  stand  for  anything.  The 
penalty  for  such  use  of  these  particular  signs  as  symbols  is  usually  jail¬ 
ing.  This  analogy  applies  to  the  oral  noises  we  make,  which  occasion¬ 
ally  become  symbols  and  at  other  times  do  not;  as  yet,  no  penalty  is 
exacted  for  such  a  fraud. 

Before  a  noise . ,  may  become  a  symbol,  something  must  exist  for 
the  symbol  to  symbolize.  So  the  first  problem  of  symbolism  should  be 
to  investigate  the  problem  of  ‘existence’.  To  define  ‘existence’,  we  have 
to  state  the  standards  by  which  we  judge  existence.  At  present,  the  use 
of  this  term  is  not  uniform  and  is  largely  a  matter  of  convenience.  Of 
late,  mathematicians  have  discovered  a  great  deal  about  this  term.  For 
our  present  purposes,  we  may  accept  two  kinds  of  existence:  (1)  the 
physical  existence,  roughly  connected  with  our  ‘senses*  and  persistence, 
and  (2)  ‘logical*  existence.  The  new  researches  in  the  foundations  of 
mathematics,  originated  by  Brouwer  and  Weyl,  seem  to  lead  to  a  cur¬ 
tailment  of  the  meaning  of  ‘logical*  existence  in  quite  a  sound  direction ; 
but  we  may  provisionally  accept  the  most  general  meaning,  as  introduced 
by  Poincare.  He  defines  ‘logical*  existence  as  a  statement  free  from 
self-contradictions.  Thus,  we  may  say  that  a  ‘thought*  to  be  a  ‘thought* 
must  not  be  self -contradictory.  A  self-contradictory  statement  is  mean¬ 
