ingless;  we  can  argue  either  way  without  reaching  any  valid  results. 
We  say,  then,  that  a  self -contradictory  statement  has  no  ‘logical*  exist¬ 
ence.  As  an  example,  let  us  take  a  statement  about  a  square  circle.  This 
is  called  a  contradiction  in  terms,  a  non-sense,  a  meaningless  statement, 
which  has  no  ‘logical’  existence.  Let  us  label  this  ‘word  salad’  by  a  spe¬ 
cial  noise — let  us  say,  ‘blah-blah*.  Will  such  a  noise  become  a  word,  a 
symbol  ?  Obviously  not — it  stands  for  nothing ;  it  remains  a  mere  noise . , 
no  matter  if  volumes  should  be  written  about  it. 

It  is  extremely  important,  semantically,  to  notice  that  not  all  the 
noises . ,  we  humans  make  should  be  considered  as  symbols  or  valid  words. 
Such  empty  noises . ,  can  occur  not  only  in  direct  ‘statements*,  but  also  in 
‘questions*.  Quite  obviously,  ‘questions*  which  employ  noises  . ,  instead 
of  words,  are  not  significant  questions.  They  ask  nothing,  and  cannot  be 
answered.  They  are,  perhaps,  best  treated  by  ‘mental*  pathologists  as 
symptoms  of  delusions,  illusions,  or  hallucinations.  In  asylums  the 
noises.,  patients  make  are  predominantly  meaningless,  as  far  as  the 
external  world  is  concerned,  but  become  symbols  in  the  illness  of  the 
patient. 

II.  GENERAL  ON  STRUCTURE 

A  complicated  and  difficult  problem  is  found  in  connection  with 
those  symbols  which  have  meaning  in  one  context  and  have  no  meaning 
in  another  context.  Here  we  approach  the  question  of  the  application 
of  'correct  symbolism  to  facts'.  We  will  not  now  enlarge  upon  this  sub¬ 
ject,  but  will  only  give,  in  a  different  wording,  an  illustration  borrowed 
from  Einstein.  Let  us  take  anything;  for  example,  a  pencil.  Let  us 
assume  that  this  physical  object  has  a  temperature  of  60  degrees.  Then 
the  'question'  may  be  asked :  'What  is  the  temperature  of  an  “electron” 
which  goes  to  make  up  this  pencil?'  Different  people,  many  scientists 
and  mathematicians  included,  would  say:  ‘60  degrees';  or  any  other 
number.  And,  finally,  some  would  say:  'I  do  not  know'.  All  these 
answers  have  one  common  characteristic;  namely,  that  they  are  sense¬ 
less  ;  for  they  try  to  answer  a  meaningless  question.  Even  the  answer, 
'I  do  not  know',  does  not  escape  this  classification,  as  there  is  nothing  to 
know  about  a  meaningless  question.  The  only  correct  answer  is  to  ex¬ 
plain  that  the  'question'  has  no  meaning.  This  is  an  example  of  a  symbol 
which  has  no  application  to  an  'electron'.  Temperature  by  definition  is 
the  vibration  of  molecules  (atoms  are  considered  as  mon-atomic  mole¬ 
cules)  ;  so  to  have  temperature  at  all,  we  must  have  at  least  two  mole¬ 
cules.  Thus,  when  we  take  one  molecule  and  split  it  into  atoms  and 
electrons,  the  term  'temperature'  does  not  apply  by  definition  to  an  elec¬ 
tron  at  all.  Although  the  term  'temperature'  represents  a  perfectly  good 
symbol  in  one  context,  it  becomes  a  meaningless  noise  in  another.  The 
reader  should  not  miss  the  plausibility  of  such  gambling  on  words,  for 
there  is  a  very  real  semantic  danger  in  it. 

In  the  study  of  symbolism,  it  is  unwise  to  disregard  the  knowledge 
we  gather  from  psychiatry.  The  so-called  'mentally'  ill  have  often  a  very 
obvious  and  well-known  semantic  mechanism  of  projection.  They  pro¬ 
ject  their  own  feelings,  moods,  and  other  structural  implications  on  the 
outside  world,  and  so  build  up  delusions,  illusions,  and  hallucinations, 
believing  that  what  is  going  on  in  them  is  going  on  outside  of  them. 
Usually,  it  is  impossible  to  convince  the  patient  of  this  error,  for  his 
whole  illness  is  found  in  the  semantic  disturbance  which  leads  to  such 
projections. 

In  daily  life  we  find  endless  examples  of  such  semantic  projections, 
of  differing  affective  intensity,  which  projections  invariably  lead  to  con¬ 
sequences  more  or  less  grave.  The  structure  of  such  affective  projections 
will  be  dealt  with  extensively  later  on.  Here  we  need  only  point  out 
that  the  problems  of  'existence'  are  serious,  and  that  any  one  who  claims 
that  something  'exists'  outside  of  his  skin  must  show  it.  Otherwise,  the 
'existence'  is  found  only  inside  of  his  skin— a  psycho-logical  state  of 

ON  SYMBOLISM 

affairs  which  becomes  pathological  the  moment  he  projects  it  on  the 
outside  world.  If  one  should  claim  that  the  term  ‘unicorn’  is  a  symbol, 
he  must  state  what  this  symbol  stands  for.  It  might  be  said  that  ‘uni¬ 
corn’,  as  a  symbol,  stands  for  a  fanciful  animal  in  heraldry,  a  statement 
which  happens  to  be  true.  In  such  a  sense  the  term  ‘unicorn’  becomes 
a  symbol  for  a  fancy,  and  rightly  belongs  to  psycho-logics,  which  deals 
with  human  fancies,  but  does  not  belong  to  zoology,  which  deals  with 
actual  animals.  But  if  one  should  believe  firmly  and  intensely  that  the 
‘unicorn’  represents  an  actual  animal  which  has  an  external  existence, 
he  would  be  either  mistaken  or  ignorant,  and  could  be  convinced  or 
enlightened ;  or,  if  not,  he  would  be  seriously  ill.  We  see  that  in  this  case, 
as  in  many  others,  all  depends  to  what  ‘ology’  our  semantic  impulses 
assign  some  ‘existence’.  If  we  assign  the  ‘unicorn’  to  psycho-logics,  or 
to  heraldry,  such  an  assignment  is  correct,  and  no  semantic  harm  is 
done ;  but  if  we  assign  a  ‘unicorn’  to  zoology ;  that  is  to  say,  if  we  believe 
that  a  ‘unicorn’  has  an  objective  and  not  a  fictitious  existence,  this  s.r 
might  be  either  a  mistake,  or  ignorance,  and,  in  such  a  case,  it  could  be 
corrected ;  otherwise,  it  becomes  a  semantic  illness.  If,  in  spite  of  all 
contrary  evidence,  or  of  the  lack  of  all  positive  evidence,  we  hold  per¬ 
sistently  to  the  belief,  then  the  affective  components  of  our  s.r  are  so 
strong  that  they  are  beyond  normal  control.  Usually  a  person  holding 
such  affective  beliefs  is  seriously  ill,  and,  therefore,  no  amount  of  evi¬ 
dence  can  convince  him. 

We  see,  then,  that  it  is  not  a  matter  of  indifference  to  what  ‘ology’ 
we  assign  terms,  and  some  assignments  may  be  of  a  pathological  char¬ 
acter,  if  they  identify  psycho-logical  entities  with  the  outside  world. 
Life  is  full  of  such  dramatic  identifications,  and  it  would  be  a  great  step 
forward  in  semantic  hygiene  if  some  ‘ologies’ — e.g.,  demonologies  of 
different  brands,  should  be  abolished  as  such,  and  their  subject-matter 
transferred  to  another  ‘ology* ;  namely,  to  psycho-logics,  where  it  belongs. 

The  projection  mechanism  is  one  fraught  with  serious  dangers,  and 
it  is  very  dangerous  to  develop  it.  The  danger  is  greatest  in  childhood, 
when  silly  teachings  help  to  develop  this  semantic  mechanism,  and  so  to 
affect,  in  a  pathological  way,  the  physically  undeveloped  nervous  system 
of  the  human  child.  Here  we  meet  an  important  fact  which  will  become 
prominent  later — that  ignorance,  identification,  and  pathological  delu¬ 
sions,  illusions,  and  hallucinations,  are  dangerously  akin,  and  differen¬ 
tiated  only  by  the  ‘emotional’  background  or  intensity. 

An  important  aspect  of  the  problem  of  existence  can  be  made  clear 
by  some  examples.  Let  us  recall  that  a  noise  or  written  sign,  to  become 
a  symbol,  must  stand  for  something .  Let  us  imagine  that  you,  my 

II.  GENERAL  ON  STRUCTURE 

reader,  and  myself  are  engaged  in  an  argument.  Before  us,  on  the  table, 
lies  something  which  we  usually  call  a  box  of  matches :  you  argue  that 
there  are  matches  in  this  box;  I  say  that  there  are  no  matches  in  it. 
Our  argument  can  be  settled.  We  open  the  box  and  look,  and  both 
become  convinced.  It  must  be  noticed  that  in  our  argument  we  used 
words ,  because  they  stood  for  something ;  so  when  we  began  to  argue, 
the  argument  could  be  solved  to  our  mutual  satisfaction,  since  there  was 
a  third  factor,  the  object,  which  corresponded  to  the  symbol  used,  and 
this  settled  the  dispute.  A  third  factor  was  present,  and  agreement  be¬ 
came  possible.  Let  us  take  another  example.  Let  us  try  to  settle  the 
problem :  Ts  blah-blah  a  case  of  tra-tra  ?’  Let  us  assume  that  you  say 
Ves ,  and  that  I  say  ‘no\  Can  we  reach  any  agreement  ?  It  is  a  real 
tragedy,  of  which  life  is  full,  that  such  an  argument  cannot  be  solved 
at  all.  We  used  noises,  not  words.  There  was  no  third  factor  for  which 
these  noises  stood  as  symbols,  and  so  we  could  argue  endlessly  without 
any  possibility  of  agreement.  That  the  noises  may  have  stood  for  some 
semantic  disturbance  is  quite  a  different  problem,  and  in  such  a  case  a 
psycho-pathologist  should  be  consulted,  but  arguments  should  stop.  The 
reader  will  have  no  difficulty  in  gathering  from  daily  life  other  examples, 
many  of  them  of  highly  tragic  character. 

We  see  that  we  can  reach,  even  here,  an  important  conclusion ; 
namely,  that,  first  of  all,  we  must  distinguish  between  words,  symbols 
which  symbolize  something,  and  noises,  not  symbols,  which  have  no 
meaning  (unless  with  a  pathological  meaning  for  the  physician)  ;  and, 
second,  that  if  we  use  words  (symbols  for  something),  all  disputes  can 
be  solved  sooner  or  later.  But,  in  cases  in  which  we  use  noises  as  if  they 
were  words,  such  disputes  can  never  be  settled.  Arguments  about  the 
truth  or  ‘falsehood’  of  statements  containing  noises  are  useless,  as  the 
terms  truth  or  falsehood’  do  not  apply  to  them.  There  is  one  charac¬ 
teristic  about  noises  which  is  very  hopeful.  If  we  use  words,  symbols, 
not-noises,  the  problems  may  be  complicated  and  difficult ;  we  may  have 
to  wait  for  a  long  time  for  a  solution;  but  we  know  that  a  solution  will 
be  forthcoming.  In  cases  where  we  make  noises,  and  treat  them  as 
words,  and  this  fact  is  exposed,  then  the  ‘problems’  are  correctly  recog¬ 
nized  at  once  as  ‘no-problems’,  and  such  solutions  remain  valid.  Thus, 
we  see  that  one  of  the  obvious  origins  of  human  disagreement  lies  in  the 
use  of  noises  for  words,  and  so,  after  all,  this  important  root  of  human 
dissension  might  be  abolished  by  proper  education  of  s.r  within  a  single 
generation.  Indeed,  researches  in  symbolism  and  s.r  hold  great  possi¬ 
bilities.  We  should  not  be  surprised  that  we  find  meaningless  noises  in 
the  foundation  of  many  old  ‘philosophies’,  and  that  from  them  arise 

ON  SYMBOLISM 

most  of  the  old  ‘philosophical’  fights  and  arguments.  Bitterness  and 
tragedies  follow,  because  many  ‘problems’  become  ‘no-problems’,  and 
the  discussion  leads  nowhere.  But,  as  material  for  psychiatrical  studies, 
these  old  debates  may  be  scientifically  considered,  to  the  great  benefit  of 
our  understanding. 

We  have  already  mentioned  the  analogy  between  the  noises  we  make 
when  these  noises  do  not  symbolize  anything  which  exists,  and  the 
worthless  ‘cheques’  we  give  when  our  bank  balance  is  zero.  This  analogy 
could  be  enlarged  and  compared  with  the  sale  of  gold  bricks,  or  any  other 
commercial  deal  in  which  we  try  to  make  the  other  fellow  accept  some¬ 
thing  by  a  representation  which  is  contrary  to  fact.  But  we  do  not  realize 
that  when  we  make  noises  which  are  not  words,  because  they  are  not 
symbols,  and  give  them  to  the  other  fellow  as  if  they  were  to  be  con¬ 
sidered  as  words  or  symbols,  we  commit  a  similar  kind  of  action.  In 
the  concise  Oxford  Dictionary  of  Current  English,  there  is  a  word, 
‘fraud’,  the  definition  of  which  it  will  be  useful  for  us  to  consider.  Its 
standard  definition  reads:  ‘Fraud,  n.  Deceitfulness  (rare),  criminal  de¬ 
ception,  use  of  false  representations,  (in  Law,  .  .  .)  ;  dishonest  artifice  or 
trick  ( pious  fraud,  deception  intended  to  benefit  deceived,  and  especially 
to  strengthen  religious  belief)  ;  person  or  thing  not  fulfilling  expectation 
or  description.’  *  Commercialism  has  taken  good  care  to  prevent  one  kind 
of  symbolic  fraud,  as  in  the  instances  of  spurious  cheques  and  selling 
gold  bricks  or  passing  counterfeit  money.  But,  as  yet,  we  have  not 
become  intelligent  enough  to  realize  that  another  most  important  and 
similar  kind  of  fraud  is  continually  going  on.  So,  up  to  the  present,  we 
have  done  nothing  about  it. 

No  reflecting  reader  can  deny  that  the  passing  off,  on  an  unsus¬ 
pecting  listener,  of  noises  for  words,  or  symbols,  must  be  classified  as 
a  fraud,  or  that  we  pass  to  the  other  fellow  contagious  semantic  dis¬ 
turbances.  This  brief  remark  shows,  at  once,  what  serious  ethical  and 
social  results  would  follow  from  investigation  of  correct  symbolism. 

On  one  side,  as  we  have  already  seen,  and  as  will  become  increas¬ 
ingly  evident  as  we  proceed,  our  sanity  is  connected  with  correct  sym¬ 
bolism.  And,  naturally,  with  the  increase  of  sanity,  our  ‘moral’  and 
‘ethical’  standards  would  rise.  It  seems  useless  to  preach  metaphysical 
‘ethics’  and  ‘morals’  if  we  have  no  standards  for  sanity.  A  fundamen¬ 
tally  tm-sound  person  cannot,  in  spite  of  any  amount  of  preaching,  be 
either  ‘moral’  or  ‘ethical’.  It  is  well  known  that  even  the  most  good- 
natured  person  becomes  grouchy  or  irritable  when  ill,  and  his  other 

♦The  first  italics  are  mine. — A.  K. 

II.  GENERAL  ON  STRUCTURE 

semantic  characteristics  change  in  a  similar  way.  The  abuse  of  symbol¬ 
ism  is  like  the  abuse  of  food  or  drink :  it  makes  people  ill,  and  so  their 
reactions  become  deranged. 

But,  besides  the  moral  and  ethical  gains  to  be  obtained  from  the  use 
of  correct  symbolism,  our  economic  system,  which  is  based  on  symbolism 
and  which,  with  ignorant  commercialism  ruling,  has  mostly  degenerated 
into  an  abuse  of  symbolism  (secrecy,  conspiracy,  advertisements,  bluff, 
'live-wire  agents’. ,) ,  would  also  gain  enormously  and  become  stable.  Such 
an  application  of  correct  symbolism  would  conserve  a  tremendous 
amount  of  nervous  energy  now  wasted  in  worries,  uncertainties . ,  which 
we  are  all  the  time  piling  upon  ourselves,  as  if  bent  upon  testing  our 
endurance.  We  ought  not  to  wonder  that  we  break  down  individually 
and  socially.  Indeed,  if  we  do  not  become  more  intelligent  in  this  field, 
we  shall  inevitably  break  down  racially. 

The  semantic  problems  of  correct  symbolism  underlie  all  human 
life.  Incorrect  symbolism,  similarly,  has  also  tremendous  semantic  rami¬ 
fications  and  is  bound  to  undermine  any  possibility  of  our  building  a 
structurally  human  civilization.  Bridges  cannot  be  built  and  be  expected 
to  endure  if  the  cubic  masses  of  their  anchorages  and  abutments  are 
built  according  to  formulae  applying  to  surfaces .  These  formulae  are 
structurally  different,  and  their  confusion  with  the  formulae  of  volumes 
must  lead  to  disasters.  Similarly,  we  cannot  apply  generalizations  taken 
from  cows,  dogs,  and  other  animals  to  man,  and  expect  the  resultant 
social  structures  to  endure. 

Of  late,  the  problems  of  meaninglessness  are  beginning  to  intrigue 
a  number  of  writers,  who,  however,  treat  the  subject  without  the  realiza¬ 
tion  of  the  multiordinal,  oo-valued,  and  non-el  character  of  meanings. 
They  assume  that  'meaningless’  has  or  may  have  a  definite  general  con¬ 
tent  or  unique,  one-valued  'meaning’.  What  has  been  already  said  on 
non-el  meanings,  and  the  example  of  the  unicorn  given  above,  establish 
a  most  important  semantic  issue ;  namely,  that  what  is  ‘meaningless’  in 
a  given  context  on  one  level  of  analysis,  may  become  full  of  sinister 
meanings  on  another  level  when  it  becomes  a  symbol  for  a  semantic  dis¬ 
turbance.  This  realization,  in  itself,  is  a  most  fundamental  semantic 
factor  of  our  reactions,  without  which  the  solution  of  the  problems  of 
sanity  becomes  extremely  difficult,  if  at  all  possible. 

CHAPTER  VII 

LINGUISTIC  REVISION 

This  would  appear  to  put  at  least  part  of  the  Theory  of  Demonstration 
in  a  category  with  the  efforts  of  beginners  in  Geometry:  To  prove  that  A 
equals  B:  let  A  equal  B;  therefore  A  equals  B.  (22)  e.  t.  bell 

To  what  final  conclusions  are  we  then  led  respecting  the  nature  and 
extent  of  the  scholastic  logic?  I  think  to  the  following:  that  it  is  not  a 
science,  but  a  collection  of  scientific  truths,  too  incomplete  to  form  a  sys¬ 
tem  of  themselves,  and  not  sufficiently  fundamental  to  serve  as  the  founda¬ 
tion  upon  which  a  perfect  system  may  rest.  (44)  george  boole 

.  .  .  the  subject-predicate  habits  of  thought  .  .  .  had  been  impressed  on 
the  European  mind  by  the  overemphasis  on  Aristotle’s  logic  during  the 
long  mediaeval  period.  In  reference  to  this  twist  of  mind,  probably  Aris¬ 
totle  was  not  an  Aristotelian.  (578)  a.  n.  whitehead 

The  Euclidean  space  alone  is  one  which  at  the  same  time  is  free  of  elec¬ 
tricity  and  of  gravitation.  (55 1)  Hermann  weyl 

To  imagine  that  Newton’s  great  scientific  reputation  is  tossing  up  and 
down  in  these  latter-day  revolutions  is  to  confuse  science  with  omnisci¬ 
ence.  (149)  A.  S.  EDDINGTON 

This  latter  objection  was  sanctioned  by  Newton,  who  was  not  a  strict 
Newtonian.  (457)  bertrand  russell 

The  evil  produced  by  the  Aristotelian  ‘primary  substance’  is  exactly 
rfiis  habit  of  metaphysical  emphasis  upon  the  ‘subject-predicate’  form  of 
proposition.  (578)  a.  n.  whitehead 

The  belief  or  unconscious  conviction  that  all  propositions  are  of  the 
subject-predicate  form — in  other  words,  that  every  fact  consists  in  some 
thing  having  some  quality — has  rendered  most  philosophers  incapable  of 
giving  any  account  of  the  world  of  science  and  daily  life.  (453) 

BERTRAND  RUSSELL 

The  alternative  philosophic  position  must  commence  with  denouncing 
the  whole  idea  of  ‘Subject  qualified  by  predicate’  as  a  trap  set  for  philos¬ 
ophers  by  the  syntax  of  language.  (574)  A.  *n.  whitehead 

And  a  well-made  language  is  no  indifferent  thing;  not  to  go  beyond 
physics,  the  unknown  man  who  invented  the  word  heat  devoted  many 
generations  to  error.  Heat  has  been  treated  as  a  substance,  simply  be¬ 
cause  it  was  designated  by  a  substantive,  and  it  has  been  thought  inde¬ 
structible.  (417)  H.  POINCAR& 

Aristotle  was  almost  entirely  concerned  with  establishing  what  had  been 
conceived  already  or  of  refuting  error,  but  not  with  solving  the  problem 
of  the  discovery  of  truth.  Now  and  then,  in  reading  his  organon,  one  feels 
that  he  has  almost  sensed  the  nature  of  this  problem,  only  to  find^  that  he 
lapses  immediately  into  a  discussion  of  the  logic  of  demonstration.  He 
thinks  of  confirming  truth  rather  than  of  finding  it.  (82)  r.  d.  Carmichael 

II.  GENERAL  ON  STRUCTURE 

It  is  necessary  here  to  give  a  short  account  of  the  great  scientific 
revolution  which  started  some  years  ago,  but  which  is  still  going  on 
with  very  beneficial  results.  This  scientific  revolution  started  in  geometry, 
and,  in  a  deeper  sense,  is  carried  on  by  geometry.  Until  the  work  of 
Gauss,  Lobatchevski,  Bolyai,  Riemann . ,  the  E  geometry,  being  unique , 
was  believed  to  be  the  geometry  of  the  ‘space'.  The  moment  a  second 
geometry  was  produced,  just  as  good,  self-consistent,  yet  contradictory 
to  the  old  one,  the  geometry  became  a  geometry.  None  was  unique.  One 
absolute  was  dead.  Until  Einstein  (roughly),  the  universe  of  Newton 
was,  for  us,  the  universe.  With  Einstein,  it  became  a  universe.  Some¬ 
thing  similar  happened  to  man.*  A  new  ‘man*  was  produced,  just  as 
good,  certainly  contradictory  to  the  old  one.  The  man  became  a  man, 
otherwise  a  ‘conceptual  construction',  one  among  the  infinity  of  possible 
ones. 

It  is  not  difficult  to  see  that  in  all  these  advances  there  is  a  common 
characteristic,  which  can  be  put  simply  in  that  it  consists  in  a  little  change 
from  a  ‘the'  into  an  ‘a'.  Some  people  insist  upon  sentences  in  one- 
syllable  words;  here  we  could  indeed  satisfy  them!  The  change,  no 
doubt,  can  be  expressed  by  the  exchange  of  one  syllable  for  another.  But 
the  problems,  in  spite  of  this  apparent  simplicity,  are  quite  important ; 
and  the  rest  of  this  volume  will  be  devoted  to  the  examination  of  this 
change  and  of  what  it  structurally  involves. 

In  mentioning  the  above  names,  a  very  important  one  was  omitted, 
that  of  Aristotle.  I  merely  mentioned  these  names  as  representative  of 
certain  trends.  Otherwise,  of  course,  it  would  have  been  necessary  to 
mention  additional  names,  including  sometimes  those  of  their  predeces¬ 
sors  and  the  followers  who  have  carried  their  work  further.  It  would 
have  been  particularly  necessary  in  the  case  of  Aristotle,  who  was  not 
only  a  most  gifted  man,  but  who,  also,  because  of  the  character  of  his 
work,  has  semantically  affected  perhaps  the  largest  number  of  people 
ever  influenced  by  a  single  man ;  and  so  his  work  has  undergone  a  most 
marked  elaboration.  Because  of  this,  his  name,  in  this  book,  will  usually 
stand  for  the  body  of  doctrines  known  as  aristotelianism.  It  is  important 
to  keep  this  in  consideration,  because  it  is  becoming  more  and  more  evi¬ 
dent  that  the  work  of  Aristotle  and  his  followers  has  had  an  unprece¬ 
dented  influence  upon  the  development  of  the  Aryan  race,  and  so  the 
study  of  aristotelianism  may  help  us  to  understand  ourselves.  In  using 
the  name  of  the  founder  of  the  school  as  a  synonym  for  the  school  itself, 

♦See  my  Manhood  of  Humanity ,  The  Science  and  Art  of  Human  Engineering. 

LINGUISTIC  REVISION 

we  make  our  statements  less  cumbersome.  Some  of  the  statements  may 
not  be  true  about  the  founder  of  the  school ;  yet  they  remain  true  about 
the  school. 

Aristotle  (384-322  b.c.)  was  born  in  Stagira,  Greece.  He  was  the 
son  of  a  physician  and  had  marked  predilection  for  natural  history  and  a 
distinct  dislike  for  mathematics.  Plato,  who  is  considered  the  father  of 
mathematicians’,  was  his  teacher.  Early  in  his  career  Aristotle  reacted 
strongly  against  the  mathematical  philosophy  of  his  teacher,  and  began 
to  build  up  his  own  system,  which  had  a  strongly  biological  bias  and 
character.  Psycho-logically,  Aristotle  was  a  typical  extrovert,  who  proj  ects 
all  his  internal  processes  on  the  outside  world  and  objectifies  them,  so 
his  reaction  against  Plato,  the  typical  introvert,  for  whom  ‘reality’  was 
all  inside,  was  a  natural  and  rather  an  inevitable  consequence.  The  strug¬ 
gle  between  these  two  giants  was  typical  of  the  two  extreme  tendencies 
which  we  find  in  practically  all  of  us,  as  they  represent  two  most  diverse, 
and  yet  fundamental  psycho-logical  tendencies.  In  1933  we  know  that 
either  of  these  extremes  in  our  make-up  is  undesirable  and  un-sound,  in 
science  as  well  as  in  life.  In  science,  the  extreme  extroverts  have  intro¬ 
duced  what  might  be  called  gross  empiricism,  which,  as  such,  is  a  mere  el 
fiction — practically  a  delusion.  For  no  ‘facts  are  ever  free  from  doc¬ 
trines’  :  so  whoever  fancies  he  can  free  himself  from  ‘doctrines  ,  as 
expressed  in  the  structure  of  the  language  he  uses . ,  simply  cherishes  a 
delusion,  usually  with  strong  affective  components.  The  extreme  intro¬ 
verts,  on  the  other  hand,  originated  what  might  be  called  the  idealistic 
philosophies’,  which  in  their  turn  become  el  delusions.  We  should  not 
overlook  the  fact  that  both  these  tendencies  are  el  and  structurally  falla¬ 
cious.  Belief  in  the  separate  existence  of  el,  and,  therefore,  fictitious, 
entities  must  be  considered  as  a  structurally  un-sound  s.r  and  accounts  in 
a  large  degree  for  many  bitter  fights  in  science  and  life. 

In  asylums,  these  two  tendencies  are  sometimes  very  obvious.  The 
extreme  extrovert  is  found  mostly  among  the  paranoiacs ;  the  extreme 
introvert  among  cases  of  schizophrenia  (dementia  praecox).  Between 
the  two  extremes  we  find  all  possible  shades  and  degrees  represented  in 
daily  life  as  well  as  in  asylums.  Both  extreme  tendencies  involve  harm¬ 
ful  s.r ,  because  both  produce  delusions  of  some  elementalism  which,  as 
such,  is  always  fictitious  and  impossible.  ‘Mentally’  ill  are  often  charac¬ 
terized  by  s.r  involving  this  capacity  for  building  for  themselves  fictitious 
worlds  in  which  they  can  find  refuge  from  actual  life.  If  we,  who  live 
outside  of  asylums,  act  as  if  we  lived  in  a  fictitious  world — that  is  to  say, 
if  we  are  consistent  with  our  beliefs — we  cannot  adjust  ourselves  to 
actual  conditions,  and  so  fall  into  many  avoidable  semantic  difficulties. 

II.  GENERAL  ON  STRUCTURE 

But  the  so-called  normal  person  practically  never  abides  by  his  beliefs, 
and  when  his  beliefs  are  building  for  him  a  fictitious  world,  he  saves  his 
neck  by  not  abiding  by  them.  A  so-called  ‘insane*  person  acts  upon  his 
beliefs,  and  so  cannot  adjust  himself  to  a  world  which  is  quite  different 
from  his  fancy. 

Let  me  repeat  that  the  nervous  system  of  the  human  child  is  not 
physically  finished  at  birth:  and,  therefore,  it  is  easy  to  give  it  quite 
harmful  semantic  twists,  by  wrong  doctrines.  To  eliminate  the  vicious 
and  fictitious  el  outlook  and  s.r,  it  is  of  paramount  importance  to  try  to 
educate  a  child  to  be  neither  an  extreme  extrovert  nor  an  extreme  intro¬ 
vert,  but  a  balanced  extroverted-introvert. 

In  psychotherapy,  the  attempt  is  often  made  to  re-educate  these 
tendencies.  The  physician  usually  tries  to  make  an  extrovert  more  intro¬ 
verted,  and  an  introvert  more  extroverted.  In  case  of  success,  the  patient 
either  recovers  altogether  or  improves  considerably. 

In  practice  there  is  a  considerable  difference  between  the  re-education 
of  an  extrovert  to  an  introvert  and  that  of  an  introvert  to  an  extrovert. 
We  have  already  seen  that  the  balanced  person  should  be  both.  In  daily 
el  language,  the  introvert  is  ‘all  thought*  and  has  not  much  use  for  the 
external  world,  while  the  extrovert  is  ‘all  senses*  and  has  little  use  for 
‘thought*.  It  often  happens  that  it  is  easier  to  re-educate  an  introvert, 
because  at  least  he  ‘thinks*,  but  difficult  to  re-educate  an  extrovert,  as  he 
has  not  cultivated  his  capacity  to  ‘think*.  He  may  be  a  remarkable  player 
on  words,  but  all  his  verbal  plays,  though  clever,  are  shallow. 

Now  we  shall  be  able  to  understand  why  Aristotle,  the  extrovert, 
and  his  doctrines  have  appealed,  and  still  appeal,  to  those  who  can 
‘think*  but  feebly.  The  fact  that  the  fuller  linguistic  system  of  the  extro¬ 
vert  Aristotle  was  accepted  in  preference  to  the  work  of  the  introvert, 
Plato,  is  of  serious  semantic  consequence  to  us.  It  is  evident  that  man¬ 
kind,  in  its  evolution,  had  to  pass  through  a  low  period  of  development; 
but  this  fact  is  not  the  only  reason  why  the  A  doctrines  have  had  such  a 
tremendous  influence  upon  the  Aryan  race.  The  reason  is  much  more 
deeply  rooted  and  pernicious.  In  his  day,  over  two  thousand  years  ago, 
Aristotle  inherited  a  structurally  primitive-made  language .  He,  as  well  as 
the  enormous  majority  of  us  at  present,  never  realized  that  what  is  going 
on  outside  of  our  skins  is  certainly  not  words.  We  never  ‘think*  about  this 
distinction,  but  we  all  take  over  semantically  from  our  parents  and  asso¬ 
ciates  their  habitual  forms  of  representation  involving  structure  as  the 
language  in  which  to  talk  about  this  world,  not  knowing,  or  else  forget¬ 
ting,  that  a  language  to  be  fit  to  represent  this  world  should  at  least  have 
th t  structure  of  this  world. 

LINGUISTIC  REVISION 

Let  me  illustrate  this  by  a  structural  example:  let  us  take  a  man¬ 
made  green  leaf.  We  see  that  in  it  green  colour  was  added .  Now  let  us 
take  a  natural  green  leaf.  We  see  that  the  green  colour  was  not  added  to 
it,  but  that  the  natural  green  leaf  must  be  considered  a  process,  a  func¬ 
tional  affair  which  became  green  without  anybody’s  adding  green  colour. 
In  the  old  savage  mythologies,  there  were  always  demons  in  human 
shape,  who  actually  made  everything  with  their  hands .  This  primitive 
mythology  built  up  a  ‘plus’  or  additive  language  which  attributed  to  the 
world  an  anthropomorphic  structure.  This  false  notion  of  the  world’s 
structure  was,  in  turn,  reflected  in  the  language.  It  was  a  subject- 
predicate,  ‘plus’  language,  and  not  as  it  should  be,  to  fit  the  structure  of 
the  world,  a  functional  language. 

Here  we  come  across  a  tremendous  fact ;  namely,  that  a  language, 
any  language,  has  at  its  bottom  certain  metaphysics,  which  ascribe,  con¬ 
sciously  or  unconsciously,  some  sort  of  structure  to  this  world.  Our  old 
mythologies  ascribed  an  anthropomorphic  structure  to  the  world,  and, 
of  course,  under  such  a  delusion,  the  primitives  built  up  a  language  to 
picture  such  a  world  and  gave  it  a  subject-predicate  form.  This  subject- 
predicate  form  also  was  closely  related  to  our  ‘senses’,  taken  in  a  very  el , 
primitive  form. 

This  ‘plus’  tendency  not  only  shaped  our  language,  but  even  in 
mathematics  and  in  physics  we  are  still  much  more  at  home  with  linear 
(‘plus’)  equations.  Only  since  Einstein  have  we  begun  to  work  seriously 
at  new  forms  of  representation  which  are  no  longer  expressed  by  linear 
(or  ‘plus’)  equations.  At  present,  we  have  serious  difficulties  in  this  field. 
It  must  be  admitted  that  linear  equations  are  much  simpler  than  non¬ 
linear  equations.  I  will  explain  later  that  the  notion  of  two- valued  caus¬ 
ality  is  strictly  connected  with  this  linearity  or  additivity. 

Neither  Aristotle  nor  his  immediate  followers  realized  or  could 
realize  what  has  been  said  here.  They  took  the  structure  of  the  primitive- 
made  language  for  granted,  and  went  ahead  formulating  a  philosophical 
grammar  of  this  primitive  language,  which  grammar — to  our  great 
semantic  detriment — they  called  ‘logic’,  defining  it  as  the  ‘laws  of 
thought’.  Because  of  this  formulation  in  a  general  theory,  we  are  accus¬ 
tomed  even  today  to  inflict  this  ‘philosophical  grammar’  of  primitive 
language  upon  our  children,  and  so  from  childhood  up  imprison  them 
unconsciously  by  the  structure  of  the  language  and  the  so-called  ‘logic’, 
in  an  anthropomorphic,  structurally  primitive  universe. 

Investigation  shows  that  three  great  names  in  our  history  have  been 
very  closely  interconnected :  Aristotle,  who  formulated  a  general  theory 
of  a  primitive  language,  a  kind  of  ‘philosophical  grammar’  of  this  lan- 

II.  GENERAL  ON  STRUCTURE 

guage,  and  called  it  ‘logic' ;  Euclid,  who  built  the  first  nearly  autonomous 
logical  system,  which  we  call  ‘geometry* ;  and,  finally,  Newton,  who 
rounded  up  these  structural  systems  by  formulating  the  foundations  of 
macroscopic  mechanics.  These  three  systems  happen  to  have  one  under¬ 
lying  structural  metaphysics,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  Newton  corrected 
some  of  the  most  glaring  errors  of  Aristotle.  Such  first  systems  are 
never  structurally  satisfactory,  and,  in  time,  it  was  found  that  these  sys¬ 
