tems  contained  unjustified  structural  assumptions  which  their  followers 
tried  to  evade.  It  was  natural  that  the  innovators  should  meet  with  a 
strong  resistance,  as  these  old  systems  had  become  so  elaborated  as  to 
impress  the  ‘thoughtless*  with  their  finality.  So  the  revisions  went  very 
slowly  and  very  shyly.  In  the  case  of  Aristotle,  revision  was  still  more 
difficult  because  the  current  religious  ‘philosophies*  of  the  Western  world 
were  inextricably  bound  up  with  the  ^-system.  The  religious  leaders 
took  a  strong  stand,  and  as  late  as  the  seventeenth  century  threatened 
death  to  the  critics  of  Aristotle. 

Even  today  a  revision  of  Aristotle  is  extremely  difficult,  for  these 
three  systems  have  a  tremendous  semantic  hold  upon  us.  Many  semantic 
factors  have  contributed  to  this  hold.  First,  they  were  established  by 
men  who  were  really  very  gifted.  Second,  they  were  not  wise  epigrams 
but  were  genuine  systems  with  definite  structure,  and,  as  such,  extremely 
difficult  to  replace.  Obviously,  it  was  not  enough  to  pick  some  weak  spot 
in  one  of  these  systems ;  the  new  system-builder  would  have  to  replace 
the  old  structure  by  an  equally  full-fledged  structure,  and  this  was  a  very 
laborious  and  difficult  task.  Third,  these  systems  were  strictly  united 
by  one  structural  metaphysics  and  s.r;  they  collaborated  with  each  other, 
and  gave  each  other  assistance.  Finally,  the  inter  dependence  of  these 
systems  rested  to  a  large  degree  on  the  structure  of  the  primitive  lan- 
guage,  upon  which  Aristotle  had  legislated,  and  which  was  accepted  by 
practically  all  Aryans,  and  so  was  inherently  bound  up  with  our  daily 
habits  of  speech  and  s.r .  Together,  these  four  factors  constituted  a  tre¬ 
mendous  power,  working  against  any  attempts  at  revision. 

We  do  not  realize  what  tremendous  power  the  structure  of  an 
habitual  language  has.  It  is  not  an  exaggeration  to  say  that  it  enslaves 
us  through  the  mechanism  of  s.r  and  that  the  structure  which  a  language 
exhibits,  and  impresses  upon  us  unconsciously,  is  automatically  projected 
upon  the  world  around  us.  This  semantic  power  is  indeed  so  unbeliev¬ 
able  that  I  do  not  know  any  one,  even  among  well-trained  scientists,  who, 
after  having  admitted  some  argument  as  correct,  does  not  the  next  min¬ 
ute  deny  or  disregard  (usually  unconsciously)  practically  every  word  he 

LINGUISTIC  REVISION 

had  admitted,  being  carried  away  again  by  the  structural  implications  of 
the  old  language  and  his  s.r . 

This  linguistic  slavery  makes  criticism  very  difficult,  for  the  major¬ 
ity  of  critics  with  their  s.r  defend  unconsciously  structural  and  linguis¬ 
tic  implications,  instead  of  analysing  open-mindedly  the  structure  of  the 
facts  at  hand.  All  our  advances  are  going  very  slowly,  very  painfully 
and  haltingly,  because  the  new  work  in  science,  the  Einstein  and  the 
new  quantum  theories  included,  is  all  of  a  non-el  structure,  while  our 
daily  languages  are  el  and  absolutistic  and  twist  pathologically  our  habits 
of  ‘thought'  and  s.r.  No  help  is  forthcoming  from  the  so-called  ‘psychol¬ 
ogists'.  Not  to  keep  the  reader  guessing  too  long,  let  me  say  here — 
although  this  will  be  explained  at  length  later  on — that  the  main  achieve¬ 
ment  of  Einstein  was  precisely  in  the  fact  that  he  refused  to  divide 
verbally  ‘space'  and  ‘time*,  which  experimentally  cannot  be  so  divided. 
This  was  accomplished  by  the  help  of  the  mathematician  Minkowski, 
who  invented  a  language  of  new  structure ;  namely,  the  four-dimensional 
‘space-time',  in  which  to  talk  about  events.  This  device  made  the  Einstein 
General  Theory  possible,  and  affected  the  new  quantum  theories.  In  the 
present  work,  in  order  to  be  able  to  talk  about  the  organism-as-a-whole, 
we  must  introduce  this  non-el  principle  as  fundamental  and  apply  it. 

The  first  science  to  break  the  traditional  structural  ring  was  geom¬ 
etry.  Full-fledged  E  systems  were  built.  Following  these  E  systems. 
N  systems  were  built  (Einstein,  quantum),  and  the  ‘time'  is  ripe  to  build 
a  ^-system,  which  the  present  writer  originated  in  his  Manhood  of 
Humanity ,  and  which  is  formulated  as  a  structural  outline  of  a  general 
theory  in  the  present  volume. 

As  soon  as  this  new  ^-system  was  definitely  formulated,  a  most 
curious,  natural,  and  yet  unexpected  result  became  apparent ;  namely, 
that  the  three  new  systems,  the  A,  E,  and  the  R  have  also  one  under¬ 
lying  structure  and  metaphysics.  This  fact  adds  to  the  importance  of 
the  situation.  All  these  three  new  systems  have  been  produced  inde¬ 
pendently.  They  express  between  them  the  structural  and  semantic  urge 
and  longing  of  all  modern  science.  Their  mutual  interdependence,  mutual 
structure,  mutual  metaphysics,  mutual  method  are  helpful,  for  when  the 
vital  nature  of  the  issues  at  hand  is  clearly  seen,  it  will  be  found  expe¬ 
dient  to  start  from  this  interdependence  as  a  basis,  although,  historically 
speaking,  it  was  not  a  factor  in  the  production  of  these  systems. 

This  does  not  seem  to  be  clearly  understood  by  all  scientists.  I 
have  read,  for  instance,  scientific  papers  in  which  Einstein  is  reproached 
that  he  did  not  start  with  E  geometries,  but  only  at  a  later  stage  incor¬ 
porated  them  into  his  system.  This  argument,  of  course,  is  not  against 

II.  GENERAL  ON  STRUCTURE 

Einstein  but  for  Einstein.  Similar  remarks  could  be  made  about  this 
present  work;  and  again  this  would  not  be  an  argument  against  this 
work,  but  for  it.  All  these  new  systems  represent  methodological  and 
structural  advances,  and  will  have  played  their  semantic  roles  even  if 
some  day  they  should  be  dismissed  and  systems  of  different  structure 
take  their  place. 

Historically,  attempts  in  the  direction  of  a  A  discipline  have  been 
very  numerous.  Indeed,  the  invention  of  any  new  important  term  of  a 
non-subject-predicate  character,  or  of  a  functional  character,  was,  in 
itself,  an  attempt  in  the  A  direction.  All  sciences  have  had  to  abandon 
the  common  vocabularies  and  build  their  own  terminologies,  many  of 
which  are  also  A.  Although  all  these  attempts  have  been  made,  and 
have  quite  often  been  successful  in  their  fields,  to  the  best  of  my  knowl¬ 
edge,  they  were  not  made  consciously.  The  term  accepted  here ;  namely, 
‘non-aristotelian’  is  very  useful,  not  only  because  it  is  appropriate  and 
illustrates  very  well  what  we  have  to  contend  with,  but  also  because  it 
places  the  emphasis  properly  and  makes  us  conscious  of  the  structural 
issues.  The  fact  that  the  three  new  non-systems  have  as  much  in  common 
as  the  older  three  had,  recommends  and  justifies  the  use  of  the  term. 
The  new  problem  which  looms  up ;  namely,  the  validity  or  non-validity  of 
the  A  law  of  the  excluded  third,  leads  automatically  to  the  non-chrysip- 
pian  and  A  oo-valued  ‘logics’,  which  merge  with  the  theory  of  probabil¬ 
ity.1  According  to  the  accepted  use,  it  is  enough  to  build  a  system 
differing  from  an  older  system  by  one  single  postulate,  to  justify  (for 
instance)  the  name  ‘non-euclidean’. 

The  scope  of  this  particular  chapter  does  not  permit  me  to  enlarge 
upon  this  difficult  and  important  problem  as  to  the  differences  between 
the  A  and  A  systems,  but  for  orientation,  a  short  list  of  structural  differ¬ 
ences  is  given  here ;  all  of  which  involves  new  semantic  factors. 

The  primitive  form  of  representation  which  Aristotle  inherited, 
together  with  its  structural  implications  and  his  ‘philosophical  grammar*, 
which  was  called  ‘logic’,  are  strictly  interconnected,  so  much  so  that  one 
leads  to  the  other. 

In  the  present  ^-system,  I  reject  Aristotle’s  assumed  structure, 
usually  called  ‘metaphysics’  ( circa  350  B.c.),  and  accept  modern  science 
(1933)  as  my  ‘metaphysics’. 

I  reject  the  following  structurally  and  semantically  important  aspects 
of  the  ^-system,  which  I  shall  call  postulates,  and  which  underlie  the 
A -system-  function : 

1)  The  postulate  of  uniqueness  of  subject-predicate  representation 

LIN( lUISTK'  REVISION 

2)  The  two-valued  el  ‘logic’,  as  expressed  in  the  law  of  ‘excluded 
third*. 

3)  The  necessary  confusion  through  the  lack  of  discrimination 
between  the  ‘is’  of  identity,  which  I  reject  completely,  and  the  ‘is’  of 
predication,  the  ‘is’  of  existence,  and  the  ‘is’  used  as  an  auxiliary  verb. 

4)  The  elementalism,  as  exemplified  by  the  assumed  sharp  division 
of  ‘senses’  and  ‘mind’,  ‘percept’  and  ‘concept’,  ‘emotions’  and  ‘intellect’, . 

5)  The  el  theory  of  ‘meaning’. 

6)  The  el  postulate  of  two-valued  ‘cause-effect’. 

7)  The  el  theory  of  definitions,  which  disregards  the  undefined  terms. 

8)  The  three-dimensional  theory  of  propositions  and  language. 

9)  The  assumption  of  the  cosmic  validity  of  grammar. 

10)  The  preference  for  intensional  methods. 

11)  The  additive  and  el  definition  of  ‘man’. 

This  list  is  not  complete  but  sufficient  for  my  purpose  and  for 
orientation. 

I  reject  the  use  of  the  ‘is’  of  identity  entirely,  because  identity  is 
never  found  in  this  world,  and  devise  methods  to  make  such  a  rejection 
possible. 

I  base  the  ^-system-function  and  system  all  through  on  negative 
‘is  not*,  premises  which  cannot  be  denied  without  the  production  of 
impossible  data,  and  so  accept  ‘difference’,  ‘differentiation’. ,  as  funda¬ 
mental. 

I  accept  relations,  structure,  and  order  as  fundamental. 

I  accept  the  many-valued,  more  general,  structurally  more  correct 
‘logic  of  probability’  of  Lukasiewicz  and  Tarski,  which  in  my  non-el 
system  becomes  infinite- valued  (oo-valued)  semantics.* 

I  accept  functional  representation  whenever  possible. 

I  introduce  the  principle  of  non-elementalism  and  apply  it  all 
through,  which  leads  to:  (a)  A  non-el  theory  of  meanings;  ( b )  A 
non-el  theory  of  definitions  based  on  undefined  terms;  (c)  A  psycho- 
physiological  theory  of  semantic  reactions . 

I  accept  the  absolute  individuality  of  events  on  the  un-speakable 
objective  levels,  which  necessitates  the  conclusion  that  all  statements 
about  them  are  only  probable  in  various  degrees,  introducing  a  general 
principle  of  uncertainty  in  all  statements. 

I  accept  ‘logical  existence’  as  fundamental. 

I  introduce  differential  and  four-dimensional  methods. 

*1  use  the  term  infinite-,  or  oo-valued  in  the  sense  of  Cantor  as  a  variable 
finite . 

II.  GENERAL  ON  STRUCTURE 

I  accept  the  propositional  function  of  Russell. 

I  accept  the  doctrinal  function  of  Keyser,  and  generalize  the  system 
function  of  Sheffer. 

I  introduce  the  four-dimensional  theory  of  propositions  and  lan¬ 
guage. 

I  establish  the  multiordinality  of  terms. 

I  introduce  and  apply  psychophysiological  considerations  of  non-el 
orders  of  abstractions. 

I  expand  the  two-term  ‘cause-effect’  relation  into  an  oo-valued 
causality. 

I  accept  the  oo-valued  determinism  of  maximum  probability  instead 
of  the  less  general  two-valued  one. 

I  base  the  ^-system  on  extensional  methods,  which  necessitates  the 
introduction  of  a  new  punctuation  indicating  the  ‘etc.’  in  a  great  many 
statements. 

I  define  ‘man’  in  non-el  and  functional  terms. 

This  list  is  also  not  complete  and  is  given  for  orientation  and 
justification  of  the  name  of  a  non~aristotelian  system . 

In  the  rough,  all  science  is  developing  in  the  A  direction.  The  more 
it  succeeds  in  overcoming  the  old  structural  implications  of  speech,  and 
the  more  successful  it  is  in  building  new  vocabularies,  the  further  and 
more  rapidly  it  will  progress. 

Our  human  relations  at  present  are  still  mostly  based  on  the 
A -system- function.  The  issues  are  definite.  Either  we  shall  have  a 
science  of  man,  and,  therefore,  have  to  part  company  with  the  structural 
implications  of  our  old  language  and  corresponding  s.r — and  this  means 
we  shall  have  to  build  up  a  new  terminology,  which  is  A  in  structure,  and 
use  different  methods ; — or  we  shall  remain  in  A  semantic  clutches,  use 
A  language  and  methods,  involving  older  s.r,  and  have  no  science  of  man. 
As  I  am  engaged  in  building  up  a  science  of  man,  all  departures  I  am 
forced  to  make  from  accepted  methods  are  necessary  semantic  prelim¬ 
inaries  to  the  building  of  my  system  and  need  no  apology. 

It  is  no  exaggeration  to  say  that  the  A,  E,  and  N  systems  have  one 
most  interesting  structural  and  semantic  characteristic  in  common; 
namely,  that  they  have  a  few  unjustified  ‘infinities’  too  many.  The  mod¬ 
ern  E ,  N,  and,  finally,  A  systems,  after  analysis,  eliminate  these  unjusti¬ 
fied  notions.  New  systems  arise,  quite  different  from  the  old  ones,  which 
again  have  this  structural  characteristic  in  common,  that  they  have  a  few 
‘infinities’  less — an  important  semantic  factor,  especially  in  the  ^-system, 
as  it  helps  to  eliminate  our  older  delusional  mythologies.  In  the  mathe¬ 
matical  reconstruction  of  Brouwer,  Weyl,  and  the  Polish  School,  a  similar 

LINGUISTIC  RL  VIS  ION 

tendency  is  apparent,  leading  to  revision  of  the  mathematical  notions  of 
infinity.  For  instance,  the  E-system  involves  several  structural  ‘infinity’ 
assumptions.  In  it,  a  line  has  infinite  length ;  the  space  constant  is  infinite ; 
and  the  natural  unit  of  length  is  also  infinite.  In  the  jV-system,  the 
velocity  of  light  is  assumed  unconsciously  to  be  infinite,  a  structural 
assumption  false  to  facts.  The  ,4 -system  involves  also  false  to  facts 
infinity  assumptions,  explained  later.  It  is  extremely  interesting  to  note 
that  in  any  system  a  similar  result  follows  from  the  introduction  of  these 
different  ‘infinities’ ;  namely,  when  such  an  ‘infinity’  is  introduced  in  the 
denominator,  it  makes  the  whole  expression  vanish.  When,  in  the  observa¬ 
tion  of  actual  facts,  we  miss  some  characteristic  entirely;  for  instance, 
order,  it  leads  to  the  introduction  of  some  ‘infinity’  somewhere.  In  other 
words,  faulty,  insufficient  observation  leads  to  the  introduction  some¬ 
where  in  our  systems  of  some  fanciful  ‘infinities’. 

I  must  emphasize  again  the  semantic  difficulties  which  beset  us,  in 
the  formation  of  a  new  and  ^-system,  mainly  because  of  the  lack  of 
scientific  non-el  psycho-logics  and  general  semantics.  Having  no  general 
theories  to  guide  us  in  our  researches,  we  must  select  some  other  devices. 
We  can  survey  those  achievements  of  mankind  which  have  proved  to 
be  the  most  beneficial  and  of  most  lasting  value,  study  their  structure 
and  try  to  train  ourselves,  and  our  s.r,  in  repeating  the  psycho-logical 
processes  and  methods  which  have  made  them.  In  this  way,  we  are  led 
to  the  study  of  the  structure  of  mathematics  and  science,  and  acquire 
the  habit  of  rigorous  and  critical  ‘thought’  and  acquire  new  s.r.  Naturally, 
such  a  method  is  wasteful ;  it  would  be  simpler  to  have  general  non-el 
theories,  which  I  have  proposed  to  call  general  semantics  and  psycho¬ 
logies,  replacing  the  older  el  ‘logic’  and  ‘psychology’,  and  study  these 
short,  structurally  correct,  ready-made  formulations  to  train  our  s.r 
rather  than  to  study  the  actual  performance  of  scientists  and  mathema¬ 
ticians,  and  formulate  these  generalizations  for  ourselves.  But,  until  the 
present  work,  this  could  not  be  done. 

For  these  reasons,  we  shall  have  to  make,  in  the  following  chapters, 
a  short  survey  of  different  scientific  achievements  without  going  into 
technical  details,  but  giving  enough  of  these  details  to  indicate  structure 
and  its  bearing  on  s.r .  Every  thing  given  will  be  strictly  of  an  elementary 
character,  and  the  intelligent  reader  will  find  no  special  difficulties  in 
following  the  survey. 

The  selection  of  suitable  material  presented  a  very  serious  problem. 
I  consulted  with  many  friends  and  used  my  best  judgement,  backed  by 
some  experience.  An  important  factor  was  the  class  of  readers  for  whom 
this  book  is  written.  Sooner  or  later  a  new  branch  of  science  must  be — 

II.  GENERAL  ON  STRUCTURE 

and  will  be — established  for  the  pursuit  of  this  A  enquiry ;  so  the  future 
student  and  teacher  must  have  at  least  an  outline  of  the  main  problems. 
It  seemed  more  advisable  to  outline  main  issues  relevant  to  the  subject, 
than  to  work  out  some  of  them  in  more  detail.  A  great  deal  of  new  scien¬ 
tific  literature  on  structure  and  s.r  must  be  produced  by  mathematicians, 
psychiatrists,  linguists,  psychophysiologists , .  In  this  field,  experience  has 
taught  me  that  very  little  has  been  done  and  that  much  of  what  has  been 
done  cannot  be  accepted  without  a  non-el  revision.  It  seems  to  be  more 
convenient  that  the  reader  shall  not  be  referred  to  too  many  books,  and 
more  expedient  that  the  writer  should  not  take  too  much  for  granted ;  so 
most  of  the  structural  and  semantic  informations  which  are  necessary  for 
an  intelligent  reading  are  given,  together  with  additional  references  for 
students  who  wish  to  go  deeper  into  the  subject. 

The  reader  will  find  that  the  non-el  principle  has  been  emphasized. 
In  the  meantime,  in  the  writing  I  have  had  to  use  some  el  terms.  In 
such  cases,  I  used  the  old  terms  in  quotation  marks.  The  reason  for  this 
is  that  before  the  full  general  theory  is  developed,  it  is  impossible  to  do 
otherwise.  Besides,  even  if  organism-as-a- whole  terms  were  used  from 
the  beginning,  this  also  would  not  be  entirely  adequate ;  for  the  organism- 
as-a-whole  cannot  and  should  not  be  structurally  separated  from  its 
environment ;  and  so  the  terms  should  be  enlarged  to  cover,  by  implica¬ 
tion,  the  environment. 

Later  we  shall  see  that  all  languages  have  some  characteristics  simi¬ 
lar  to  mathematical  languages.  For  instance,  the  A  word,  ‘apple’,  as  it 
has  no  individual  subscripts  or  date,  is  not  a  name  for  a  definite  object 
or  stage  of  a  process  which  are  all  different ,  but  a  name  for  a  definition , 
which,  in  principle,  is  one-valued,  while  the  objective  processes  are 
oo-valued.  If  this  mechanism  is  not  clearly  understood,  we  are  bound  in 
dealing  with  actual  oo-valued  stages  of  processes,  to  identify  the  oo  values 
into  one  or  a  few  values.  The  above  considerations  necessitate  a  non-el 
new  theory  of  meanings  in  accordance  with  the  structure  of  the  world 
and  our  nervous  system. 

The  distinction  between  mathematical  and  physical  languages  is 
structurally  most  important,  although  once  identification  is  entirely  elim¬ 
inated,  we  discover  that  all  possible  characteristics  found  in  this  world 
are  due  to  structuret  and  so  can  be  expressed  in  terms  of  structure,  rela¬ 
tions,  and  multi-dimensional  order. 

Several  similar  difficulties  will  appear  later  on,  all  having  a  similar 
general  characteristic ;  namely,  that  we  seem  to  reach  an  impasse,  from 
which  there  is  no  way  out.  Yet  escape  can  be  found,  not  by  solution  in 
the  old  way,  but  by  reformulating  the  problem  so  as  to  make  a  solution 

LINGUISTIC  REVISION 

possible.  This  method  is  of  extreme  usefulness  in  mathematics,  and 
seemingly  can  be  applied  to  life  also. 

If  we  compare  the  three  systems  of  Aristotle,  Euclid,  and  Newton, 
designated,  A ,  E,  N,  respectively,  in  Fig.  1,  with  the  non-aristotelian, 
non-euclidean  and  non-newtonian  systems,  designated  A,  E,  N,  a  very 
important  fact  should  be  noticed ;  namely,  that 
the  AEN  trilogy  is  more  general  than  AEN . 

This  fact  has  far-reaching  semantic  and  prac¬ 
tical  consequences  and  perhaps  can  be  best 
explained  by  the  aid  of  a  diagram.  We  see 
that  the  AEN  trilogy  includes  the  AEN 
trilogy  as  a  particular  case,  from  which  it 
follows  that  all  those  readers  who  are  already 
re-educated  to  the  new  AEN  s.r ,  have  less 
difficulty  in  understanding  the  older  AENt 
simply  because  the  older  systems  are  only 
particular  cases  of  the  new  AEN .  But  this  is  not  so  with  those  readers 
who  still  have  the  old  AEN  s.r ;  they  have  to  enlarge  their  limited  point 
of  view,  grasp  more  than  they  knew  before,  and  so  will  have  serious 
semantic  difficulties  for  a  while,  and,  perhaps,  become  impatient  or  even 
angry.  With  the  understanding  of  this  larger  generality  of  the  new 
AEN ,  perhaps  a  great  deal  of  this  semantic  futile  unpleasantness  can 
be  eliminated, 

I  know  of  no  better  example  to  illustrate  this  than  to  refer  the 
reader  to  a  little  elementary  book,  Debate  on  the  Theory  of  Relativity , 
published  by  the  Open  Court  Co.,  Chicago.2  It  is  really  interesting  to 
watch  how  good-natured  the  einsteinists  are  as  compared  with  the  new- 
tonians.  This  book  is  suggested  because  it  is  elementary,  extremely 
instructive,  and  very  well  worth  reading.  But  the  whole  literature  of 
euclideanism,  non-euclideanism,  newtonianism  and  non-newtonianism 
gives  ample  proof  of  the  above  statements.  What  kind  of  verbal  flowers 
the  aristotelians  will  throw  to  the  non-aristotelians  remains  to  be  seen ; 
but  some  verbal  and  semantic  uproar  can  be  expected. 

It  should  be  expected  that  this  widening  of  horizons  can  only  be 
attained,  after  all,  with  difficulty,  because  it  requires  an  alteration  of 
habitual  reactions,  from  one-,  two-,  and  three- valued  to  oo-valued  new 
s.r — usually  not  easy  to  achieve.  But  there  seems  little  doubt  that  the 
future  depends  on  it,  and  so  we  shall  not  be  able  to  escape  it  indefinitely. 

As  we  usually  fail  to  make  allowances  for  the  ‘emotional'  aspects  of 
‘intellectual'  pursuits,  let  me  once  more  point  to  the  fact  that  even  purely 
‘intellectual'  achievements  have  their  ‘emotional'  components  and  these 

II.  GENERAL  ON  STRUCTURE 

are  included  in  the  non-el  s.r  It  seems  that  broader  oo -valued  under¬ 
standing  has  beneficial  effect  on  our  s.r,  a  result  which  should  be  expected, 
if,  as  at  present,  we  have  no  reason  to  doubt  that  the  organism-as-a- 
whole  is  a  dependable  structural  non-el  generalization. 

PART  III 

NON-ELEMENT ALISTIC  STRUCTURES 

The  history  of  human  thought  may  be  roughly  divided  into  three  periods, 
each  period  has  gradually  evolved  from  its  predecessor.  The  beginning 
of  one  period  overlaps  the  other.  As  a  base  for  my  classification  I  shall 
take  the  relationship  between  the  observer  and  the  observed.  .  .  . 

The  first  period  may  be  called  the  Greek,  or  Metaphysical,  or  Pre- 
Scientific  Period.  In  this  period  the  observer  was  everything,  the  observed 
did  not  matter. 

The  second  period  may  be  called  the  Classical  or  Semi-Scientific — still 
reigning  in  most  fields — where  the  observer  was  almost  nothing  and  the 
only  thing  that  mattered  was  the  observed.  This  tendency  gave  rise  to 
that  which  we  may  call  gross  empiricism  and  gross  materialism.  . 

The  third  period  may  be  called  the  Mathematical,  or  Scientific  Period. 
...  In  this  period  mankind  will  understand  {some  understand  it  already) 
that  all  that  man  can  know  is  a  joint  phenomenon  of  the  observer  and  the  ob¬ 
served.  ... 

Someone  may  ask,  How  about  “intuitions,"  “emotions,"  etc.?  The 
answer  is  simple  and  positive.  It  is  a  fallacy  of  the  old  schools  to  divide 
man  into  parcels,  elements;  all  human  faculties  consist  of  an  inter-con¬ 
nected  whole  .  .  .  (280)  A.  K. 

The  organism  is  inexplicable  without  environment.  Every  characteristic 
of  it  has  some  relation  to  environmental  factors.  And  particularly  the 
organism  as  a  whole,  i.  e.,  the  unity  and  order,  the  physiological  differences, 
relations  and  harmonies  between  its  parts,  are  entirely  meaningless  except 
in  relation  to  an  external  world,  my  Charles  m.  child 

In  reality  it  is  the  brain  as  a  whole  which  is  the  centre  of  association, 
and  the  association  is  the  very  raison  d’etre  of  the  nervous  system  as  a 
Whole.  (411)  HENRI  pi£ron 

The  views  of  space  and  time  which  I  wish  to  lay  before  you  have  sprung 
from  the  soil  of  experimental  physics,  and  therein  lies  their  strength.  They 
are  radical.  Henceforth  space  by  itself,  and  time  by  itself,  are  doomed  to 
fade  away  into  mere  shadows,  and  only  a  kind  of  union  of  the  two  will 
preserve  an  independent  reality,  (352)  H.  minkowski 

This  assumption  is  not  permissible  in  atomic  physics;  the  interaction 
between  observer  and  object  causes  uncontrollable  and  large  changes  in 
the  system  being  observed,  because  of  the  discontinuous  changes  charac¬ 
teristic  of  atomic  processes.  (2i5>  w.  Heisenberg 

Well,  this  is  one  of  the  characteristics  by  which  we  recognize  the  facts 
which  yield  great  results.  They  are  those  which  allow  of  these  happy  in¬ 
novations  of  language.  The  crude  fact  then  is  often  of  no  great  interest; 
we  may  point  it  out  many  times  without  having  rendered  great  services 
to  science.  It  takes  value  only  when  a  wiser  thinker  perceives  the  relation 
for  which  it  stands,  and  symbolizes  it  by  a  word.  (417)  h.  poincar£ 

CHAPTER  VIII 

GENERAL  EPISTEMOLOGICAL 

The  physiological  gradient  is  a  case  of  protoplasmic  memory  since  it 
represents  the  persistence  of  the  effects  of  environmental  action.  The 
establishment  of  a  gradient  in  a  protoplasm  may  be  regarded  as  a  process 
of  learning.  Charles  m.  child 

In  what  has  already  been  said,  we  have  emphasized  repeatedly  the 
‘organism-as-a- whole’  principle.  The  principle  is  structural,  involving 
most  important  semantic  factors  and  so  deserves  a  more  detailed  con¬ 
sideration. 

Since  the  days  of  Aristotle,  more  than  two  thousand  years  ago,  this 
principle  has  been  often  emphasized,  often  belittled,  but,  withal,  seldom 
applied.  That  all  we  know  about  life  and  organisms  seems  to  justify 
such  a  principle  seems  obvious. 

The  arguments  of  those  experimentalists  who  belittle  or  object  to 
such  a  principle  seem  to  be  all  of  a  similar  type,  and  are,  perhaps,  best 
expressed  by  Professor  H.  S.  Jennings,  who,  in  his  friendly  review  of 
Ritter’s  book  on  the  Organismal  Conception  of  Life ,  concludes  that 
such  an  ‘organismal  conception’  is  quite  justified,  but  is  entirely  sterile 
and  does  not  help  laboratory  workers. 

It  must  be  granted  that  at  the  date  when  the  book  of  Ritter  and 
the  review  of  Jennings  were  written  such  a  statement  was  seemingly 
justified.  The  principle  is  usually  treated  as  a  rough  generalization  from 
experience  and  is  not  analysed  further;  the  structural epistemological, 
psycho-logical  and  semantic  consequences  were  not  known,  and  so  the 
laboratory  workers  actually  did  not  realize  that  they  have  much  help. 

As  we  have  already  seen,  the  main  semantic  issues  were,  and  are, 
structural .  How  can  we  apply  the  organism-as-a-whole  principle  if  we 
insist  on  keeping  an  el  language  and  attitude?  Naturally,  if  the  principle 
is  not  applied,  it  is  futile  to  look  for  semantic  consequences  of  a  non- 
applied  principle.  But  once  the  principle  is  applied,  a  new  language  has 
to  be  built,  of  different  structure  and,  therefore ,  new  implications ,  which 
suggest  a  long  series  of  new  experiments. 

