A  new  and  structurally  different  theory  may  be  summarized  in  a 
single  term — as,  for  instance,  ‘tropism’  or  ‘dynamic  gradient’,  a  fact 
which  not  only  revolutionizes  our  knowledge  but  which  leads  also  to 
entirely  new  experiments  and  further  knowledge.  Experiments,  as  such, 

111.  NON-ELEMENTAL1ST1C  STRUCTURES 

always  give  relational,  structural  data,  that,  under  such  and  such  con¬ 
ditions,  such  and  such  results  follow.  The  non~el  attitude  and  language, 
as  opposed  to  the  old  elementalism,  is  a  part  of  a  broader  and  more 
fundamental  semantic  problem ;  namely,  similarity  of  structure  between 
language  and  the  external  world.  Such  similarity  leads  to  similarity  of 
‘logical*  relations,  predictability,  and  so  forth,  and,  in  general,  to  the 
understanding  of  the  structure  of  the  world  and  new  s.r. 

There  are  many  examples  of  such  organism-as-a-whole  terms,  but 
for  the  present  we  will  mention  only  the  terms  ‘tropism*  in  the  gen¬ 
eralized  sense  of  Loeb,  and  the  ‘dynamic  or  physiological  gradients*  of 
Professor  Child.  The  term  ‘tropism*  means  the  response  of  the  organ- 
ism-as-a- whole  to  special  external  stimuli.  For  instance,  the  term  ‘helio- 
tropism*  is  applied  in  cases  when  the  organism  responds  to  the  influence 
of  light;  ‘chemotropism*,  when  it  reacts  to  chemical  stimuli;  ‘galvano- 
tropism*,  when  the  organism  responds  to  galvanic  (electrical)  stimulation , . 

The  term  ‘dynamic  or  physiological  gradient*  is  the  foundation  of 
the  A  biological  system  of  Professor  Child.  Because  of  its  importance, 
I  shall  explain  the  meaning  of  this  term  in  some  detail.1 

All  protoplasm  exhibits  empirically  a  structural  characteristic  which 
may  be  called  ‘irritability*,  which  appears  as  a  reaction  of  living  proto¬ 
plasm  to  external  dynamic  influences.  That  ‘irritability*,  as  a  structural 
characteristic,  becomes  obvious  when  we  consider  that  structurally  dis¬ 
integrated  protoplasm  is  colloidally  inactive  and  becomes  ‘dead*.  Many 
of  the  most  important  characteristics  of  living  protoplasm  are  strictly 
bound  up  with  structural  integrity. 

This  ‘irritability*  occurs  in  a  structural  plenum  and  is  transmitted 
to  other  regions  of  the  protoplasm  with  differing  yet  Unite  velocities, 
and  not  in  ‘no  time’,  as  Alice  would  say.  Let  us  imagine  a  non-differen- 

tiated,  except  for  the  limiting  surface 

(A) ,  and  living  bit  of  protoplasm.  This 
limiting  surface  represents  that  part  of 
the  protoplasm  which  is  in  direct  con¬ 
tact  with  the  environment.  If  the  ex¬ 
ternal  dynamic  factor  (S)  excites  this 
living  bit  of  protoplasm  at  a  point  (B), 
this  stimulus  will  be  the  strongest  at 

(B) ,  and  it  will  spread  to  the  further 
removed  portions  of  (A)  in  a  dimin¬ 
ishing  gradient.  If  the  decrement  is 
not  too  sharp,  the  stimulus  will  reach 

the  furthest  regions  of  (A)  ;  namely,' (C),  (D),  (E),  (F),. 

GENERAL  EPISTEMOLOGICAL 

The  presence  or  absence  of  the  decrement  or  its  steepness  and  the 
intensity  of  the  excitation  during  transmission  depends  on  the  specific 
character  of  the  protoplasm,  and  varies  from  individual  to  individual, 
and  in  different  regions  and  under  different  conditions  varies  in  one 
individual. 

Thus,  we  see  that  a  living  cell  has  a  necessary  relationship  with  the 
environment  and  with  external  energies  because  of  its  limiting  surface. 
The  difference  between  the  ‘inside  of  the  skin*  and  the  ‘outside  of  the 
skin*  establishes  the  organism-as-a-whole.  The  interplay  between  the 
inside  and  the  outside  is  structural  and  supplies  the  energies  which 
activate  the  organism.  The  membrane  formation  is  mostly  not  dependent 
upon  the  constitution  of  any  particular  protoplasm,  but  is  rather  a  gen¬ 
eral  reaction  of  all  protoplasm  to  environmental  influences. 

The  evidence  we  have  seems  to  show  that  in  all  protoplasm  in  which 
we  find  no  specialized  conducting  paths  a  certain  decrement  appears, 
so  that  the  effectiveness  of  transmission  is  limited.  In  a  primitive  non- 
differentiated  protoplasm  different  points  further  removed  from  (B)  will 
show  different  degrees  of  excitatory  changes  decreasing  from  (B).  At 
a  certain  point  the  transmission  may  cease  altogether. 

The  result,  then,  becomes  an  excitation-transmission  gradient  of 
greater  or  lesser  length,  the  different  levels  of  which  represent  various 
degrees  or  intensities  of  excitation. 

The  primary  region  of  excitation  (B)  is  physiologically  more  affected 
and  dominant  over  the  other  regions  to  which  the  excitation  is  trans¬ 
mitted,  because  it  has  more  effect  upon  them  than  they  have  upon  it. 
The  effect  of  such  conditions  gives  rise  to  a  temporary  structural 
organismal  pattern.  The  region  of  primary  excitation  (B)  becomes  the 
dominant  region,  and  the  other  regions  become  subordinate  to  it. 

The  potentiality  for  the  excitation  and  the  transmission  was  struc¬ 
turally  present  in  the  protoplasm,  but  this  could  not  produce  the  pattern 
which  resulted  from  the  external  excitation.  We  see  that  the  action  of 
the  external  factor  was  necessary  for  the  realization  of  the  definite 
physiological  pattern  whose  potentialities  were  in  the  protoplasm. 

These  new  excitation-transmission  patterns  exhibit  all  the  charac¬ 
teristics  of  new  structural  patterns  in  the  protoplasmic  mass.  They  deter¬ 
mine  localized  differences  at  different  points,  (C),  (D),  (E),.  These 
differences  and  relations  with  the  dominant  region  (B)  constitute  a 
physiological  axis  with  (B)  at  one  pole.  This  new  pattern  constitutes  a 
new  structural  integration,  which  is  a  joint  phenomenon  of  the  poten¬ 
tialities  of  the  protoplasm  and  the  environmental  action.  This  relation 
is  of  a  functional  and  not  merely  of  a  ‘plus*  character.  Child  shows  that 

III.  NON-ELEMENT ALI STIC  STRUCTURES 

the  physiological  axes  in  their  simpler  forms  are  similar  to,  if  not  the 
result  of,  such  excitation-transmission  gradients. 

For  the  organism  to  work  as-a-whole,  some  sort  of  integrating  pat¬ 
tern  is  necessary.  The  behaviour  of  the  organism-as-a-whole  results, 
first,  from  patterns  already  present,  and,  second,  from  the  possibilities 
of  further  development  and  integration  in  response  to  particular  external 
factors.  The  physiological  gradients  give  such  means. 

The  development  of  our  nervous  system  is  strictly  connected  with 
the  above  principles  discovered  by  Child.2  In  axiate  animals  and  man 
the  chief  aggregation  of  nervous  tissues  is  localized  in  the  apical  (head) 
end,  which  region  is  characterized  primarily  by  a  higher  rate  of  meta¬ 
bolism  in  the  early  stages.  Physiological  gradients  originate  as  simple 
protoplasmic  reactions  to  external  stimuli,  and  so  the  nervous  system 
originates  in  protoplasmic  behaviour.  Nerves  then  become  simply  struc¬ 
turalized  and  permanent  physiological  gradients,  and  so  exert  a  physio¬ 
logical  dominance  over  other  tissues. 

From  an  epistemological  point  of  view,  we  should  notice  that  the 
gradients  are  primarily  quantitative  and  that  we  do  not  need  specific 
factors  to  determine  them.  Any  factor  that  will  determine  a  more  or  less 
persistent  quantitative  differential  in  the  protoplasm  ought  to  be  effective. 
The  above  theory  is  structurally  supported  by  a  large  number  of  experi¬ 
ments.  For  instance,  we  can  experimentally  obliterate  or  determine  new 
gradients.8  The  organism  appears  in  this  new  light  as  a  behaviour  re- 
action-pattern,  and  substantiates  the  old  saying  that  the  function  builds 
the  organ.  Not  only  should  the  organism  be  treated  as-a-whole,  but  it  is 
impossible  to  isolate  the  organism  from  its  environment.  A  functional 
interrelationship  is  established  between  the  two. 

This  theory  appears,  also,  to  be  fundamental  for  psychiatry  and 
for  psycho-logics,  for  it  establishes  the  head  as  a  dominant  region  on  the 
base  of  an  experimentally  proven  higher  rate  of  metabolism.  From 
Child’s  point  of  view,  as  suggested  by  D'r.  William  A.  White,  the  main 
dynamic  gradient,  the  central  nervous  axis,  gives  the  structuralized  evi¬ 
dence  of  the  degree  of  correlation  of  the  other  organs  and  of  the  degree 
that  the  body  is  under  the  control  of  the  head-end  of  this  gradient.  The 
failure  to  keep  in  touch  with  this  centre  of  control  leads  to  the  disinte¬ 
gration  of  the  individual4.  The  head-end  is  also  the  most  modifiable  point 
m  the  axis  of  control,  a  conclusion  which  is  of  the  utmost  significance 
in  psychotherapy.  It  is  known  that  the  metabolism  of  organs  can  be 
affected  by  ‘psychic’  stimuli,  and  it  is  only  one  step  further  to  under¬ 
stand,  as  White  says,  why  we  may  have  other  structuralized  functions, 
such  as  structuralized  anti-social  feelings,  structuralized  greed,  structur- 

GENERAL  EPISTEMOLOGICAL 

alized  hate.,  facts  which  are  observed  daily  in  ordinary  life  and  in 
asylums.  From  the  point  of  view  of  the  theory  of  Child,  the  nervous 
system  appears  not  only  as  a  structuralized  conducting  gradient,  but  it 
also  explains  how  specific  conducting  tissues  could  have  evolved  from 
non-specific  living  protoplasm.  It  is  important  to  notice  the  dominance 
which  the  primary  region  of  excitation  exerts  over  the  others,  since,  with 
the  great  complexities  of  the  human  brain,  we  understand  better  why 
so-called  'mental’  and  semantic  issues,  which  are  phylogenetically  the 
youngest,  are  of  such  importance. 

In  our  daily  life  we  deal  with  different  people,  some  of  whom  are 
seriously  ill  ‘mentally’  and  who,  under  favorable  conditions,  would  be 
under  medical  attendance.  The  majority  of  us — some  specialists  con¬ 
sider  it  to  run  even  as  high  as  ninety  per  cent  of  the  whole  population — 
would  be  better  off  if  taken  care  of  by  some  psychiatrist,  or,  at  least, 
if  under  consultation  from  time  to  time. 

Owing  to  old  religious  prejudices,  often  unconscious,  it  is  still 
believed  that  those  ‘mentally’  ill  are  either  obsessed  by  ‘demons’  or  are 
being  punished  for  some  ‘evil’, .  The  majority  even  of  enlightened 
people  have  a  kind  of  semantic  horror  or  fright  at  ‘mental’  ills,  not 
realizing  that  under  the  animalistic  conditions  which  prevail  at  present 
in  our  theories,  ‘ethical’,  social,  economic.,  those  only  with  the  least 
human  traits  are  favored,  while  those  most  human  cannot  stand  such 
animalistic  conditions  and  often  break  down.  It  is  not  a  novelty  that 
a  moron  cannot  be  ‘insane’.  A  moron  lacks  something;  only  the  more 
gifted  individuals,  the  more  human  (as  compared  with  animals),  break 
down.  I  know  of  many  psychiatrists  who  say  that  ‘it  takes  a  “good 
mind”  to  be  “insane” 

Now,  ‘mental’  and  semantic  excitation,  which  phylogenetically  ap¬ 
peared  so  recently,  naturally  plays,  in  many  instances,  a  dominant  part, 
a  fact  which  science,  until  very  lately,  has  completely  disregarded.  The 
present  theory  makes  it  quite  obvious  that  with  animalistic  theories  in 
existence,  and  un-sanity  (lack  of  consciousness  of  abstracting,  confusion 
of  orders  of  abstractions  resulting  from  identifications.,)  practically 
universally  operating  in  every  one  of  us,  a  seriously  unbalanced  race 
must  be  produced. 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  consistent  application  of  a  non-el 
language  in  the  analysis  of  animal  behaviour  has  suggested  new  experi¬ 
ments  and  that,  as  a  result,  the  use  of  such  terms  had  its  influence  on 
laboratory  workers.  It  does  not  matter  to  what  extent  these  terms,  or 
the  theories  which  they  represented,  were  ‘right’  or  ‘wrong’,  they  were 
terms  of  the  non-el  type,  and  they  expressed  in  one  term  entirely  struc- 

111.  NON-ELEMENTALIST1C  STRUCTURES 

turally  new  and  far-reaching  theories.  In  testing  these  theories,  new 
series  of  experiments  were  required.  Even  when  the  new  experiments 
were  devised  to  verify  the  older  experiments,  again  the  laboratory  workers 
got  direct  benefit  of  the  structurally  new  terms.  But  these  benefits  were 
largely  unconscious,  and  so  biologists  could  believe  in  the  older  days 
that  they  had  no  laboratory  benefits  from  the  use  of  such  terms;  how¬ 
ever,  this  belief  is  now  entirely  unjustified. 

Since  the  non-el  principle  is  not  only  a  structurally  justified  empiri¬ 
cal  generalization,  but  also  involves  for  its  application  the  structural 
rebuilding  of  our  language  and  old  theories,  the  semantic  issues  are  far- 
reaching  and  of  great  practical  value. 

The  application  of  the  principle  means  the  rejection  of  the  old 
elementalism  which  results  and  leads  to  identifications  and  to  blinding 
semantic  disturbances,  which,  in  turn,  prevent  clear  vision  and  unbiased 
creative  freedom. 

According  to  the  modern  theory  of  materials,  as  given  in  Part  X, 
the  mutual  interdependence,  the  mutual  action  and  reaction  of  every¬ 
thing  in  this  world  upon  everything  else  appears  as  a  structural  fact 
and  a  necessity,  and  so  el  languages  cannot  be  expected  to  lead  to  satis¬ 
factory  semantic  solutions.  We  should  not  be  surprised  to  find  that  the 
struggle  against  identification  and  elementalism  appears  at  some  stage 
in  every  science. 

Some  of  the  most  prominent  examples  of  this  tendency  outside  of 
biology,  psychiatry. ,  can  be  found  in  modern  physics.  From  a  structural 
point  of  view  the  whole  theory  of  Einstein  is  nothing  else  than  an 
attempt  to  reformulate  physics  on  a  structurally  new  non-el  and  A 
foundation — an  exact  structural  parallel  of  the  biological  organism-as-a- 
whole  principle. 

Einstein  realized  that  the  empirical  structure  of  ‘space*  and  ‘time* 
with  which  the  physicist  and  the  average  man  deals  is  such  that  it  can¬ 
not  be  empirically  divided,  and  that  we  actually  deal  with  a  blend  which 
we  have  split  only  elementalistically  and  verbally  into  these  fictitious 
entities.  He  decided  to  build  a  verbal  system  closer  in  structure  to  the 
facts  of  experience  and,  with  the  help  of  the  mathematician  Minkowski, 
he  formulated  a  system  of  new  structure  which  employed  a  non-el  lan¬ 
guage  of  space-time.  As  we  know  from  physics  and  astronomy,  this 
non-el  language  suggested  experiments ,  and  so  it  had  beneficial  labora¬ 
tory  application.  But,  in  fact,  the  influence  goes  still  deeper,  as  the  pres¬ 
ent  work  will  show,  for  such  structural  advances  carry  with  them 
profound  psycho-logical,  semantic  effects.  Although,  at  present,  these 

GliNKRAL  KIMSTKMOLOCilCAL 

beneficial  influences  operate  unconsciously,  they,  nevertheless,  tend  to 
counteract  the  el  and  absolutistic  semantic  effects  of  identification. 

It  is  interesting  to  note  that  the  Einstein  theory,  because  struc¬ 
tural,  has  had  the  effect  upon  the  younger  physicists  of  a  semantic 
release  from  the  old  structural  elementalism  and  has  prepared  the  seman¬ 
tic  ground  for  the  crop  of  young  geniuses  which  has  sprung  up  lately  in 
the  quantum  field.  It  was  found  that  the  el  ‘absolute’  division  of  the 
‘observer’  and  the  ‘observed’  was  false  to  facts,  because  every  observa¬ 
tion  in  this  field  disturbs  the  observed.  The  elimination  of  this  elemen¬ 
talism  in  the  quantum  field  led  to  the  most  revolutionary  restricted 
‘uncertainty  principle’  of  Heisenberg,  which,  without  abolishing  deter¬ 
minism,  requires  the  transforming  of  the  two-valued  A  ‘logic’  into  the 
oo -valued  semantics  of  probability.  Again,  this  advance  in  quantum 
formulations  has  suggested  new  experiments. 

The  y?-system,  as  originated  by  the  writer  in  his  Manhood  of 
Humanity  and  other  writings,  is  also  the  result  of  the  structurally  non-el 
tendency.  In  Manhood  of  Humanity ,  I  introduced  a  non-el  term,  ‘time¬ 
binding  ,  by  which  is  meant  all  the  factors  which  as-a-whole  make  man 
a  man,  and  which  differentiate  him  from  animals.  In  carrying  the  sys¬ 
tem  further  in  the  present  book,  I  reject  the  structurally  el  separation 
involved  in  such  terms  as  ‘senses’  and  ‘mind’. ,  and  introduce,  instead, 
non-el  terms,  such  as  ‘different  orders  of  abstractions’. ,  where  ‘mind* 
and  ‘senses’. ,  are  no  longer  divided.  Curiously  enough,  even  in  such  a 
field,  the  method  has  suggested  experiments,  and  so  again  the  new 
language  has  laboratory  importance. 

What  has  been  said  above  about  the  organism-as-a-whole,  and  illus¬ 
trated  by  particular  cases,  seems  to  show  a  general  characteristic  of  all 
our  abstracting  capacities.  We  usually  disregard,  or  fail  to  appreciate, 
the  fact  that  a  single  structurally  important  new  term  might  lead  to 
the  re-postulation  of  the  whole  structure  of  the  language  in  the  given 
field.  In  science  we  search  for  structure ;  so  any  structurally  new  term 
is  useful,  because,  when  tested,  it  always  gives  structural  information, 
whether  positive  or  negative.  In  our  human  affairs,  it  is  different.  All 
our  human  institutions  follow  the  structure  of  the  language  used ;  but 
we  never  ‘think’  of  that,  and,  when  the  silly  institutions  do  not  work, 
we  blame  it  all  on  ‘human  nature’,  without  any  scientific  justification. 

Poincare,  in  one  of  his  essays,  speaks  about  the  harmful  effect  which 
the  term  ‘heat’  had  on  physics.  Grammatically,  the  term  ‘heat’  is  classi¬ 
fied  as  a  substantive,  and  so  physics  was  labouring  for  centuries  looking 
for  some  ‘substance’  which  would  correspond  to  the  substantive  name 
‘heat’.  We  know  by  now  that  there  is  no  such  thing,  but  that  ‘heat’  must 

III.  NON-ELEMENTALISTIC  STRUCTURES 

be  considered  as  a  manifestation  of  ‘energy*.  If  we  choose  to  carry  this 
analysis  further,  we  should  find  that  ‘energy*  is  also  not  a  very  satis¬ 
factory  term,  but  that  ‘action*,  perhaps,  is  more  fundamental. 

In  dealing  with  ourselves  and  the  world  around  us,  we  must  take 
into  account  the  structural  fact  that  everything  in  this  world  is  strictly 
interrelated  with  everything  else,  and  so  we  must  make  efforts  to  dis¬ 
card  primitive  el  terms,  which  imply  structurally  a  non-existing  isolation. 

The  moment  this  is  realized,  we  shall  have  to  treat  the  non-el  prin¬ 
ciple  seriously.  As  the  new  terms  have,  also,  their  non-el  implications, 
such  terms  throw  new  light  on  old  problems. 

In  practice,  it  is  difficult,  at  first,  to  avoid  the  use  of  old  terms. 
When  we  want  to  digest  fully  a  new  and  important  work  based  on  new 
structural  terms  and  acquire  corresponding  s.r,  the  best  way  to  train 
oneself  in  the  use  of  the  new  terms  is  by  gradually  dropping  the  old 
terms.  If  we  have  to  use  the  old  terms,  then  we  should  train  ourselves 
to  be  aware  of  their  insufficiency  and  of  their  fallacious  structural  im¬ 
plications ,  and  so  be  free  from  the  old  s.r. 

The  use  of  the  new  terms  should  be  deliberate.  We  should  put  the 
problem  to  ourselves  somewhat  as  follows:  The  old  language  is  struc¬ 
turally,  and,  therefore,  by  implication,  semantically  unsatisfactory;  the 
new  terms  seem  to  correspond  closer  to  facts ;  let  us  test  the  new  terms. 
Are  the  new  terms  always  structurally  satisfactory?  Probably  not,  but 
in  science  experiments  check  predictions,  and  so  new  structural  issues 
become  clarified. 

We  have  been  speaking  about  new  and  old  terms  quite  simply,  yet 
the  issues  are  not  so  simple.  The  invention  of  a  single  structurally  new 
term  always  involves  new  structural  and  relational  notions,  which,  again, 
involve  s.r .  For  instance,  if  we  study  any  event,  and  in  that  study  use 
the  terms  ‘tropism*,  or  ‘dynamic  gradient*,  or  ‘time-binding*,  or  ‘order 
of  abstractions',  or  ‘space-time*,  or  ‘wave-packets*. ,  we  must  use  all 
structural  and  semantic  implications  the  terms  involve. 

Using  the  first  four  terms,  we  are  bound  to  treat  the  organism-as-a- 
whole,  for  the  terms  are  not  el.  They  are  not  based  on  the  notion  of,  nor 
do  they  postulate,  some  fictitious  ‘isolated’  elements.  In  using  space-time, 
we  introduce  the  individuality  of  events,  as  every  ‘point  of  space*  carries 
with  itself  a  date,  which,  by  necessity,  makes  every  ‘point*  in  space-time 
unique  and  individual.  In  using  the  term  ‘wave-packet*,  we  re-interpret 
the  older  objectified  and,  perhaps,  fictitious  ‘electron’, . 

The  consistent  and  permanent  use  of  such  terms  naturally  involves, 
structurally,  a  new  world-outlook,  new  s.r,  more  justified  by  our  scien¬ 
tific  and  daily  experience.  But  the  greatest  gain  is  usually  in  getting 

GENERAL  EPISTEMOLOGICAL 

away  from  primitive  structural  notions  and  metaphysics,  with  their 
vicious  semantic  disturbances.  In  creative  work,  semantic  Imitations 
hamper  a  dear  understanding,  and  prevent  scientists  from  inventing  or 
formulating  better,  simpler,  and  more  effective  theories  of  different 
structure. 

As  soon  as  we  possess  ‘knowledge’,  then  we  shall  ‘know’  all  that 
there  is  to  be  known.  By  definition,  there  cannot  be  any  unknowable . 
There  is  a  place  for  the  unknown  structure.  The  unknown  is  rather 
extensive,  partly  because  science  has  been,  and  still  is,  persecuted,  as 
has  already  been  pointed  out. 

The  so-called  ‘unknowable’  was  the  semantic  result  of  identifica¬ 
tion,  of  a  semantic  unbalance,  which  posits  for  knowledge  something 
‘beyond’  knowledge.  But  has  such  a  postulation  any  meanings  outside 
of  psychopathology?  Of  course  not,  as  it  starts  with  a  self -contradictory 
assumption,  which,  being  senseless,  must  lead  to  senseless  results. 

We  have  dwelt  on  the  problems  of  the  structure  of  terms  at  such 
length,  because  they  are  generally  disregarded,  but  they  are,  for  semantic 
purposes,  fundamental.  The  reader  will  get  the  main  benefit  of  this  book 
and  will  receive  help  in  understanding  modern  scientific  issues  if  he  be¬ 
comes  entirely  convinced  of  the  seriousness  of  structural  and  semantic 
problems. 

Terms  are  artifices  of  humans  which  are  necessary  to  economize 
effort  in  the  field  of  ‘experience’  and  experimentation.  They  are  useful  in 
reducing  the  actual  amount  of  experience  necessary,  by  allowing  verbal 
experimentation.  The  human  rate  of  progress  is  swifter  than  that  of 
the  animals,  and  this  is  due  mainly  to  the  fact  that  we  can  summarize 
and  transmit  past  experiences  to  the  young  generation  in  a  degree  far 
more  effective  than  that  of  the  animals.  We  have  also  extra-neural 
means  for  recording  experiences,  which  the  animals  lack  entirely. 

That  such  verbal  experimentation  is  possible  at  all  is  conditioned 
by  the  fact  that  languages  have  structure ,  and  that  our  knowledge  of  the 
world  is  structural  knowledge.  Let  us  repeat  once  more  that  if  two  rela¬ 
tions  have  similar  structure,  all  of  their  ‘logical’  characteristics  are  simi¬ 
lar;  therefore,  once  structure  is  discovered,  such  a  process  of  verbal 
experimentation  becomes  extremely  effective,  and  an  accelerating  cultural 
device.  The  use  of  an  antiquated  language  in  our  human  affairs,  in 
addition  to  other  drawbacks,  prevents  our  being  more  intelligent  in 
those  affairs. 

The  natural  order  of  investigation  is  indicated  thus:  (1)  Empirical 
search  for  structure  in  the  sciences;  (2)  Once  this  structure  is  dis¬ 
covered,  at  each  date,  the  structure  of  our  language  is  adjusted  to  it  and 

111.  NON-ELEMENTAL1ST1C  STRUCTURES 

our  new  s.r  trained.  Historically,  we  have  partially  followed  the  reversed, 
and  ultimately  pre-human,  and  so  pathological,  order.  Without  science, 
and  with  extremely  meagre  and  primitive  knowledge  of  the  structure  of 
the  world,  we  have  produced  grunts  and  languages  of  primitive  false 
structure,  reflecting,  of  necessity,  its  implications  as  to  the  assumed 
structure  of  the  world.  We  have  made  out  of  it  primitive  dogmas  which 
are  still  in  full  sway  and  embodied  in  the  structure  of  the  old  language. 
This  is  also  the  reason  why,  outside  of  technical  achievements,  we  are 
still  on  such  primitive  levels.  It  is  easy  to  understand  why  experimental 
science  is  of  such  importance  and  why  theoretical  (verbal)  predictions 
must  be  tested  experimentally.  The  above  also  gives  a  deeper  and  a  new 
justification  for  what  is  called  'pragmatism'. 

Experiments  constitute  a  search  for  relations  and  structure  in  the 
empirical  world.  Theories  produce  languages  of  some  structure.  If  the 
two  structures  are  similar,  the  'theories  work';  otherwise,  they  do  not, 
and  suggest  further  search  and  structural  adjustments. 

It  should  be  mentioned,  perhaps,  that  the  main  epistemological 
principle  which  has  led  to  the  writing  of  the  works  of  the  present  author 
was  a  definite  inclination  to  abandon  identification  and  the  resulting 
structurally  unsatisfactory  el  language  in  general  use,  and  to  produce  a 
non-el  system,  which,  in  structure,  would  be  similar  to  the  world  around 
us,  ourselves  and  our  nervous  system  included.  This  structural  novelty 
was  the  foundation  on  which  the  ^-system  has  been  gradually  built. 

CHAPTER  IX 

COLLOIDAL  BEHAVIOUR 

In  fact,  to-day  colloids  may  be  regarded  as  an  important,  perhaps  the 

most  important  connecting  link  between  the  organic  and  the  inorganic 

world.  (7)  WOLFGANG  PAULI 

In  our  researches,  let  us  follow  the  natural  order  and  give  a  brief 
structural  account  of  what  we  know,  empirically,  about  the  medium  in 
which  life  is  found;  namely,  about  the  colloids.  The  following  few 
elementary  particulars  show  the  empirical  importance  of  structure,  and  so 
are  fundamental  in  the  present  work. 

At  present,  physicians  are  usually  too  innocent  of  psychiatry,  and 
psychiatrists,  although  they  often  complain  about  this  innocence  of  their 
colleagues,  seldom,  if  ever,  themselves  pay  any  attention  to  the  colloidal 
structure  of  life;  and  their  arguments  about  the  ‘body-mind’  problem 
are  still  scientifically  incomplete  and  unconvincing,  though  the  ‘body- 
mind’  problem  has  been  present  with  us  for  thousands  of  years.  It  is  a 
very  important  semantic  problem,  and,  as  yet,  not  solved  scientifically, 
although  there  is  a  simple  solution  of  it  to  be  found  in  the  colloidal 
structure  of  life. 

The  reader  should  not  ascribe  any  uniqueness  of  the  ‘cause-effect’ 
character  to  the  statements  which  follow,  as  they  may  not  be  true  when 
generalized.  Colloidal  science  is  young  and  little  known.  Science  has 
accumulated  a  maze  of  facts,  but  we  do  not  have,  as  yet,  a  general  theory 
of  colloidal  behaviour.  Statements,  therefore,  should  not  be  unduly 
generalized. 

We  shall  only  indicate  a  few  structural  and  relational  connections 
important  for  our  purpose. 

When  we  take  a  piece  of  some  material  and  subdivide  it  into 
smaller  pieces,  we  cannot  carry  on  this  process  indefinitely.  At  some 
stage  of  this  process  the  bits  become  so  small  that  they  cannot  be  seen 
with  the  most  powerful  microscope.  At  a  further  stage,  we  should 
reach  a  limit  of  the  subdivision  that  the  particles  can  undergo  without 
losing  their  chemical  character.  Such  a  limit  is  called  the  molecule.*  The 
smallest  particle  visible  in  the  microscope  is  still  about  one  thousand 
times  larger  than  the  largest  molecule.  So  we  see  that  between  the 
molecule  and  the  smallest  visible  particle  there  is  a  wide  range  of  sizes. 

♦This  statement  is  only  approximate,  because  there  is  evidence  that  chemical 
characteristics  change  as  the  molecule  is  approached. 

Ill 

III.  NON-ELEMENT ALI STIC  STRUCTURES 

*  see  page  xii  Findlay  calls  these  the  ‘twilight  zone  of  matter* ;  and  it  was  Oswald,  I 

believe,  who  called  it  the  ‘world  of  neglected  dimensions'. 

This  ‘world  of  neglected  dimensions'  is  of  particular  interest  to  us, 
because  in  this  range  of  subdivision  or  smallness  we  find  very  peculiar 
forms  of  behaviour — life  included — which  are  called  ‘colloidal  behaviour'. 

The  term  ‘colloid'  was  proposed  in  1861  by  Thomas  Graham  to 
describe  the  distinction  between  the  behaviour  of  those  materials  which 
readily  crystallize  and  diffuse  through  animal  membranes  and  those 
which  form  ‘amorphous*  or  gelatinous  masses  and  do  not  diffuse  readily 
or  at  all  through  animal  membranes.  Graham  called  the  first  class  ‘crys¬ 
talloids*  and  the  second  ‘colloids’,  from  the  Greek  word  for  glue. 

In  the  beginning  colloids  were  regarded  as  special  ‘substances’,  but 
it  was  found  that  this  point  of  view  was  not  correct.  For  instance,  NaCl 
may  behave  in  solution  either  as  a  crystalloid  or  as  a  colloid;  so  we 
began  to  speak  about  the  colloidal  state .  Of  late,  even  this  term  became 
