unsatisfactory  and  is  often  supplanted  by  the  term  ‘ colloidal  behaviour \ 

In  general,  a  colloid  may  be  described  as  a  ‘system*  consisting  of  two 
or  more  ‘phases*.  The  commonest  represent  emulsions  or  suspensions  of 
fine  particles  in  a  gaseous,  liquid,  or  other  medium,  the  size  of  the  par¬ 
ticles  grading  from  those  barely  visible  microscopically  to  those  of 
molecular  dimensions.  These  particles  may  be  either  homogeneous  solids, 
or  liquids,  or  solutions  themselves  of  a  small  percentage  of  the  medium 
in  an  otherwise  homogeneous  complex.  Such  solutions  have  one  charac¬ 
teristic  in  common;  namely,  that  the  suspended  materials  may  remain 
almost  indefinitely  in  suspension,  because  the  tendency  to  settle,  due  to 
gravity,  is  counteracted  by  some  other  factor  tending  to  keep  the  par¬ 
ticles  suspended.  In  the  main,  colloidal  behaviour  is  not  dependent  upon 
the  physical  state  or  chemistry  of  the  finely  subdivided  materials  or  of 
the  medium.  We  find  colloidal  behaviour  exhibited  not  only  by  colloidal 
suspensions  and  emulsions  where  solid  particles  or  liquid  droplets  are  in 
a  liquid  medium,  but  also  when  solid  particles  are  dispersed  in  gaseous 
medium  (smokes),  or  liquid  droplets  in  gaseous  media  (mists),. 

Materials  which  exhibit  this  special  colloidal  behaviour  are  always 
in  a  very  fine  state  of  subdivision,  so  that  the  ratio  of  surface  exposed 
to  volume  of  material  is  very  large.  A  sphere  containing  only  10  cubic 
centimetres,  if  composed  of  fine  particles  0.00000025  cm.  in  diameter, 
would  have  a  total  area  of  all  the  surfaces  of  the  particles  nearly  equal 

*  see  page  xii  to  half  an  acre.1  It  is  easy  to  understand  that  under  such  structural  con¬ 

ditions  the  surface  forces  become  important  and  play  a  prominent  role 
in  colloidal  behaviour. 

COLLOIDAL  BEHAVIOUR 

The  smaller  the  colloidal  particles,  the  closer  we  come  to  molecular 
and  atomic  sizes.  Since  we  know  atoms  represent  electrical  structures , 
we  should  not  be  surprised  to  find  that,  in  colloids,  surface  energies  and 
electrical  charges  become  of  fundamental  importance,  as  by  necessity  all 
surfaces  are  made  up  of  electrical  charges.  The  surface  energies  operat¬ 
ing  in  finely  grained  and  dispersed  systems  are  large,  and  in  their  ten¬ 
dency  for  a  minimum,  every  two  particles  or  drops  tend  to  become  one ; 
because,  while  the  mass  is  not  altered  by  this  change,  the  surface  of  one 
larger  particle  or  drop  is  less  than  the  surface  of  two  smaller  ones — an 
elementary  geometrical  fact.  Electrical  charges  have  the  well-known 
characteristic  that  like  repels  like  and  attracts  the  unlike.  In  colloids,  the 
effect  of  these  factors  is  of  a  fundamental,  yet  opposite,  character.  The 
surface  energies  tend  to  unite  the  particles,  to  coagulate,  flocculate  or 
precipitate  them.  In  the  meanwhile  the  electrical  charges  tend  to  pre¬ 
serve  the  state  of  suspension  by  repelling  the  particles  from  each  other. 
On  the  predominance  or  intensity  of  one  or  other  of  these  factors,  the 
instability  or  the  stability  of  a  suspension  depends. 

In  general,  if  'time'  limits  are  not  taken  into  consideration,  colloids 
are  unstable  complexes,  in  which  continuous  transformation  takes  place, 
which  is  induced  by  light,  heat,  electric  fields,  electronic  discharges,  and 
other  forms  of  energy.  These  transformations  result  in  a  great  variation 
of  the  characteristics  of  the  system.  The  dispersed  phase  alters  its 
characteristics  and  the  system  begins  to  coagulate,  reaching  a  stable  state 
when  the  coagulation  is  complete.  This  process  of  transformation  of  the 
characteristics  of  the  system  which  define  the  colloid,  and  which  ends  in 
coagulation,  is  called  the  ‘ageing*  of  the  colloid.  With  the  coagulation 
complete,  the  system  loses  its  colloidal  behaviour — it  is  ‘dead*.  Both  of 
these  terms  apply  to  inorganic  as  well  as  to  organic  systems. 

Some  of  the  coagulating  processes  are  partial  and  reversible,  and 
take  the  form  of  change  in  viscosity;  some  are  not.  Some  are  slow; 
some  extremely  rapid,  particularly  when  produced  by  external  agencies 
which  alter  the  colloidal  equilibrium. 

From  what  has  been  said  already,  it  is  obvious  that  colloids,  particu¬ 
larly  in  organisms,  are  extremely  sensitive  and  complex  structures  with 
enormous  possibilities  as  to  degree  of  stability,  reversibility . ,  and  allow  a 
wide  range  of  variation  of  behaviour.  When  we  speak  of  ‘chemistry*, 
we  are  concerned  with  a  science  which  deals  with  certain  materials  which 
preserve  or  alter  certain  of  their  characteristics.  In  ‘physics',  we  go 
beyond  the  obvious  characteristics  and  try  to  discover  the  structure 
underlying  these  characteristics.  Modern  researches  show  clearly  that 
atoms  have  a  very  complex  structure  and  that  the  macroscopic  character- 

III.  NON-ELEMENTAL1STIC  STRUCTURES 

istics  are  directly  connected  with  sub-microscopic  structure.  If  we  can 
alter  this  structure,  we  usually  can  alter  also  the  chemical  or  other  char¬ 
acteristics.  As  the  processes  in  colloids  are  largely  structural  and  phys¬ 
ical,  anything  which  tends  to  have  a  structural  effect  usually  also  disturbs 
the  colloidal  equilibrium,  and  then  different  macroscopic  effects  appear. 
As  these  changes  occur  as  series  of  interrelated  events,  the  best  way  is  to 
consider  colloidal  behaviour  as  a  physico-electro-chemical  occurrence.  But 
once  the  word  ‘physical*  enters,  structural  implications  are  involved.  This 
explains  also  why  all  known  forms  of  radiant  energy,  being  structures, 
can  affect  or  alter  colloidal  structures,  and  so  have  marked  effect  on 
colloids. 

As  all  life  is  found  in  the  colloidal  form  and  has  many  characteris¬ 
tics  found  also  in  inorganic  colloids,  it  appears  that  colloids  supply  us 
with  the  most  important  known  link  between  the  inorganic  and  the 
organic.  This  fact  also  suggests  entirely  new  fields  for  the  study  of  the 
living  cells  and  of  the  optimum  conditions  for  their  development ,  sanity 
included . 

Many  writers  are  not  agreed  as  to  the  use  of  the  terms  ‘film*, 
‘membrane*,  and  the  like.  Empirically  discovered  structure  shows  clearly, 
however,  that  we  deal  with  surfaces  and  surface  energies  and  that  a 
‘surface  tension  film’  behaves  as  a  membrane.  In  the  present  work,  we 
accept  the  obvious  fact  that  organized  systems  are  film-partitioned 
systems. 

One  of  the  most  baffling  problems  has  been  the  peculiar  periodicity 
or  rhythmicity  which  we  find  in  life.  Lately,  Lillie  and  others  have 
shown  that  this  rhythmicity  could  not  be  explained  by  purely  physical 
nor  purely  chemical  means,  but  that  it  is  satisfactorily  explained  when 
treated  as  a  physico-electro-chemical  structural  occurrence.  The  famous 
experiments  of  Lillie,  who  used  an  iron  wire  immersed  in  nitric  acid  and 
reproduced,  experimentally,  a  beautiful  periodicity  resembling  closely 
some  of  the  activities  of  protoplasm  and  the  nervous  system,  show  con¬ 
clusively  that  both  the  living  and  the  non-living  systems  depend  for  their 
rhythmic  behaviour  on  the  chemically  alterable  film,  which  divides  the 
electrically  conducting  phases.  In  the  iron  wire  and  nitric  acid  experi¬ 
ment,  the  metal  and  the  acid  represent  the  two  phases,  and  between  the 
two  there  is  found  a  thin  film  of  oxide.  In  protoplasmic  structures,  such 
as  a  nerve  fibre,  the  internal  protoplasm  and  the  surrounding  medium  are 
the  two  phases,  separated  by  a  surface  film  of  modified  plasm  membrane. 
In  both  systems,  the  electromotive  characteristics  of  the  surfaces  are 
determined  by  the  character  of  the  film.2 

COLLOIDAL  BEHAVIOUR 

That  living  organisms  are  film-bounded  and  partitioned  systems 
accounts  also  for  irritability.  It  appears  that  irritability  manifests  itself 
as  sensitiveness  to  electrical  currents.  These  currents  seem  to  depend  on 
polarizability  or  resistance  to  the  passage  of  ions,  owing  to  the  presence 
of  semi-permeable  boundary  films  or  surfaces  enclosing  or  partitioning 
the  system.  It  is  obvious  that  we  are  here  dealing  with  complex  struc¬ 
tures  which  are  intimately  connected  with  the  characteristics  of  life. 
Living  protoplasm  is  electrically  sensitive  only  as  long  as  its  structure  is 
intact.  With  death,  semi-permeability  and  polarizability  are  lost,  together 
with  electrical  sensitivity. 

One  of  the  baffling  peculiarities  of  organisms  is  the  rapidity  with 
which  the  chemical  and  metabolic  processes  spread.  Indeed,  it  is  impos¬ 
sible  to  explain  this  by  the  transportation  of  material.  All  evidence 
shows  that  electrical  and,  perhaps,  other  energy  factors  play  an  important 
role ;  and  that  this  activity  again  depends  on  the  presence  of  surfaces  of 
protoplasmic  structures  with  electrode-like  characteristics  which  form 
circuits. 

The  great  importance  of  the  electrical  charges  of  the  colloidal  par¬ 
ticles  arises  out  of  the  fact  that  they  prevent  particles  from  coalescing; 
and  when  these  charges  are  neutralized,  the  particles  tend  to  form  larger 
aggregates  and  settle  out  of  the  solution.  Because  of  these  charges,  when 
an  electrical  current  is  sent  through  a  colloidal  solution,  the  differently 
charged  particles  wander  to  one  or  the  other  electrode.  This  process  is 
called  cataphoresis.  There  is  an  important  difference  in  behaviour  in 
inorganic  and  organic  colloids  under  the  influence  of  electrical  currents, 
and  this  is  due  to  the  difference  in  structure.  In  inorganic  colloids,  an 
electrical  current  does  not  coagulate  the  whole,  but  only  that  portion  of 
it  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the  electrodes.  Not  so  in  living  proto¬ 
plasm.  Even  a  weak  current  usually  coagulates  the  entire  protoplasm, 
because  the  inter-cellular  films  probably  play  the  role  of  electrodes  and 
so  the  entire  protoplasm  structurally  represents  the  ‘immediate  vicinity’ 
of  the  electrodes.'  Similarly,  structure  also  accounts  for  the  extremely 
rapid  spread  of  some  effects  upon  the  whole  of  the  organism. 

Electrical  phenomena  in  living  tissue  are  mainly  of  two  more  or  less 
distinct  characters.  The  first  include  electromotive  energy  which  pro¬ 
duces  electrical  currents  in  nerve  tissue,  the  membrane  potentials, .  The 
second  are  called,  by  Freundlich,  electrokinetic,  and  include  cataphoresis, 
agglutination , .  There  is  much  evidence  that  the  mechanical  work  of  the 
muscles,  the  secretory  action  of  the  glands,  and  the  electrical  work  of 
the  nerve  cells  are  closely  connected  with  the  colloidal  structure  of  these 
tissues.  This  would  explain  why  any  factor  (semantic  reactions  included) 

111.  NON-ELEMENTALISTIC  STRUCTURES 

capable  of  altering  the  colloidal  structure  of  the  living  protoplasm  must 
have  a  marked  effect  on  the  behaviour  and  welfare  of  the  organism. 

Experiments  show  that  there  are  four  main  factors  which  are  able 
to  disturb  the  colloidal  equilibrium :  ( 1 )  Physical,  as,  for  instance, 
X-rays,  radium,  light,  ultra-violet  rays,  cathode  rays . ;  (2)  Mechanical, 
such  as  friction,  puncture . ;  (3)  Chemical,  such  as  tar,  paraffin,  arsenic . ; 
and,  finally,  (4)  Biological,  such  as  microbes,  parasites,  spermatozoa , . 
In  man,  another  (fifth)  potent  factor;  namely,  the  semantic  reactions, 
enters,  but  about  this  factor,  I  shall  speak  later. 

For  our  purpose,  the  effects  produced  by  the  physical  factors, 
because  obviously  structural,  are  of  main  interest,  and  we  shall,  there¬ 
fore,  summarize  some  of  the  experimental  structural  results.  Electrical 
currents  of  different  strength  and  duration,  as  well  as  acids  of  different 
concentration,  or  addition  of  metallic  salts,  which  produce  marked  acid¬ 
ity,  usually  coagulate  the  protoplasm,  these  effects  being  structurally 
interrelated.  Slow  coagulation  involves  changes  in  viscosity,  all  of  which, 
under  certain  conditions,  may  be  reversible.8  When  cells  are  active,  their 
fluidity  often  changes  in  a  sharp  and  rapid  manner.4 

Fat  solvents  are  called  surface-active  materials ;  when  diluted,  they 
decrease  protoplasmic  viscosity ;  but  more  concentrated  solutions  produce 
increased  viscosity  or  coagulation.6  The  anaesthetics,  which  always  are 
fat  solvents  and  surface-active  materials,  are  very  instructive  in  their 
action  for  our  purpose,  as  they  affect  very  diversified  types  of  protoplasm 
similarly,  this  similarity  of  action  being  due  to  the  similarity  of  colloidal 
structure.  Thus,  ether  of  equal  concentration  will  make  a  man  uncon¬ 
scious,  will  prevent  the  movement  of  a  fish  and  the  wriggling  of  a  worm, 
or  stop  the  activity  of  a  plant  cell,  without  permanently  injuring  the 
cells.6  In  fact,  the  action  of  all  drugs  is  based  on  their  effect  upon  the 
colloidal  equilibrium,  without  which  action  a  drug  would  not  be  effective. 
It  is  well  known  that  various  acids  or  alkalis  always  change  the  electrical 
resistance  of  the  protoplasm.7 

The  working  of  the  organism  involves  mostly  a  structural  and  very 
important  Vicious  circle’,  which  makes  the  character  of  colloidal  changes 
non-additive .  If,  for  instance,  the  heart,  for  any  reason,  slows  down  the 
circulation,  this  produces  an  accumulation  of  carbonic  acid  in  the  blood, 
which  again  increases  the  viscosity  of  the  blood  and  so  throws  more 
work  on  the  already  weakened  heart.8  Under  such  structural  conditions, 
the  results  may  accumulate  very  rapidly,  even  at  a  rate  which  can  be 
expressed  as  an  exponential  function  of  higher  degree. 

Different  regions  of  the  organism  have  different  charges;  but,  in 
the  main,  an  injured,  or  excited,  or  cooler  part  is  electro-negative  (which 

COLLOIDAL  BEHAVIOUR 

is  connected  with  acid  formation),  and  the  electro-positive  particles  rush 
to  those  parts  and  supply  the  material  for  whatever  physiological  need 
there  may  be.® 

The  effects  of  different  forms  of  radiant  energy  on  colloids  and 
protoplasm  are  being  extensively  studied,  and  the  results  are  very  start¬ 
ling.  The  different  forms  of  radiant  energy  differ  in  wave-length,  fre¬ 
quency., — that  is  to  say,  generally  in  structure, — and,  as  such,  may 
produce  structural  effects  on  colloids  and  organisms,  which  effects  may 
appear  on  the  gross  macroscopic  level  in  many  different  forms. 

Electrical  currents,  for  instance,  retard  reversibly  the  growth  of 
roots,  may  activate  some  eggs  into  larval  stages  without  fertilization . , 
which  makes  it  possible  to  understand  why,  in  some  cases,  a  mere  punc¬ 
turing  of  the  egg  may  disturb  the  equilibrium  and  produce  the  effects  of 
fertilization.10 

The  X-,  or  Rontgen-rays  have  been  shown  to  accelerate  150 
times  the  process  of  mutation.  Muller,  in  his  experiments  with  several 
thousand  cultures  of  the  fruit  fly,  has  established  the  above  ratio  of 
induced  mutations,  which  become  hereditary.11  ‘Cosmic  rays*  in  the 
form  of  radiation  from  the  earth,  in  tunnels,  for  instance,  show  similar 
results,  except  that  mutation  occurs  only  twice  as  often  as  under  the 
usual  laboratory  conditions.  Under  the  influence  of  X-rays,  mice  change 
their  colour  of  hair ;  gray  mice  become  white,  and  white  ones  darker. 
Sometimes  further  additional  bodily  changes  appear;  as,  for  instance, 
one  or  no  kidneys,  abnormal  eyes  or  legs,  occur  more  often  than  under 
ordinary  conditions.  Some  animals  lose  their  power  of  reproduction, 
although  the  body  is  not  obviously  changed.  Plants  respond  also  to  the 
X-ray  treatment.  They  grow  faster,  flower  more,  and  produce  new 
forms  more  readily.  In  humans  the  effect  of  X-ray  irradiation  has  often 
proven  disastrous  to  the  health  of  experimenters.  There  are  even  data 
that  the  irradiation  of  pregnant  mothers  may  result  in  deformation  of 
the  head  and  limbs  of  the  unborn  child  and,  in  one-third  of  the  cases, 
feeble-mindedness  of  the  children  has  resulted.12 

Ultra-violet  rays  also  show  a  marked  effect.  In  some  instances,  they 
slow  down  or  stop  the  streaming  of  protoplasm,  because  of  increased 
viscosity  or  coagulation ;  plants  grow  slowly  or  rapidly ;  certain  valuable 
ingredients  in  plants  are  increased;  certain  animals,  as,  for  instance, 
small  Crustacea  or  bacteria  are  killed;  eggs  of  Nereis  (a  kind  of  sea 
worm),  which  usually  have  28  chromosomes,  after  irradiation  have  70; 
certain  bone  malformations  in  children  are  cured ;  the  toxin  in  the  blood 
serum  of  pernicious  anaemia  patients  is  destroyed ,  .18  In  this  respect,  we 
should  notice  again  that  ultra-violet  irradiation  produces  curative  effects 

III.  NON-ELEMENTALISTIC  STRUCTURES 

like  those  of  cod-liver  oil,  which  shows  that  the  effect  of  both  factors 
is  ultimately  colloidal  and  structural. 

Extensive  experimentation  with  cathode  rays  is  very  recent,  but 
already  we  have  a  most  astonishing  array  of  structural  facts.  Moist  air 
is  converted  into  nitric  acid,  synthetic  rubber  is  produced  rapidly,  the 
milk  from  rubber  trees  is  made  solid  and  insoluble  without  the  use  of 
sulphur,  liquid  forms  of  bakelite  are  solidified  without  heating,  linseed 
oil  becomes  dry  to  the  touch  in  three  hours  and  hard  in  six  hours,  certain 
materials,  like  cholesterol,  yeast,  starch,  cottonseed  oil,  after  exposure 
for  thirty  seconds,  heal  rickets,  and  similar  unexpected  results.  What  are 
usually  called  'vitamins’  do  not  only  represent  'special  substances’,  but 
become  structurally  active  factors;  and  this  is  why  ultra-violet  rays 
may  produce  results  like  those  of  some  'substance’.  It  seems  that  in  ‘vita¬ 
mins  the  surface  activities  are  important;  the  parallelism  shown  by 
von  Hahn  between  the  surface  activities  of  different  materials  and  the 
Funk  table  of  vitamin  content  is  quite  suggestive.  Some  data  seem  to 
show  that,  in  some  instances,  surface-active  materials,  such  as  coffee  or 
alcohol,  produce  beneficial  surface  activities  similar  to  the  'vitamins’.14 

The  above  short  list  gives  only  an  approximate  picture  of  the  over¬ 
whelming  importance  of  the  roles  which  structure  in  general,  and  col¬ 
loids  in  particular,  play  in  our  lives.  We  see  about  us  many  human  types. 
Some  are  delicate,  some  are  heavy-set,  some  flabby,  some  puffy,  all  of 
which  indicates  a  difference  in  their  colloidal  structure.  Paired  with  these 
physical  colloidal  states  are  also  nervous,  'mental*,  and  other  character¬ 
istics,  which  vary  from  weak  and  nervous  to  the  extreme  limitation  of 
nervous  activities,  as  in  idiocy,  which  is  a  negation  of  activity. 

It  is  curious  that  in  all  illnesses,  whether  'physical’  or  'mental’,  the 
symptoms  are  very  few,  and  fundamentally  of  a  standard  type.  In 
'physical’  illness  we  find  the  following  common  characteristics:  fever, 
chills,  headaches,  convulsions,  vomiting,  diarrhoea,.  In  'mental’  ills, 
identifications,  illusions,  delusions,  and  hallucinations — in  general,  the 
reversed  pathological  order— are  found.  It  is  not  difficult  to  understand 
the  reason.  Because  of  the  general  colloidal  background  of  life,  different 
disturbances  of  colloidal  equilibrium  should  produce  similar  symptoms. 
In  fact,  many  of  these  symptoms  have  been  reproduced  experimentally 
by  injecting  inert  precipitates  incapable  of  chemical  reactions,  which  have 
induced  artificial  colloidal  disturbances.  Thus,  if  the  serum  from  an  epi¬ 
leptic  patient  is  injected  into  a  guinea  pig,  it  results  in  an  attack  of  con¬ 
vulsions,  often  ending  in  death.  But,  if  the  guinea  pig  is  previously  made 
immune  by  an  injection  of  some  colloid  which  accustoms  the  nerve- 
endings  to  the  colloidal  flocculation,  then,  for  a  few  hours  following,  we 

COLLOIDAL  BEHAVIOUR 

can,  with  impunity,  introduce  into  the  circulation  otherwise  fatal  doses 
of  epileptic  serum.  Epileptic  serum  can  also  be  made  immune  by  filtra¬ 
tion,  or  by  strong  centrifugation,  or  by  long  standing,  which  frees  it 
from  colloidal  precipitates.15 

Death  through  blood  transfusion  or  the  injection  of  any  colloid  into 
the  circulation  has  also,  in  the  main,-  similar  symptoms,  regardless  of 
the  chemical  character  of  the  colloid,  indicating  once  more  the  importance 
and  fundamental  character  of  structure.16 

That  illnesses  are  somehow  connected  with  colloidal  disturbances 
(note  the  wording  of  this  statement)  becomes  quite  obvious  when  we 
consider  catarrhal  diseases,  inflammations,  swellings,  tumours,  cancer, 
blood  thrombi.,  which  involve  colloidal  injuries,  resulting  in  extreme 
cases  in  complete  coagulation  or  fluidification,  the  variation  between  ‘gel* 
and  ‘sol’  appearing  in  a  most  diversified  manner.17  Other  illnesses  are 
connected  with  precipitation  or  deposits  of  various  materials.  Gout,  for 
instance,  results  from  a  morbid  deposit  of  uric  acid,  and  different  con¬ 
cretions,  such  as  the  ‘stones’,  are  very  often  found  in  different  fluids  of 
the  organism.  We  have,  thus,  concretions  in  the  intestines,  the  bile,  the 
urine,  the  pancreas,  the  salivary  glands ;  lime  deposits  in  old  softened 
tissues,  ‘rice  bodies’  in  the  joints,  ‘brain  sand*,  .18 

In  bacterial  diseases,  the  micro-organisms  rapidly  produce  acids  and 
bases  which  tend  to  destroy  the  colloidal  equilibrium.  Lately,  it  has 
been  found  that  even  tuberculosis  is  more  than  a  mere  chapter  in  bac¬ 
teriology.  All  the  main  tubercular  symptoms  can  be  reproduced,  experi¬ 
mentally,  by  means  of  colloidal  disturbances  without  the  intervention  of 
a  single  bacterium.19  This  would  explain  also  why,  in  some  instances, 
psychotherapy  is  effective  in  diseases  with  tubercular  symptoms.20 

By  structural  necessity,  every  expression  of  cellular  activity  involves 
some  sort  of  colloidal  behaviour ;  and  any  factor  disturbing  the  colloidal 
structure  must  be  disturbing  to  the  welfare  of  the  organism.  Vice  versa, 
a  factor  which  is  beneficial  to  the  organism  must  reach  and  affect  the 
colloids. 

After  this  brief  account  of  the  structural  peculiarities  of  the  domain 
in  which  life  is  found,  we  can  understand  the  baffling  ‘body-mind’  prob¬ 
lem.  We  do  not  yet  know  as  many  details  as  we  could  wish,  but  these 
will  accumulate  the  moment  a  general  solution  is  clearly  formulated.  It 
is  a  well-established  experimental  fact  that  all  nervous  and  ‘mental* 
activities  are  connected  with,  or  actually  generate,  electrical  currents, 
which  of  late  are  scrupulously  studied  by  the  aid  of  an  instrument  called 
the  psychogalvanometer.81  It  is  not  suggested  that  electrical  currents  are 
the  only  ones  which  are  involved.  There  may  be  many  different  forms 

III.  NON-ELEMENT ALI STIC  STRUCTURES 

of  radiant  energy  produced  or  effective,  which  we  have  not  yet  the  instru¬ 
ments  to  record.  Experiments  suggest  such  a  possibility.  Thus,  for 
instance,  the  apex  of  a  certain  rapidly  growing  vegetable  or  animal  tissue 
emits  some  sort  of  invisible  radiation  which  stimulates  the  growth  of 
living  tissue  with  which  it  is  not  in  contact.  The  tip  of  a  turnip  or  onion 
root,  if  placed  at  right  angles  to  another  root,  at  a  distance  of  a  quarter 
of  an  inch,  so  stimulates  the  growth  of  the  latter  that  the  increase  of  the 
number  of  cells,  on  its  side  nearest  the  point  of  stimulation,  is  as  high  as 
seventy  per  cent.  These  radiations  accelerate  the  growth  of  some  bac¬ 
teria.  Other  examples  could  be  given.22 

A  classical  example  of  the  effect  left  on  protoplasm  by  energetic 
factors  is  given  by  Bovie.23 

As  yet,  we  have  not  assumed  that  the  protoplasm  of  plants  also 
shows  lasting  structural  and  functional  results  of  stimulation,  some  sort 
of  ‘learning’  or  ‘habit-formation’  characteristics.  But  such  is  the  case; 
and  further  experimentation  along  these  lines  will  help  greatly  to  under¬ 
stand  the  mechanism  of  ‘mental’  processes  in  ourselves. 

If  we  take  the  seed  of  a  plant,  for  instance,  of  a  squash,  and  keep 
it  in  a  moist  tropism  chamber  in  the  dark,  it  will  grow  a  root.  When  the 
root  is  about  one  inch  long,  we  begin  our  experiment.  Originally,  under 

the  influence  of  gravitation,  the  root  grows 
vertically  downwards  (A).  If  we  rotate  the 
tropism  chamber  90°  so  that  the  root  is  hori¬ 
zontal  (B),  the  root  will  soon  bend  down¬ 
wards  under  the  influence  of  positive  geotrop- 
ism.  But  the  bending  does  not  occur  at  once. 
There  is  a  latent  period — in  the  case  of  the 
squash  seed,  about  ten  minutes — after  which 
pause  the  root  is  bent  downwards.  When  we 
have  determined  this  latent  period  for  a  given 
seedling,  we  then  rotate  the  chamber  to  the 
positions  (B),  (C),  (A),  (B),  (C).,  just 
within  the  ‘time*  limit  before  the  bending 
would  occur.  We  repeat  such  procedure  sev¬ 
eral  times.  When  we  set  the  root  again  in  its  vertical  downward  position 
(A),  we  notice  that  the'  root,  without  any  more  changes  of  position,  will 
wag  backwards  and  forward  with  the  period  as  was  used  in  the  experi¬ 
ment.  This  unexpected  behaviour  will  last  for  several  days.  It  shows 
that  the  alternating  stimulus  of  gravitation,  as  applied  to  the  root,  has 
produced  some  structural  changes  in  the  protoplasm  which  persist  for  a 
comparatively  long  period  after  the  stimulus  has  ceased  to  act.  It  be- 

COLLOIDAL  BEHAVIOUR 

comes  obvious  that  teachability  and  the  structural  tendency  for  forming 
cngrams  is  a  general  characteristic  of  protoplasm. 

All  the  examples  given  above  show  clearly  that  structure  in  general, 
and  of  colloids  in  particular,  gives  us  a  satisfactory  basis  for  the  under¬ 
standing  of  the  equivalence  between  occurrences  which  belonged  for¬ 
merly  to  'chemistry*  and  those  classified  as  'physical*,  and  ultimately 
between  these  and  those  we  call  'mental*.  Structure,  and  structure  alone, 
gives  not  only  the  unique  content  of  what  we  call  'knowledge*,  but  also 
the  bridge  between  the  different  classes  of  occurrences — a  fact  which,  as 
yet,  has  not  been  fully  understood. 

To  sum  up:  It  is  known  that  colloidal  behaviour  is  exhibited  by 
materials  of  very  fine  subdivision,  the  ‘world  of  neglected  dimensions*, 
which  involves  surface  activities  and  electrical  characters  of  manifold 
and  complex  structure,  and  therefore  the  flexibility  of  gross  macroscopic 
characteristics.  It  is  well  known  that  all  life-processes,  'feelings*,  'emo¬ 
tions*,  'thought*,  semantic  reactions,  and  so  forth,  involve  at  least  elec¬ 
trical  currents.  As  electrical  currents  and  other  forms  of  energy  are  able 
to  affect  the  colloidal  structure  on  which  our  physical  characteristics 
depend,  obviously  'feelings*,  'emotions*,  'thought*. ;  in  general,  s.r,  which 
are  connected  with  manifestations  of  energy,  will  also  have  some  effect 
on  our  bodies,  and  vice  versa.  Colloidal  structure  supplies  us  with  an 
extremely  flexible  mechanism  with  endless  possibilities. 

When  we  analyse  the  known  empirical  facts  from  a  structural  point 
of  view,  we  find  not  only  the  equivalence  which  was  mentioned  before, 
but  we  must,  also,  legitimately  consider  the  so-called  ‘mental*,  ‘emotional*, 
and  other  semantic  and  nervous  occurrences  in  connection  with  manifes¬ 
tations  of  energy  which  have  a  powerful  influence  on  the  colloidal 
behaviour,  and  so  ultimately  on  the  behaviour  of  our  organisms  as-a- 
whole.  Under  such  environmental  conditions,  we  must  take  into  account 
all  energies  which  have 'been  discovered,  semantic  reactions  not  excluded , 
as  all  such  energies  have  structural  effect.  As  language  is  one  of  the 
expressions  of  one  of  these  energies,  we  ought  to  find  it  quite  natural 
that  the  structure  of  language  finds  its  reflection  in  the  structure  of  the 
environmental  conditions  which  are  dependent  on  it. 

Until  lately,  the  disregard  of  colloidal  science  and  of  structure  in 
general  has  greatly  retarded  advance  in  biology,  psychiatry,  and  other 
sciences.  Biology,  for  instance,  has  mostly  studied  ‘life’  where  none 
existed ;  namely,  in  death.  If  we  study  corpses,  we  study  death,  not  life, 
and  life  is  a  function  of  living  cells.  The  living  cell  is  semi-fluid,  and 
all  the  forces  which  act  in  colloidal  solutions  and  constitute  colloidal 

122  III.  NON-ELEMENTALISTIC  STRUCTURES 

behaviour  are  acting  because  they  can  aet,  while  a  dead  cell  is  coagulated 
and  so  a  different  set  of  energies  is  operating  there.24 

Should  we  wonder  that  life,  being  a  form  of  colloidal  behaviour  on 
microscopic  and  sub-microscopic  levels,  conditioned  by  little  colloidal 
‘wholes’,  and  structures  separated  from  their  environment  by  surfaces, 
preserves  a  similar  character  on  macroscopic  levels?  We  should,  instead, 
be  surprised  if  this  did  not  turn  out  to  be  the  raw, 

CHAPTER  X 

THE  ‘  ORGAN  ISM  -  AS- A- WHOLE* 

...  in  hypnotized  children  real  colours  and  suggested  colours  are  blended 
to  form  the  complementary  colour.  (189>  w.  horsley  gantt 

Section  A.  Illustrations  from  biology. 

Because  of  the  semantic  importance  of  the  structural  non-elemental- 
istic  principle,  and  the  weighty,  yet  in  the  beginning  odd,  consequences 
which  follow  the  consistent  application  of  this  principle  in  practice,  we 
will  give  a  short  account  of  some  other  experimental  structural  facts 
taken  from  widely  separated  fields. 

A  worm,  a  marine  planarian,  called  a  Thysanozoon  (Brochii),  is 
common  in  the  bay  of  Naples.  If  we  put  a  normal  Thysanozoon  on  its 
back,  it  soon  will  right  itself.  When  the  brain  of  the  worm  has  been 
removed,  under  similar  conditions  of  the  experiment,  the  worm  will  right 
itself,  but  more  slowly.  In  this  case,  we  see  a  general  tendency  of  the 
organism-as-a-whole;  the  nervous  system  only  facilitated  a  quicker 
action.  If  we  cut  the  worm  partly  in  two,  so  that  the  longitudinal  nerves 
are  severed,  but  a  thin  piece  of  tissue  keeps  the  two  parts  together,  the 
two  parts  move  in  a  co-ordinated  way,  as  if  not  cut.  The  organism  still 
works  as-a-whole,  although  the  conditions  seem  not  favourable.1 

If  we  cut  a  fresh-water  planarian  ( Planaria  torva)  in  two,  trans¬ 
versely,  the  posterior  part,  which  has  no  brain,  moves  about  as  well  as 
the  anterior  part,  which  has  the  brain.  If  we  try  to  find  the  effect  of  light 
on  the  part  devoid  of  brain  and  eyes,  we  see  that  the  effect  of  light  is 
not  changed,  and  that  the  posterior  part  crawls  away  from  light  into 
