dark  corners  as  a  normal  animal  would,  except  that  the  action  takes  place 
at  a  slower  rate.  In  normal  animals,  the  reaction  usually  begins  in  about 
one  minute  after  the  exposure ;  in  the  brainless  part,  it  takes  nearly  five 
minutes  of  exposure.2 

How  chemical  conditions  affect  the  activities  of  the  organism-as-a- 
whole  can  be  well  illustrated  by  the  following  examples.  In  a  jellyfish, 
we  can  increase  or  decrease  the  locomotor  activities  by  simply  changing 
the  chemical  constitution  of  the  water.  If  we  increase  the  number  of 
Na  ions  in  the  sea-water,  the  rhythmical  contractions  increase  and  the 
animal  becomes  restless.  If  we  increase  the  number  of  Ca  ions,  the  con¬ 
tractions  decrease.  In  a  similar  way,  we  can  change  the  orientation 
toward  light  in  a  number  of  marine  animals  by  changing  the  constitution 

Ill.  N ON -ELEMEN TALI  STIC  STRUCTURES 

of  the  medium.  The  larvae  of  Polygordius ,  which  usually  go  away  from 
light  into  dark  corners,  can  be  compelled  to  go  toward  light  by  two 
methods :  either  by  lowering  the  temperature  of  the  sea-water,  or  else  by 
increasing  the  concentration  of  the  salts  in  the  sea- water.  This  behaviour 
can  be  reversed  by  raising  the  temperature  or  lowering  the  concentration 
of  the  salts.3 

An  extremely  instructive  group  of  experiments  has  been  performed 
in  artificial  fertilization  of  the  eggs  of  a  large  number  of  marine  animals, 
such  as  starfish,  molluscs,  and  others. 

Under  usual  conditions,  these  eggs  cannot  develop  unless  a  sperma¬ 
tozoon  enters  the  egg,  which  results  in  a  thickening  of  the  membrane  called 
the  ‘fertilization  membrane’.  Experiments  show  that  such  a  transforma¬ 
tion  can  be  produced  artificially  in  an  unfertilized  egg,  with  resulting 
‘fertilization’,  by  several  artificial  means,  as,  for  instance,  by  the  treat¬ 
ment  of  the  eggs  with  special  chemicals,  and,  in  some  instances,  by  merely 
puncturing  the  egg  with  a  needle.  The  late  Jacques  Loeb  succeeded  in 
producing  in  this  way  parthenogenetic  frogs,  which  lived  a  normal  life.4 

Under  normal  conditions,  the  eggs  of  different  sea  animals  can  be 
fertilized  only  by  their  proper  sperm.  But,  if  we  raise  the  alkalinity  of 
the  sea-water  slightly,  we  find  that  the  eggs  can  be  fertilized  by  different 
sperms,  often  of  widely  separated  kinds  of  animals.5  If  we  put  unfertil¬ 
ized  eggs  of  a  sea-urchin  into  sea-water  which  contains  a  trace  of  sapo¬ 
nin,  we  fihd  that  the  eggs  acquire  the  characteristic  ‘membrane  of 
fertilization’.  If  the  eggs  are  taken  out,  washed  carefully  and  put  back 
into  sea-water,  they  develop  into  larvae.6  The  change  in  the  chemical 
constitution  of  sea-water  will  also  often  produce  twins  from  one  egg 
Change  in  temperature  may  change  the  colour  of  butterflies ,  .7 

A  very  large  class  of  such  organism-as-a- whole  reactions  is  given 
in  the  works  of  Professor  C.  M.  Child  on  regeneration.  I  suggest  these 
works,  not  only  because  they  are  particularly  interesting,  even  to  the 
layman,  but  mainly  because  Professor  Child  has  formulated  a  A  biolog¬ 
ical  system,  the  importance  of  which  is  becoming  paramount,  and  is 
beginning  to  be  applied  even  in  psychiatry  by  Dr.  Wm.  A.  White  and 
others. 

We  find  the  characteristic  of  profiting  by  past  experiences  and 
acquiring  negative  reactions  very  low  in  the  scale  of  life.  Thus,  even 
infusoria,  which  ingest  a  grain  of  carmine,  soon  learn  to  refuse  it.8  Most 
interesting  experiments  were  performed  on  worms  by  Yerkes  in  1912 
and  verified  repeatedly.  Yerkes  built  a  T-shaped  maze.  In  one  arm  (C) 
he  placed  a  piece  of  sand-paper  (S),  beyond  which  there  was  an  elec- 

TI I E  'ORG A N I SM-A S- A- WHOLE’ 

trical  device  (E)  which  could  give  an  electrical  shock.  The  animal  used 
for  experimenting  was  an  earthworm.  The  worm  was  admitted  through 
the  entrance  (A).  If  he  selected  his 
way  through  (B),  he  got  out  without 
disagreeable  consequences.  If  he  se¬ 
lected  (C),  he  received,  first,  a  fair 
warning  through  the  sand-paper  (S) 
and,  if  this  was  not  enough,  he  received 
an  electrical  shock  at  (E).  After  a 
number  of  experiences,  the  worm 
learned  his  lesson  and  avoided  the  path 
(C).  After  this  habit  was  acquired, 
the  five  anterior  segments  of  the  worm 
were  cut  off.  The  beheaded  worm  re¬ 
tained  the  habit,  although  it  reacted 
more  slowly.  During  the  following  two  months,  the  worm  grew  a  new 
brain  and  the  habit  disappeared.  When  trained  again,  he  partially  re¬ 
acquired  the  above  habit.  Further  experiments  established  that  normal 
worms  acquire  the  avoiding  habit  in  approximately  two  hundred  trials ; 
and  when  the  electrical  device  was  put  in  the  other  arm,  the  worm 
learned  how  to  reverse  his  habit  in  about  sixty-five  trials.  Once  the  habit 
was  acquired,  the  removal  of  the  brain  did  not  alter  it.  Worms  with 
removed  brains  were  also  able  to  acquire  a  similar  habit.  Since  the  brain 
of  an  earthworm  is  a  very  small  part  of  his  whole  nervous  system,  it  has 
only  a  small  dominance,  and  the  neuro-muscular  habits  are  acquired  by 
the  whole  system  and  not  simply  by  the  brain.  But,  when  a  new  brain 
began  to  operate,  its  dominance  was  seemingly  sufficient  to  eliminate 
the  habit.® 

Experiments  of  McCracken  with  silkworm  moths  have  shown  that 
a  beheaded  moth  can  live  as  long  as  a  normal  one.  It  can  be  mated  and 
will  lay  the  normal  number  of  fertile  eggs  arranged  in  the  usual  way. 
But  it  will  not  lay  eggs  spontaneously,  and  cannot  select  the  proper  kind 
of  leaves  on  which  to  deposit  them.  If  the  head  and  the  thorax  were  cut 
off,  the  females  were  unable  to  mate  and  their  life  was  shortened  to 
about  five  days.  If  mated  before  the  operation,  they  would  still  lay  eggs 
when  stimulated. 

In  these  more  complicated  cases,  the  brain  is  necessary  for  the  more 
complicated  behaviour,  as,  for  instance,  the  selection  of  a  mulberry  leaf.10 
Although  the  organism  works  as-a-whole,  the  differentiation  and  relative 
importance  (domination)  of  different  organs  becomes  more  accentuated, 
the  higher  we  go  in  the  scale  of  life. 

A 

Fig.  1 

111.  NON-ELEMENTAL1STIC  STRUCTURES 

Section  B,  Illustrations  from  nutrition  experiments . 

We  find  striking  illustrations  of  the  non-el  principle  in  the  study  of 
‘vitamins’.  A  few  years  ago  it  was  discovered  that  certain  widely  spread 
and  pernicious  diseases  were  due  to  deficiencies  of  some  factors  in  diet. 
These  factors,  which  normally  are  present  in  very  minute  amounts,  were 
called  ‘vitamins’  by  the  Polish  biologist,  Funk.  The  most  important 
vitamin-deficiency  diseases  are  called  Rickets,  Scurvy,  Beri-Beri,  and 
Pellagra.  In  all  these  cases,  it  is  important  to  notice  that  the  lack  of  a 
minute  amount  of  some  factor  may  have  the  most  varied,  pronounced, 
and  seemingly  unrelated  consequences.  The  symptoms  can  now  be  pro¬ 
duced  deliberately  on  experimental  animals,  by  diets  free  from  the  par¬ 
ticular  ‘vitamins’  and  can  also  be  cured  at  will  by  feeding  them  with 
the  proper  ‘vitamins’.11 

Rickets  appears  essentially  as  a  disease  of  infancy  or  childhood.  In 
mild  cases,  the  disease  may  only  be  discovered  after  the  death  of  the 
adult.  In  these  cases,  the  lesions  have  not  become  pronounced  enough 
during  life  to  attract  attention. 

The  diagnosis  usually  depends  on  manifestations  in  the  bones,  but 
rickets  affects  the  whole  organism  and  not  merely  the  skeleton.  The 
children  are  nervous  and  irritable,  but  apathetic.  They  sleep  poorly  and 
perspire  excessively.  The  muscles  become  wasted  and  weak.  Often  a 
secondary  anaemia  occurs.  The  children  sit,  stand,  and  walk  later  than 
usual ;  the  teeth  appear  later  in  life  and  decay  sooner.  The  bones  usually 
become  much  affected.  Areas  of  softening  appear  in  the  long  bones, 
which  become  bent.  In  more  severe  cases,  the  bones  may  even  become 
fractured  and  the  head  of  the  bone  may  separate  from  the  shaft.  The 
general  resistance  of  the  children  to  other  diseases  is  lowered  and  mor¬ 
tality  increases. 

Cod  liver  oil  or  sunshine  usually  effects  a  cure.  We  should  notice 
the  little  word  ‘or’,  for  quite  different  ‘causes’  produce  similar  ‘effects’ — 
an  example  illustrating  that  in  life  ‘cause’  and  ‘effect*  do  not  correspond 
in  a  one-to-one  relation,  but  in  a  many-to-one  relation. 

Experiments  have  shown  that  not  less  than  three  primary  dietary 
factors  are  concerned  with  the  development  of  skeletal  tissue.  These  are 
phosphorus,  calcium,  and  at  least  one  organic  compound  which  is  known 
as  antirachitic  vitamin.  The  work  of  Professor  E.  V.  McCollum  and 
his  co-workers  seems  to  show  an  interesting  point;  namely,  that  the 
ratio  between  the  concentrations  of  calcium  and  of  phosphorus  in  the 
food  may  be  more  important  than  the  absolute  amounts  of  these 
substances. 

THE  'ORGAN  l  SM-AS-A- WHOLE’ 

Scurvy  develops  gradually.  The  patient  loses  weight,  appears  anae¬ 
mic,  pale,  weak,  and  short  of  breath.  The  gums  become  swollen,  bleed 
easily,  and  often  develop  ulcers.  The  teeth  loosen  and  may  fall  out. 
Hemorrhages  between  the  mucous  membranes  and  the  skin  often  occur. 
Blue-black  spots  in  the  skin  are  very  easily  produced,  or  even  occur 
spontaneously.  The  ankles  become  swollen,  and,  in  severe  cases,  the  skin 
becomes  hard.  Nervous  symptoms  of  a  varied  character  appear,  some  of 
which  are  due  to  the  rupture  of  blood  vessels.  In  later  stages  of  the  dis¬ 
ease,  delirium  and  convulsions  may  occur.  Autopsy  reveals  significant 
data ;  namely,  hemorrhages  and  fragility  of  the  bones.  Scurvy  appears 
also  as  a  deficiency  disease,  produced  mainly  by  the  lack  in  food  of  the 
so-called  ‘anti-scorbutic  vitamin’. 

Beri-Beri  labels  a  form  of  inflammation  of  the  peripheral  nerves, 
the  nerves  of  motion  and  sensation  being  equally  affected.  In  the  begin¬ 
ning  of  the  disease,  the  patient  feels  fatigue,  depression,  and  stiffness  of 
the  legs.  We  distinguish  two  forms,  the  wet  and  the  dry.  In  the  dry 
form,  wasting,  anaesthesia  and  paralysis  are  the  chief  manifestations. 
The  most  marked  manifestation  in  the  wet  form  is  the  accumulation  of 
serum  in  the  cellular  tissue  affecting  the  trunks,  limbs  and  extremities. 
Usually,  in  both  forms,  there  appear  tenderness  of  the  calf  muscles  and 
a  tingling  or  burning  in  the  feet,  legs,  and  arms.  The  mortality  is  high. 

Pellagra  involves  the  nervous  system,  the  digestive  tract,  and  skin. 
Normally,  one  of  the  first  symptoms  to  appear  is  soreness  and  inflamma¬ 
tion  of  the  mouth.  Symmetrical  redness  of  the  skin  occurs  on  parts  of 
the  body.  The  nervous  symptoms  become  more  pronounced  as  the  dis¬ 
ease  advances.  The  spinal  cord  is  particularly  involved,  but  the  central 
nervous  system  is  also  often  affected. 

Speaking  about  ‘vitamins’  and  how  their  absence  affects  the  organ- 
ism-as-a-whole,  we  should  mention  that  sterility  in  females  may  be  con¬ 
nected  with  lack  of  vitamins.  Astonishing  experiments  by  Professor 
McCollum  showed  that  such  diverse  phenomena  as  loss  of  weight,  pre¬ 
mature  old  age,  high  infant  mortality. ,  are  largely  due  to  diet,  and  that 
even  such  fundamental  instincts  as  the  motherly  instinct  are  also  affected. 
The  normally  nourished  rat  very  seldom  destroys  its  young  and,  as  a  rule, 
rats  are  good  mothers.  If  we  put  such  a  mother  rat  on  an  abundant  diet 
that  is  deficient  in  some  vitamins,  the  mother  reacts  quite  differently 
toward  her  young  and  destroys  them  soon  after  their  birth.  This  char¬ 
acteristic  has  been  controlled  experimentally,  and  reversed  at  will  by 
proper  diets.  Nervousness  and  irritability  in  rats  can  also  be  controlled 
experimentally  by  means  of  the  vitamins  they  receive,  or  lack  in  food. 

111.  NON-ELEMENTAL1STIC  STRUCTURES 

Section  C.  Illustrations  from  ‘ mental *  and  nervous  diseases . 

Simple  and  striking  examples  of  what  the  non-el  principle  means 
can  also  be  given  from  psychiatry. 

White  quotes  the  report  of  Prince  that  a  patient  was  subject  to 
severe  attacks  of  hay  fever  when  exposed  to  roses.  On  one  occasion,  a 
bunch  of  roses  was  unexpectedly  produced  from  behind  a  screen.  The 
patient  started  a  severe  attack  with  all  the  usual  symptoms,  lachryma- 
tion,  congestion  of  the  mucosa . ,  although  the  roses  were  made  of  paper. 
This  interesting  case  shows  clearly  how  ‘mental*  factors  (the  belief  that 
the  roses  were  genuine)  produce  a  series  of  reactions  involving  sensory, 
motor,  vasomotor  disturbances,  and  secretory  disturbances  of  a  definitely 
‘physical*  character.12 

Migraine  labels  a  disturbance  in  the  tension  of  blood  vessels 
(vasomotor),  which  is  due  to  a  great  variety  of  possible  stimuli  acting 
on  the  vegetative  nervous  system.  In  some  instances,  the  stimuli  may 
be  purely  physical,  as  severe  blows,  falls,  fast  movements,  sudden  altera¬ 
tion  in  temperature,  of  pressure . ;  or  they  may  be  chemical,  and  due  to 
nicotine,  alcohol,  morphine,  or  to  some  endocrinal  disturbances  (adrenals, 
thyroid) ,  toxins , .  They  may  be  of  a  purely  somatic  reflex  character,  due 
to  fatigue,  tumour  formations , .  They  may  also  be  of  a  semantic  charac¬ 
ter,  due  to  anger,  fear,  disappointment,  worry,  and  other  semantic  states, 
which  may  act  by  disturbing  the  metabolism. 

Migraine  appears  usually  as  a  periodical  abnormal  state,  in  which 
the  patient  suffers  from  an  oppressive  pain  in  the  head  which  gradually 
passes  from  heaviness  and  dullness  to  splitting  intensity.  Often  charac¬ 
teristic  visual  signs  also  appear.  The  patient  sees  dark  spots  in  the 
visual  field,  flying  specks,  and  may  become  even  partially  blind.  Chilli¬ 
ness,  depression,  sensory  disturbances,  particularly  in  the  stomach,  with 
vomiting,  are  often  present.  An  attack  may  last  a  few  hours  or  even 
several  days.13 

Cretinism  labels  a  physical  and  ‘mental*  disturbance  due  mainly  to 
the  loss  or  diminution  of  the  function  of  the  thyroid  gland.  The 
patient  (child)  falls  behind  in  his  physical  development,  which  often 
results  in  dwarfism,  except  for  the  skull,  which  grows  larger  in  propor¬ 
tion  to  the  rest  of  the  body.  The  bone  defects  give  rise  to  widely  sepa¬ 
rated  eyes,  pug  nose , .  The  bony  tissue  becomes  unusually  hard,  and 
there  is  also  a  marked  dental  deficiency.  The  neck  is  usually  thick  and 
short,  the  abdomen  puffy,  the  navel  sunken.  The  hair  line  begins  low  on 
the  forehead,  the  nose  is  sunken,  the  eyelids  swollen,  the  face  puffy,  the 
tongue  protruding.  The  liver  is  usually  enlarged,  respiration  is  slow,  and 

THE  ‘OKGANISM-AS-A-WIIOLE* 

changes  in  the  blood  can  be  detected.  The  nervous  system  is  affected: 
we  also  find  defects  in  sensory  and  motor  nerve  structure.  On  the 
‘mental’  level,  we  find  different  degrees  of  stupidity,  ‘mental’  weakness 
(morons),  imbecility,  and  even  idiocy.  Smell,  eyesight,  and  hearing  are 
often  poor,  speech  disturbed,  so  that  we  often  find  the  patients  deaf  and 
dumb.  The  patients  have  an  unsteady  gait,  with  wobbling  of  the  head. 
Over-activity  of  the  thyroid  gland  results  in  the  well-known  goitre. 

Hyperpituitarism  results  in  acromegaly,  characterized  by  the  grad¬ 
ual  enlargement  of  the  bones  of  the  nose,  jaw,  hands  and  feet,  gigantism, 
often  connected  with  profound  disturbances.  Hypopituitarism,  or  defi¬ 
ciency  of  the  pituitary  hormones,  gives  rise  to  a  group  of  diseases  char¬ 
acterized  by  a  progressive  accumulation  of  fat,  and  is  connected  with 
other  abnormalities  and  disturbances. 

From  the  field  of  the  psychoneuroses,  I  shall  mention  only  hysteria. 
It  is  very  interesting  to  note  that  the  many  and  various  physical  and 
somatic  symptoms  are  of  a  purely  semantic  origin.  The  symptoms  of 
hysteria  are  many  and  very  complex,  but  they  group  themselves  mainly 
in  disturbances  of  motion  and  ‘sensation*.  We  find  every  kind  of  paraly¬ 
sis  and  anaesthesia.  Paralysis  of  the  limbs  is  frequent ;  anaesthesia  may 
be  distributed  in  many  ways,  involving  the  superficies  or  the  various 
‘sense-organs’.  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  the  distribution  of  these 
symptoms  does  not  follow  the  anatomical  areas  of  nerve  distribution, 
but  shows  a  symbolic  (psycho-logical)  grouping.  The  disturbances  of 
motility  are  usually  in  the  form  of  paralysis.  Tremors,  muscular  debility, 
fatigability,  involuntary  muscular  twitching,  tics  and  spasms  are  often 
hysterical  in  origin.  Speech  is  often  involved;  sometimes  patients  can 
only  whisper,  although  their  vocal  organs  are  healthy.  Stuttering  is 
often  hysterical,  and  analysis  shows  that  the  words  which  give  difficul¬ 
ties  usually  have  special  semantic  significance  for  the  patient.  Respira¬ 
tory  disturbances  of  an  asthmatic  character  and  disturbances  of  the 
gastro-intestinal  tract  are  also  often  hysterical. 

It  should  be  emphasized  that  since  non-elementalism  has  a  physico¬ 
chemical  structural  base  in  colloidal  behaviour,  all  life  and  all  organisms 
give  ample  material  for  illustration.  We  have  given  here  only  a  very 
few  examples,  selected  mainly  because  of  their  simple  and  spectacular 
empirical  character,  but  not  generally  too  well  known.  Empirical  data 
show  clearly  that  the  most  diversified  factors,  acting  as  partial  stimuli, 
ultimately  affect  or  result  in  the  response  of  the  whole. 

The  handling  of  such  empirical,  structural,  fundamental  problems 
involves  serious  structural,  linguistic  and  semantic  difficulties  which  have 
to  be  solved  entirely  by  adjusting  the  structure  of  the  language  used.  But 

111.  NON-ELEMENTAL1STIC  STRUCTURES 

such  adjustment  requires  a  full  understanding  of  the  structural  issues 
at  hand  and  a  fundamental  structural  departure  from  A  methods  and 
means-  Thesf  structural  issues  and  means  of  departures  from  A  meth- 
°ds  are  explained  in  the  following  chapters. 

To  sum  up:  The  non-el  principle  formulates  a  structural  rWai-fr 
inherently  found  in  the  structure  of  the  world,  ourselves,  and  our  ner¬ 
vous  system  on  all  levels;  the  knowledge  and  application  of  which  is 
unconditionally  necessary  for  adjustment  on  all  levels,  and,  therefore,  in 
humans,  for  sanity . 

As  ‘knowledge’,  ‘understanding’,  and  such  functions  are  solely  rela¬ 
tional,  and,  therefore,  structural,  the  unconditional  and  inherent  condi¬ 
tion  for  adjustment  on  all  human  levels  depends  on  building  language 
of  similar  structure  to  the  experimental  facts.  Once  this  is  accomplished, 
all  the  former  desirable  semantic  consequences  follow  automatically. 

For  simplicity,  we  have  considered  only  examples  of  the  ‘organism- 
as-a-whole’,  but,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  such  a  detached  consideration  can¬ 
not  be  considered  entirely  satisfactory,  as,  structurally,  every  organism 
depends  on  its  environment;  and,  therefore,  in  building  our  languages, 
we  ought  to  coin  terms  which  also  involve  the  latter  by  implication! 
Fortunately,  this  condition  does  not  involve  us  in  serious  difficulties, 
when  once  identity  is  eliminated  and  the  fundamental  problems  of  struc¬ 
ture  are  grasped.  Indeed,  the  terms  which  we  have  already  used,  or 
which  will  be  used  as  we  proceed,  are  all  of  such  a  non-el  structure  as  to 
involve  the  environment  by  implication. 

In  dealing  with  Smith*,  the  difficulties  are  particularly  serious 
because  his  nervous  system  is  the  most  complex  known.  It  is  stratified 
four-dimensionally  (in  space-time),  and  the  dominance  of  some  centres 
introduces  prodigious  and  manifold  interrelations  non-existent  in  nervous 
systems  of  simpler  structure;  and  we  still  have  to  learn  how  to  handle 
the  former.  Fortunately,  mathematical  methods  and  psychiatry  explain 
a  good  deal  about  this  question,  and  give  us  the  desired  means  to  apply 
what  we  have  learned. 

Obviously,  to  ‘know*  something  is  quite  different  from  the  habitual 
application  of  what  we  have  learned.  This  semantic  difference  is  particu¬ 
larly  acute  in  the  case  of  language,  as  it  involves  structural  implications 
which  work  unconsciously .  It  is  not  enough  to  'understand*  and  'know* 
the  content  of  the  present  work;  one  must  train  oneself  in  the  use  of  the 
new  terms.  Then  only  can  he  expect  the  maximum  semantic  results. 

PART  IV 

STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  NON-ARISTOTELIAN 

languages 

Without  objects  conceived  as  unique  individuals,  we  can  have  no  Classes . 
Without  classes  we  can,  as  we  have  seen,  define  no  Relations ,  without  re¬ 
lations  we  can  have  no  Order,  But  to  be  reasonable  is  to  conceive  of  order - 
systems ,  real  or  ideal.  Therefore ,  we  have  an  absolute  logical  need  to  conceive 
of  individual  objects  as  the  elements  of  our  ideal  order  systems .  This  postulate 
is  the  condition  of  defining  clearly  any  theoretical  conception  whatever. 
The  further  metaphysical  aspects  of  the  concept  of  an  individual  we  may 
here  ignore.  To  conceive  of  individual  objects  is  a  necessary  presupposition 
of  all  orderly  activity.  (449)  josiah  royce 

The  connections  shown  by  these  particular  examples  hold  in  general: 
given  a  transformation,  you  have  a  function  and  a  relation;  given  a  func¬ 
tion,  you  have  a  relation  and  a  transformation;  given  a  relation,  you  have 
a  transformation  and  a  function:  one  thing — three  aspects;  and  the  fact  is 
exceedingly  interesting  and  weighty.  (264)  cassius  j.  keyser 

It  can,  you  see,  be  said,  with  the  same  approximation  to  truth,  that  the 
whole  of  science,  including  mathematics,  consists  in  the  study  of  trans¬ 
formations  or  in  the  study  of  relations.  (264)  cassius  j  .  keyser 

Science  is  never  merely  knowledge;  it  is  orderly  knowledge.  (449> 

JOSIAH  ROYCE 

Philosophers  have,  as  a  rule,  failed  to  notice  more  than  two  types  of 
sentence,  exemplified  by  the  two  statements  “this  is  yellow”  and  “butter¬ 
cups  are  yellow.”  They  mistakenly  suppose  that  these  two  were  one  and 
the  same  type,  and  also  that  all  propositions  were  of  this  type.  The  former 
error  was  exposed  by  Frege  and  Peano;  the  latter  was  found  to  make  the 
explanation  of  order  impossible.  Consequently  the  traditional  view  that 
all  propositions  ascribe  a  predicate  to  a  subject  collapsed,  and  with  it  the 
metaphysical  systems  which  were  based  upon  it,  consciously  or  uncon¬ 
sciously.  (457)  BERTRAND  RUSSELL 

Interesting  analyses  by  Van  Woerkom  have  shown  a  general  incapacity 
in  aphasics  Tor  grasping  relations,  realizing  ordered  syntheses,  etc. ;  all  of 
them  are  operations  which  are  based,  in  the  normal  individual,  on  the  use 
of  verbal  symbolization.  When  confronted  by  groups  of  figures  or  of  geo¬ 
metrical  forms,  the  aphasic,  even  though  he  may  perceive  them  correctly, 
is  unable  to  analyse  or  to  order  the  elements,  to  grasp  their  succession  .  .  . 
(4111  HENRI  pi£ron 

CHAPTER  XI 

ON  FUNCTION 

The  whole  science  of  mathematics  rests  upon  the  notion  of  function, 
that  is  to  say,  of  dependence  between  two  or  more  magnitudes,  whose 
study  constitutes  the  principal  object  of  analysis.  c.  E.  ficard 

Every  one  is  familiar  with  the  ordinary  notion  of  a  function — with  the 
notion,  that  is,  of  the  lawful  dependence  of  one  or  more  variable  things 
upon  other  variable  things,  as  the  area  of  a  rectangle  upon  the  lengths  of 
its  sides,  as  the  distance  traveled  upon  the  rate  of  going,  as  the  volume  of 
a  gas  upon  temperature  and  pressure,  as  the  prosperity  of  a  throat  specialist 
upon  the  moisture  of  the  climate,  as  the  attraction  of  material  particles  upon 
their  distance  asunder,  as  prohibitionary  zeal  upon  intellectual  distinction 
and  moral  elevation,  as  rate  of  chemical  change  upon  the  amount  or  the 
mass  of  the  substance  involved,  as  the  turbulence  of  labor  upon  the  lust 
of  capital,  and  so  on  and  on  without  end.  (264)  cassius  j.  keyser 

The  infinite  which  it  superficially  gets  rid  of  is  concealed  in  the  notion 
of  “any,”  which  is  but  one  of  the  protean  disguises  of  mathematical  gen¬ 
erality.  (22)  E.  T.  BELL 

The  famous  mathematician,  Heaviside,  mentions  the  definition  of 
quaternions  given  by  an  American  schoolgirl.  She  defined  quaternions 
as  ‘an  ancient  religious  ceremony*.  Unfortunately,  the  attitude  of  many 
mathematicians  justified  such  a  definition.  The  present  work  departs 
widely  from  this  religious  attitude  and  treats  mathematics  simply  as  a 
most  important  and  unique  form  of  human  behaviour.  There  is  nothing 
sacred  about  any  single  verbal  formulation,  and  even  those  that  now 
seem  most  fundamental  should  be  held  subject  to  structural  revision  if 
need  should  arise.  The  few  mathematicians  who  have  produced  epoch- 
making  innovations  in  mathematical  method  had  this  behaviouristic 
attitude  unconsciously ,  as  will  be  shown  later.  The  majority  of  mathema¬ 
ticians  take  mathematics  as  a  clear-cut  entity,  ‘by  itself*.  This  is  due, 
first,  to  a  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions  and  to  identification,  as 
will  be  explained  later ;  and,  second,  to  its  seeming  simplicity.  In  reality, 
such  an  attitude  introduces  quite  unexpected  complications,  leading  to 
mathematical  revolutions,  which  are  always  bewildering.  The  mathemat¬ 
ical  revolutions  occur  only  because  of  this  over-simplified,  and  thus 
fallacious,  attitude  of  the  mathematicians  toward  their  work.  Had  all 
mathematicians  the  semantic  freedom  of  those  who  make  the  mathemat¬ 
ical  ‘revolutions*,  there  would  be  no  mathematical  ‘revolutions*,  but  an 
extremely  swift  and  constructive  progress.  To  re-educate  the  s,r  of  such 
mathematicians,  the  problem  of  the  psycho-logics  of  mathematics  must 
receive  more  attention.  This  means  that  some  mathematicians  must 

134  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

become  psycho-logicians  also,  or  that  psycho-logicians  must  study 
mathematics. 

For,  let  us  take  a  formula  which  exemplifies  mathematics  at  its  best  * 
namely,  one  and  one  make  two  (1  +  1  -2).  We  see  clearly  that  this 
human  product  involves  a  threefold  relation:  between  the  man  who 
made  it, 

(A)  /l+l-2\ 

Brown  ■« - ►  Smith 

let  us  say,  Smith,  and  the  black-on-white  marks  (A),  between  these 
marks  and  Brown,  and  between  Brown  and  Smith.  This  last  relation¬ 
ship  is  the  only  important  one.  The  marks  (A)  are  only  auxiliary  and 
are  meaningless  by  'themselves’.  They  would  never  occur  if  there  were 
no  Smiths  to  make  them,  and  would  be  of  no  value  if  there  were  no 
understanding  Browns  to  use  and  to  appreciate  them.  It  is  true  that 
when  we  take  into  account  this  threefold  relation  the  analysis  becomes 
more  difficult  and  must  involve  a  revision  of  the  foundations  of  mathe¬ 
matics.  Although  it  is  impossible  to  attempt  in  this  book  a  deeper 
analysis  of  these  problems  in  a  general  way,  yet  this  behaviouristic  atti¬ 
tude  follows  the  rejection  of  the  ‘is’  of  identity,  and  is  applied  all 
through  this  work. 

The  notion  of  ‘function*  has  played  a  very  great  role  in  the  develop¬ 
ment  of  modern  science,  and  is  structurally  and  semantically  funda¬ 
mental.  Thxs  notion  was  apparently  first  introduced  into  mathematical 
literature  by  Descartes.  Leibnitz  introduced  the  term.  The  notion  of  a 
‘function*  is  based  on  that  of  a  variable .  In  mathematics,  a  variable  is 
used  as  an  oo-valued  symbol  that  can  represent  any  one  of  a  series  of 
numerical  elements. 

It  is  useful  to  enlarge  the  mathematical  meaning  of  a  variable  to 
include  any  oo-valued  symbol  of  which  the  value  is  not  determined. 
The  various  determinations  which  may  be  assigned  to  the  variable  we 
call  the  value  of  the  variable.  It  is  important  to  realize  that  a  mathe¬ 
matical  variable  does  not  vary  or  change  in  itself,  but  can  take  any  value 
within  its  range.  If  a  particular  value  is  selected  for  a  variable,  then 
this  value,  and,  therefore,  the  variable,  becomes  fixed — a  one-valued 
constant.  In  the  use  of  these  terms,  we  should  take  into  account  the 
behaviour  of  the  mathematizer.  His  V  is  like  a  container,  into  which  he 
may  poor  any  or  many  liquids ;  but  once  the  selection  has  been  made, 
the  content  of  the  container  is  one  or  a  constant.  So  ‘change*  is  not 
inherent  in  a  variable ;  it  is  due  only  to  the  volition  of  the  mathematizer, 
who  can  change  one  value  for  another.  Thus,  the  value  changes  by 
quanta,  in  definite  lots,  according  to  the  pleasure  of  the  operator.  This 

ON  FUNCTION 

quantum  character  of  the  variable  has  serious  structural  and  semantic 
consequences,  which  will  become  clearer  further  on.  It  allows  us,  with¬ 
out  stretching  our  definitions,  to  apply  the  new  vocabulary  to  any  problem 
whatsoever.  It  is  in  structural  accord  with  the  trend  of  the  quantum 
theory,  and,  therefore,  with  the  structure  of  this  world,  as  we  know  it 
