at  present. 

The  notion  of  a  variable  originated  in  mathematics,  and,  in  the  be¬ 
ginning,  dealt  only  with  numbers.  Now  numbers,  when  given,  represent, 
structurally,  a  manifold  or  aggregate  which  is  not  supposed  to  change. 
So,  when  we  consider  a  variable,  we  should  ‘think’  not  of  a  changing 
entity,  but  of  any  element  we  choose  out  of  our  perfectly  constant  col¬ 
lection  (when  given).  Let  me  repeat  that  the  notion  of  change  enters 
in,  only  in  connection  with  the  volition  and  the  s.r  of  the  one  who 
operates  these  unchanging  entities.  The  notion  of  a  variable  is  taken 
always  in  an  extensional  oo -valued  sense,  to  be  explained  later,  as  it 
always  implies  structurally  a  collection  of  many  individuals,  out  of  which 
collection  a  selection  of  one  can  be  made.  The  notion  of  a  variable  is 
general  and,  in  principle,  oo- valued;  a  constant  is  a  special  one- valued 
case  of  a  variable  in  which  the  collection  contains  a  single  element, 
making  alternative  selection  impossible. 

Variables  are  usually  symbolized  by  the  end  letters  of  the  alphabet, 
x,  y,  z , .  The  supply  is  increased  as  desired  by  the  use  of  indices ;  for 
instance,  x\  /,  <er\ ;  xfft  z". ;  or  xlf  yu  zt . ;  x2,  y2,  z2 , .  This  gives  a 
flexible  means  of  denoting  numerous  individuals,  and  so  manufacturing 
them  indefinitely,  as  the  extensional  method  of  mathematics  requires. 
Another  method,  introduced  not  long  ago,  has  proven  useful  in  dealing 
with  a  definite  selection  of  variables  in  a  simplified  manner.  One  letter 
or  one  equation  can  be  used  instead  of  many.  The  variable  sign  x  is 
modified  by  another  letter  which  may  have  different  values,  in  a  given 
range ;  for  instance,  Xi ,  Xk , .  The  modifying  letter  i  or  k  can  take  the 
serial  values ;  let  us  say  i  or  k  —  1,  2,  3 , .  Since  the  one  symbol  stands 
for  the  array  of  many  different  variables  xXi  x2,  xs . ,  statements  can  be 
greatly  simplified,  and  yet  preserve  structurally  the  extensional  indi¬ 
viduality. 

It  is  important  that  the  non-mathematical  reader  should  become 
acquainted  with  the  above  methods  and  notations,  as  they  involve  a  pro¬ 
found  and  far-reaching  structural  and  psycho-logical  attitude,  useful  to 
everybody,  involving  most  fundamental  s.r. 

The  extensional  method  means  dealing  structurally  with  many 
definite  individuals ;  as,  for  instance,  with  1,  2,  3 . ,  a  series  in  which  each 
individual  has  a  special  and  unique  name  or  symbol.  This  extensional 

136  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

method  is  structurally  the  only  one  by  which  we  may  expect  to  acquire 
A  oo -valued  s.r.  In  a  strict  sense,  the  problems  in  life  and  the  sciences 
do  not  differ  structurally  from  this  mathematical  problem.  In  life  and 
science,  one  deals  with  many,  actual,  unique  individuals,  and  all  speak¬ 
ing  is  using  abstractions  of  a  very  high  order  (abstractions  from 
abstraction  from  abstraction,.).  So,  whenever  we  speak,  the  individual 
is  never  completely  covered,  and  some  characteristics  are  left  out. 

A  rough  definition  of  a  function  is  simple :  y  is  said  to  be  a  func¬ 
tion  of  x,  if,  when  x  is  given,  y  is  determined.  Let  us  start  with  a  simple 
mathematical  illustration ;  y  —  x  +  3.  If  we  select  the  value  1  for  x  our 
y**  1  +  3  —  4.  If  we  select  x  —  2,  then  y  =  2  +  3  —  5,.  Let  us  take 
a  more  complicated  example ;  for  instance :  y~=x*  —  x-\- 2.  We  see 
that  for  x=*  1,  y—  1  —  1  +  2  —  2;for^-=2,y««4— 2  +  2  —  4;  for 
x  =  3,  y  =“*  9 — 3  +  2  ■=*=  8 , . 

In  general,  y  is  determined  when  we  fulfill  all  the  indicated  opera¬ 
tions  upon  the  variable  x,  and  so  get  the  final  results  of  these  operations. 
In  symbols,  y^f(x)t  which  is  read,  y  equals  function  of  x,  or  y  equals 
f  of  x. 

In  our  example,  we  may  call  x  the  independent  variable,  meaning 
that  it  is  the  one  to  which  we  may  assign  any  value  at  our  pleasure,  if 
not  limited  by  the  conditions  of  our  problem,  and  y  would  then  be  the 
dependent  variable,  which  means  that  its  value  is  no  longer  dependent 
on  our  pleasure,  but  is  determined  by  the  selection  of  the  value  of  x. 
The  terms  dependent  and  independent  variables  are  not  absolute,  for 
the  dependence  is  mutual,  and  we  could  select  either  variable  as  the 
independent  one,  according  to  our  wishes. 

The  notion  of  a  ‘function'  has  been  generalized  by  Bertrand  Rus¬ 
sell  to  the  very  important  notion  of  a  ‘propositional  function'.1  For  my 
purpose,  a  rough  definition  will  be  sufficient.  By  a  propositional  func¬ 
tion,  I  mean  an  oo -valued  statement,  containing  one  or  more  variables, 
such  that  when  single  values  are  assigned  to  these  variables  the  expres¬ 
sion  becomes,  in  principle,  a  one-valued  proposition.  The  oo-valued 
character  of  propositional  functions  seems  essential,  because  we  may 
have  a  one-valued  descriptive  function  with  variables,  or  a  one-valued 
expression  formulating  a  semantic  relational  law  expressed  in  variable 
terms . ,  yet  these  would  be  propositions.  Thus,  the  oo -valued  statement, 
x  is  black',  would  exemplify  a  propositional  function ;  but  the  one-valued 
relation  ‘if  x  is  more  than  y,  and  y  is  more  than  z,  then  x  is  more  than 
z  exemplifies  a  proposition.  This  extended  m,o  notion  of  a  propositional 
function  becomes  of  crucial  importance  in  a  ^-system,  because  most  of 
our  speaking  is  conducted  in  oo-valued  languages  to  which  we  mostly 

ON  FUNCTION 

and  delusionally  ascribe  single  values,  entirely  preventing  proper 
evaluation. 

An  important  characteristic  of  a  propositional  function,  for  instance, 

- x  is  black',  is  that  such  a  statement  is  neither  true  nor  false,  but  am¬ 
biguous.  It  is  useless  to  discuss  the  truth  or  falsehood  of  propositional 
functions,  since  the  terms  true  or  false  cannot  be  applied  to  them.  But 
if  a  definite,  single  value  is  assigned  to  the  variable  xt  then  the  proposi¬ 
tional  function  becomes  a  proposition  which  may  be  true  or  false.  ^  For 
instance,  if  we  assign  to  x  the  value  ‘coal’,  and  say  ‘coal  is  black ,  the 
oo-valued  propositional  function  has  become  a  one-valued  true  proposi¬ 
tion.  If  we  should  assign  to  x  the  value  ‘milk',  and  say  milk  is  black , 
this  also  would  make  a  proposition,  but,  in  this  case,  false.  If  we  should 
assign  to  x  the  value  ‘blah-blah',  and  say  ‘blah-blah  is  black ,  such  a 
statement  may  be  considered  as  meaningless,  since  it  contains  sounds 
which  have  no  meaning ;  or  we  may  say,  ‘the  statement  blah-blah  is  not 
black  but  meaningless',  and,  therefore,  the  proposition  ‘blah-blah  is 

black1,  is  not  meaningless  but  false. 

We  should  notice— a  fact  disregarded  in  the  Principia  Mathematica 
—that  there  is  no  hard  and  fast  rule  by  which  we  can  distinguish 
between  meaningless  and  false  statements  in  general,  but  that  such  dis¬ 
crimination  depends  on  many  factors  in  each  specific  case.  A  proposi¬ 
tional  function,  *x  is  black’,  cannot  be  its  own  argument :  for  instance,  if 
we  substitute  the  whole  propositional  function,  *x  is  black’,  for  the  vari¬ 
able  x  in  the  original  propositional  function,  and  then  consider  the 
expression,  *x  is  black,  is  black’,  which  Whitehead  and  Russell  classify  as 
meaningless r  this  expression  is  not  necessarily  meaningless,  but  may  be 
considered  false .  For,  the  statement,  is  black’,  is  defined  as  a  proposi¬ 
tional  function ,  and,  therefore,  the  statement,  *x  is  black,  is  black’,  may 
be  considered  false . 

The  problems  of  ‘meaning’  and  ‘meaningless’  are  of  great  semantic 
importance  in  daily  life,  but,  as  yet,  little  has  been  done,  and  little  re¬ 
search  made,  to  establish  or  discover  valid  criteria.  To  prove  a  given 
statement  false  is  often  laborious,  and  sometimes  impossible  to  do  so, 
because  of  the  undeveloped  state  of  knowledge  in  that  field.  But  with 
meaningless  verbal  forms,  when  their  meaninglessness  is  exposed  in  a 
given  case,  the  non-sense  is  exploded  for  good. 

From  this  point  of  view,  it  is  desirable  to  investigate  more  fully  the 
mechanism  of  our  symbolism,  so  as  to  be  able  to  distinguish  between 
statements  which  are  false  and  verbal  forms  which  have  no  meanings. 
The  reader  should  recall  what  was  said  about  the  term  ‘unicorn’,  used  as 
a  symbol  in  heraldry  and,  eventually,  in  ‘psychology’,  since  it  stands  for 

138  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

a  human  fancy ,  but,  in  zoology,  it  becomes  a  noise  and  not  a  symbol, 
since  it  does  not  stand  for  any  actual  animal  whatsoever. 

A  very  curious  semantic  characteristic  is  shared  in  common  by  a 
propositional  function  and  a  statement  containing  meaningless  noises; 
namely,  that  neither  of  them  can  be  true  or  false.  In  the  old  A  way 
all  sounds  man  made,  which  could  be  written  down  and  looked  like 
words,  were  considered  words ;  and  so  every  ‘question*  was  expected  to 
have  an  answer.  When  spell-marks  (noises  which  can  be  spelled)  were 
put  together  in  a  specified  way,  each  combination  was  supposed  to  say 
something,  and  this  statement  was  supposed  to  be  true  or  false.  We  see 
clearly  that  this  view  is  not  correct,  that,  in  addition  to  words,  we  make 
noises  (spell-marks)  which  may  have  the  appearance  of  being  words, 
but  should  not  be  considered  as  words,  as  they  say  nothing  in  a  given 
context.  Propositional  functions,  also,  cannot  be  classified  under  the 
simple  two  opposites  of  true  and  false. 

The  above  facts  have  immense  semantic  importance,  as  they  are 
directly  connected  with  the  possibility  of  human  agreement  and  adjust¬ 
ment.  For  upon  statements  which  are  neither  true  nor  false  we  can 
always  disagree,  if  we  insist  in  applying  criteria  which  have  no  applica¬ 
tion  in  such  cases. 

In  human  life  the  semantic  problems  of  ‘meaninglessness*  are  fun¬ 
damental  for  sanity,  because  the  evaluation  of  noises,  which  do  not  con¬ 
stitute  symbols  in  a  given  context  as  symbols  in  that  context,  must,  of 
necessity,  involve  delusions  or  other  morbid  manifestations. 

The  solution  of  this  problem  is  simple.  Any  noises  or  signs,  when 
used  semantically  as  symbols,  always  represent  some  symbolism,  but  we 
must  find  out  to  what  field  the  given  symbolism  applies.  We  find  only 
three  possible  fields.  If  we  apply  a  symbol  belonging  to  one  field  to 
another  field,  it  has  very  often  no  meaning  in  this  latter.  In  the  follow¬ 
ing  considerations,  the  theory  of  errors  is  disregarded. 

A  symbol  may  stand  for:  (1)  Events  outside  our  skin,  or  inside 
our  skin  in  the  fields  belonging  to  physics,  chemistry,  physiology, .  (2) 
Psycho-logical  events  inside  our  skin,  or,  in  other  words,  for  s.r  which 
may  be  considered  sane*,  covering  a  field  belonging  to  psycho-logics. 
(3)  Semantic  disturbances  covering  a  pathological  field  belonging  to 
psychiatry. 

As  the  above  divisions,  together  with  their  interconnections,  cover 
the  field  of  human  symbolism,  which,  in  1933,  have  become,  or  are  rap¬ 
idly  becoming,  experimental  sciences,  it  appears  obvious  that  older  ‘meta¬ 
physics’  of  every  description  become  illegitimate,  affording  only  a  very 
fertile  field  for  study  in  psychiatry. 

ON  FUNCTION 

Because  of  structural  and  the  above  symbolic  considerations  based 
on  A  negative,  non-identity  premises,  these  conclusions  appear  as  final; 
and,  perhaps,  for  the  first  time  bring  to  a  focus  the  age-long  problem 
of  the  subject-matter,  character,  value,  and,  in  general,  the  status  of  the 
older  ‘metaphysics*  in  human  economy.  From  the  non-el,  structural,  and 
semantic  point  of  view,  the  problems  with  which  the  older  ‘metaphysics* 
and  ‘philosophy*  dealt,  should  be  divided  into  two  quite  definite  groups. 
One  would  include  ‘epistemology*,  or  the  theory  of  knowledge,  which 
would  ultimately  merge  with  scientific  and  non-el  psycho-logics,  based 
on  general  semantics,  structure,  relations,  multi-dimensional  order,  and 
the  quantum  mechanics  of  a  given  date;  and  the  rest  would  represent 
semantic  disturbances,  to  be  studied  by  a  generalized  up-to-date 
psychiatry. 

Obviously,  considerations  of  structure,  symbolism,  sanity . ,  involve 
the  solutions  of  such  weighty  problems  as  those  of  ‘fact*,  ‘reality*,  ‘true*, 
‘false*. ,  which  are  completely  solved  only  by  the  consciousness  of  ab¬ 
stracting,  the  multiordinality  of  terms . , — in  general,  a  ^-system. 

Let  me  repeat  the  rough  definition  of  a  propositional  function — 
as  an  oo-valued  statement  containing  variables  and  characterized  by  the 
fact  that  it  is  ambiguous,  neither  true  nor  false. 

How  about  the  terms  we  deal  with  in  life?  Are  they  all  used  as 
one-valued  terms  for  constants  of  some  sort,  or  do  we  have  terms  which 
are  inherently  oo-valued  or  variable?  How  about  terms  like  ‘mankind*, 
‘science*,  ‘mathematics*,  ‘man*,  ‘education*,  ‘ethics*,  ‘politics*,  ‘religion*, 
‘sanity*,  ‘insanity^,  ‘iron*,  ‘wood*,  ‘apple*,  ‘object*,  and  a  host  of  other 
terms  ?  Are  they  labels  for  one-valued  constants  or  labels  for  oo-valued 
stages  of  processes.  Fortunately,  here  we  have  no  doubt. 

We  see  that  a  large  majority  of  the  terms  we  use  are  names  for 
oo-valued  stages  of  processes  with  a  changing  content.  When  such  terms 
are  used,  they  generally  carry  different  or  many  contents.  The  terms 
represent  oo-valued  variables,  and  so  the  statements  represent  oo-valued 
propositional  functions,  not  one-valued  propositions,  and,  therefore,  in 
principle,  are  neither  true  nor  false,  but  ambiguous. 

Obviously,  before  such  propositional  functions  can  become  proposi¬ 
tions,  and  be  true  or  false,  single  values  must  be  assigned  to  the  vari¬ 
ables  by  some  method.  Here  we  must  select,  at  least,  the  use  of 
co-ordinates.  In  the  above  cases,  the  ‘time*  co-ordinate  is  sufficient. 
Obviously,  ‘science  1933*  is  quite  different  from  ‘science  1800*  or  ‘science 
300  b.c/. 

The  objection  may  be  made  that  it  would  be  difficult  to  establish 
means  by  which  the  use  of  co-ordinates  could  be  made  workable.  It 

140  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

seems  that  this  might  involve  us  in  complex  difficulties.  But,  no  matter 
how  simple  or  how  complex  the  means  we  devise,  the  details  are  vmmor 
tend,  and,  therefore,  we  can  accept  the  roughest  and  simplest;  let  us 
say,  the  year,  and  usually  no  spatial  co-ordinates.  The  invaluable  seman¬ 
tic  effect  of  such  an  innovation  is  structurd,  one-,  versus  oo-valued, 
psycho-logicd  and  methodological,  and  affects  deeply  our  s.r. 

From  time  immemorial,  some  men  were  supposed  to  deal  in  one¬ 
valued  ‘eternal  verities*.  We  called  such  men  ‘philosophers*  or  ‘meta¬ 
physicians*.  But  they  seldom  realized  that  all  their  ‘eternal  verities’ 
consisted  only  of  words,  and  words  which,  for  the  most  part,  belonged 
to  a  primitive  language,  reflecting  in  its  structure  the  assumed  structure 
of  the  world  of  remote  antiquity.  Besides,  they  did  not  realize  that 
these  ‘eternal  verities*  last  only  so  long  as  the  human  nervous  system  is 
not  altered.  Under  the  influence  of  these  ‘philosophers’,  two-valued 
‘logic’,  and  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions,  nearly  all  of  us  con¬ 
tracted  a  firmly  rooted  predilection  for  ‘general’  statements— ‘universals*, 
as  they  were  called — which,  in  most  cases,  inherently  involved  the  seman¬ 
tic  one-valued  conviction  of  validity  for  all  ‘time*  to  come. 

If  we  use  our  statements  with  a  date,  let  us  say  ‘science  1933*,  such 
statements  have  a  profoundly  modified  structural  and  psycho-logical 
character,  different  from  the  old  general  legislative  semantic  mood.  A 
statement  concerning  ‘science  1933’,  whether  correct  or  not,  has  no  ele¬ 
ment  of  semantic  conviction  concerning  1934. 

We  see,  further,  that  a  statement  about  ‘science  1933*  might  be 
quite  a  definite  statement,  and  that  if  the  person  is  properly  informed, 
it  probably  would  be  true.  Here  we  come  in  contact  with  the  structure 
of  one  of  those  human  semantic  impasses  which  we  have  pointed  out. 
We  humans,  through  old  habits,  and  because  of  the  inherent  structure 
of  human  knowledge,  have  a  tendency  to  make  static,  definite,  and,  in 
a  way,  absolutistic  one-valued  statements.  But  when  we  fight  absolutism, 
we  quite  often  establish,  instead,  some  other  dogma  equally  silly  and 
harmful.  For  instance,  an  active  atheist  is  psycho-logically  as  unsound 
as  a  rabid  theist. 

A  similar  remark  applies  to  practically  all  these  opposites  we  are 
constantly  establishing  or  fighting  for  or  against.  The  present  structure 
of  human  knowledge  is  such,  as  will  be  shown  later,  that  we  tend  to  make 
definite  statements,  static  and  one-valued  in  character,  which,  when  we 
take  into  account  the  present  pre-,  and  A  one-,  two-,  three- valued  affec¬ 
tive  components,  inevitably  become  absolutistic  and  dogmatic  and  ex¬ 
tremely  harmful. 

ON  FUNCTION 

It  is  a  genuine  and  fundamental  semantic  impasse.  These  static 
statements  are  very  harmful,  and  yet  they  cannot  be  abolished,  for  the 
present.  There  are  even  weighty  reasons  why,  without  the  formulation 
and  application  of  oo-valued  semantics,  it  is  not  possible  (1933)  to  abol¬ 
ish  them.  What  can  be  done  under  such  structural  circumstances  ?  Give 
up  hope,  or  endeavour  to  invent  methods  which  cover  the  discrepancy 
in  a  satisfactory  (1933)  way?  The  analysis  of  the  psycho-logics  of  the 
mathematical  propositional  function  and  A  semantics  gives  us  a  most 
satisfactory  structural  solution,  necessitating,  among  others,  a  four¬ 
dimensional  theory  of  propositions. 

We  see  (1933)  that  we  can  make  definite  and  static  statements, 
and  yet  make  them  semantically  harmless.  Here  we  have  an  example  of 
abolishing  one  of  the  old  A  tacitly-assumed  ‘infinities’.  The  old  ‘general’ 
statements  were  supposed  to  be  true  for  ‘all  time’ ;  in  quantitative  lan¬ 
guage  it  would  mean  for  ‘infinite  numbers  of  years’.  When  we  use  the 
date,  we  reject  the  fanciful  tacit  A  ‘infinity’  of  years  of  validity,  and 
limit  the  validity  of  our  statement  by  the  date  we  affix  to  it.  Any  reader 
who  becomes  accustomed  to  the  use  of  this  structural  device  will  see 
what  a  tremendous  semantic  difference  it  makes  psycho-logically. 

But  the  above  does  not  exhaust  the  question  structurally.  We  have 
seen  that  when  we  speak  about  oo-valued  processes,  and  stages  of 
processes,  we  use  variables  in  our  statements,  and  so  our  statements  are 
not  propositions  but  propositional  functions  which  are  not  true  or  false, 
but  are  ambiguous.  But,  by  assigning  single  values  to  the  variables,  we 
make  propositions,  which  might  be  true  or  false;  and  so  investigation 
and  agreement  become  possible,  as  we  then  have  something  definite  to 
talk  about. 

A  fundamental  structural  issue  arises  in  this  connection;  namely, 
that  in  doing  this  (assigning  single  values  to  the  variables),  our  attitude 
has  automatically  changed  to  an  extensional  one.  By  using  our  state¬ 
ments  with  a  date,  we  deal  with  definite  issues,  on  record,  which  we  can 
study,  analyse,  evaluate . ,  and  so  we  make  our  statements  of  an  exten- 
sional  character,  with  all  cards  on  the  table,  so  to  say,  at  a  given  date. 
Under  such  extensional  and  limited  conditions,  our  statements  then 
become,  eventually,  propositions,  and,  therefore,  true  or  false,  depending 
on  the  amount  of  information  the  maker  of  the  statements  possesses. 
We  see  that  this  criterion,  though  difficult,  is  feasible,  and  makes  agree¬ 
ment  possible. 

A  structural  remark  concerning  the  ^-system  may  not  be  amiss 
here.  In  the  -system  the  ‘universal’  proposition  (which  is  usually  a 
propositional  function)  always  implies  existence.  In  A  ‘logic’,  when  it  is 

142  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

said  that  ‘all  A*s  are  B*,  it  is  assumed  that  there  are  A*s.  It  is  obvious 
that  always  assuming  existence  leaves  no  place  for  non-existence;  and 
this  is  why  the  old  statements  were  supposed  to  be  true  or  false.  In 
practical  life,  collections  of  noises  (spell -marks)  which  look  like  words, 
but  which  are  not,  are  often  not  suspected  of  being  meaningless,  and 
action  based  on  them  may  consequently  entail  unexplicable  disaster.  In 
our  lives,  most  of  our  miseries  do  not  originate  in  the  field  where  the 
terms  ‘true*  and  ‘false*  apply,  but  in  the  field  where  they  do  not  apply; 
namely,  in  the  immense  region  of  propositional  functions  and  meaning¬ 
lessness,  where  agreement  must  fail. 

Besides,  this  sweeping  and  unjustified  structural  assumption  makes 
the  ^-system  less  general .  To  the  statement,  ‘all  A’s  are  B*,  the  mathe¬ 
matician  adds  ‘there  may  or  may  not  be  A’s\  This  is  obviously  more 
general .  The  old  pair  of  opposites,  true  and  false,  may  be  enlarged  to 
three  possibilities — statements  which  might  be  true,  or  false,  and  verbal 
forms  which  have  the  appearance  of  being  statements  and  yet  have  no 
meaning,  since  the  noises  used  were  spell-marks,  not  symbols  for  any¬ 
thing  with  actual  or  ‘logical*  existence. 

Again  a  ^-system  shares  with  the  E  and  R  systems  a  useful  and 
important  methodological  and  structural  innovation;  namely,  it  limits 
the  validity  of  its  statements,  with  weighty  semantic  beneficial  conse¬ 
quences,  as  it  tends  from  the  beginning  to  eliminate  undue,  and  often 
intense,  dogmatism,  categorism,  and  absolutism.  This,  on  a  printed  page, 
perhaps,  looks  rather  unimportant,  but  when  applied ,  it  leads  to  a  fun¬ 
damental  and  structurally  beneficial  alteration  in  our  semantic  attitudes 
and  behaviour. 

In  the  present  work,  each  statement  is  merely  the  best  the  author 
can  make  in  1933.  Each  statement  is  given  definitely,  but  with  the 
semantic  limitation  that  it  is  based  on  the  information  available  to  the 
author  in  1933.  The  author  has  spared  no  labour  in  endeavouring  to 
ascertain  the  state  of  knowledge  as  it  exists  in  the  fields  from  which  his 
material  is  drawn.  Some  of  this  information  may  be  incorrect,  or 
wrongly  interpreted.  Such  errors  will  come  to  light  and  be  corrected  as 
the  years  proceed. 

A  great  source  of  difficulty  and  of  possible  objections  is  that  science 
is,  at  present,  so  specialized  that  it  is  impossible  for  one  man  to  know  all 
fields,  and  that,  therefore,  the  use  of  a  term  such  as  ‘science  1933’*  might 
be  fundamentally  unsound.  This  objection  should  not  be  lightly  dis¬ 
missed,  as  it  is  serious.  Yet  it  can,  I  believe,  be  answered  satisfactorily. 
At  this  early  stage  of  our  enquiry,  a  large  number  of  the  facts  of  knowl¬ 
edge  does  not  affect  my  investigation ;  therefore,  it  has  not  proved  im- 

ON  FUNCTION 

possible  to  keep  sufficiently  well  informed  on  the  points  which  are 
covered.  Also,  the  further  scientific  theories  advance,  the  simpler  they 
become.  For  instance,  books  on  physics  are  simpler  and  less  voluminous 
now  than  twenty  years  ago.  Something  similar  could  be  said  about 
mathematics.  The  general  outlook  is  simpler. 

The  main  interest  of  the  author  at  this  stage  of  his  work  is  struc¬ 
tural  and  semantic,  rather  than  technical,  and  so  he  has  only  had  to  know 
enough  of  the  technique  of  different  sciences  to  be  able  to  understand 
sufficiently  their  structure  and  method.  Revolutionary  structural  and 
methodological  advances  are  few  in  the  history  of  mankind ;  and  so  it  is 
possible,  though  not  easy,  to  follow  them  up  in  1933. 

But  the  main  point  is  that  the  affixing  of  the  date  has  very  far- 
reaching  structural  methodological  and,  therefore,  psycho-logical  seman¬ 
tic  consequences.  For  instance,  it  changes  propositional  function  into 
propositions,  converts  semantically  one-valued  intensional  methods  into 
oo -valued  extensional  methods,  introduces  four-dimensional  methods . , 
and  so  the  ‘date’  method  is  to  be  recommended  on  these  structural  and 
semantic  grounds  alone .  As  it  is  beneficial  to  affix  the  date  in  1933,  we 
affix  the  date  1933,  not  to  give  the  impression  that  from  a  technical  point 
of  view  I  am  familiar  with  the  results  of  all  branches  of  science  at  that 
date,  but  to  indicate  that  no  advance  in  structure  and  method  of  1933 
has  been  disregarded.  It  will  become  obvious  later  in  this  book,  when 
additional  data  have  been  taken  into  consideration,  and  a  new  summary 
and  new  abstractions  made,  that  the  result  is  a  surprising  simplification, 
which  can  be  clearly  understood  by  laymen  as  well  as  by  scientists.  With 
the  help  of  the  generalizations  of  new  structure  and  oo-valued  semantics, 
it  will  be  easier  to  follow  the  advance  of  science,  because  we  shall  then 
have  a  better  outlook  on  the  psycho-logics  of  science  as-a-whole. 

It  will  become  clear,  too,  that  to  provide  for  a  further  elaboration 
of  this  work  in  the  future,  the  establishment  of  a  special  branch  of 
research  in  ^-systems  must  become  a  group  activity ;  for,  as  I  have  been 
painfully  aware,  the  production  of  even  this  outline  of  that  branch  of 
research  has  overstrained  the  powers  of  one  man. 

The  most  cheering  part  of  this  work  is,  perhaps,  the  practical 
results  which  this  investigation  has  accomplished,  combined  with  the 
simplicity  of  means  employed.  One  of  the  dangers  into  which  the  reader 
is  liable  to  fall  is  to  ascribe  too  much  generality  to  the  work,  to  forget 
the  limitations  and,  perhaps,  one-sidedness  which  underlie  it.  The  limita¬ 
tion  and  the  generality  of  this  theory  lie  in  the  fact  that  if  we  symbolize 
our  human  problems  (H  =  f(x i,  x2,  x3,  x4,  x5,  .  .  .  xnJ)  as  a  function  of 
an  enormous  number  of  variables,  the  present  theory  deals  only  with  a 

144  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

few  of  these  variables,  let  us  say  (say,  structure),  xt  (say,  evalua¬ 
tion)  . ,  but  these  variables  have  been  found,  up  to  the  present,  in  all  our 
experience  and  all  our  equations. 

A  most  important  extension  of  the  notion  of  ‘function*  and  ‘propo¬ 
sitional  function*  has  been  further  accomplished  by  Cassius  J.  Keyser, 
who,  in  1913,  in  his  discussion  of  the  multiple  interpretations  of  postu¬ 
late  systems,  introduced  the  notion  of  the  ‘doctrinal  function*.  Since, 
the  doctrinal  function  has  been  discussed  at  length  by  Keyser  in  his 
Mathematical  Philosophy  and  his  other  writings,  by  Carmichael2,  and 
others.  Let  us  recall  that  a  propositional  function  is  defined  as  an 
oo-valued  statement,  containing  one  or  more  variables,  such  that  when 
single  values  are  assigned  to  these  variables  the  expression  becomes  a 
one-valued  proposition.  A  manifold  of  interrelated  propositional  func¬ 
tions,  usually  called  postulates,  with  all  the  consequences  following  from 
them,  usually  called  theorems,  has  been  termed  by  Keyser  a  doctrinal 
function .  A  doctrinal  function,  thus,  has  no  specific  content,  as  it  deals 
with  variables,  but  establishes  definite  relations  between  these  variables. 
In  principle,  we  can  assign  many  single  values  to  the  variable  terms  and 
so  generate  many  doctrines  from  one  doctrinal  function.  In  an  oo-valued 
^-system  which  eliminates  identity  and  is  based  on  structure,  doctrinal 
functions  become  of  an  extraordinary  importance. 

In  an  oo-valued  world  of  absolute  individuals  on  objective  levels, 
our  statements  can  always  be  formulated  in  a  way  that  makes  obvious 
the  use  of  oo-valued  terms  (variables)  and  so  the  postulates  can  always 
be  expressed  by  propositional  function.  As  postulates  establish  relations 
or  multi-dimensional  order,  a  set  of  postulates  which  defines  a  doctrinal 
function  gives,  also  uniquely ,  the  linguistic  structure.  As  a  rule,  the 
builders  of  doctrines  do  not  start  with  sets  of  postulates  which  would 
explicitly  involve  variables,  but  they  build  their  doctrine  around  some 
specific  content  or  one  special  respective  value  for  the  variables,  and  so 
the  structure  of  a  doctrine,  outside  of  some  mathematical  disciplines,  has 
never  been  explicitly  given.  If  we  trace  a  given  doctrine  with  specific 
content  to  its  doctrinal  function  without  content ,  but  variable  terms,  then, 
only,  do  we  obtain  a  set  of  postulates  which  gives  us  the  linguistic  struc¬ 
ture.  Briefly,  to  find  the  structure  of  a  doctrine,  we  must  formulate  the 
doctrinal  function  of  which  the  given  doctrine  is  only  a  special  inter¬ 
pretation.  In  non-mathematical  disciplines,  where  doctrines  are  not 
traced  down  to  a  set  of  postulates,  we  have  no  means  of  knowing  their 
structure,  or  whether  two  different  doctrines  originated  from  one  doc¬ 
trinal  function,  or  from  two .  In  other  words,  we  have  no  simple  means 
of  ascertaining  whether  the  two  different  doctrines  have  similar  or  differ- 

UN  FUNCTION 

rut  structure.  Under  aristotelianism,  these  differentiations  were  impos¬ 
sible,  and  so  the  problems  of  linguistic  structure,  propositional  and 
doctrinal  functions . ,  were  neglected,  except  in  the  recent  work  of  mathe¬ 
maticians.  The  entirely  general  semantic  influence  of  these  structural 
conditions  becomes  obvious  when  we  realize  that,  no  matter  whether  or 
not  our  doctrines  are  traced  down  to  their  doctrinal  functions,  our 
semantic  processes  and  all  ‘thinking’  follow  automatically  and,  by  neces¬ 
sity,  the  conscious  or  unconscious  postulates,  assumptions.,  which  are 
given  (or  made  conscious)  exclusively  by  the  doctrinal  function. 

The  terms  ‘proposition’,  ‘function’,  ‘propositional  function’,  ‘doc¬ 
trinal  function’. ,  are  multiordinal,  allowing  many  orders,  and,  in  a  given 
analysis,  the  different  orders  should  be  denoted  by  subscripts  to  allow 
a  differentiation  between  them.  When  we  deal  with  more  complex 
doctrines,  we  find  that  in  structures  they  represent  higher  order  doc¬ 
trines,  or  a  higher  whole,  the  constituents  of  which  represent  lower  order 
doctrines.  Similarly,  with  doctrinal  functions,  if  we  take  any  system,  an 
analysis  will  discover  that  it  is  a  whole  of  related  doctrinal  functions. 
As  this  situation  is  the  most  frequent,  and  as  ‘thinking’,  in  general,  rep¬ 
resents  a  process  of  relating  into  higher  order  relational  entities  which 
are  later  treated  as  complex  wholes,  it  is  useful  to  have  a  term  which 
would  symbolize  doctrinal  functions  of  higher  order,  which  are  made 
