up  of  doctrinal  functions  of  lower  orders.  We  could  preserve  the  ter¬ 
minology  of  ‘higher’  and  ‘lower’  order;  but  as  these  conditions  are 
always  found  in  all  systems,  it  seems  more  expedient  to  call  the  higher 
body  of  interrelated  doctrinal  functions,  which  ultimately  produce  a 
system — a  system- function.  At  present,  the  term  ‘system  function’  has 
been  already  coined  by  Doctor  H.  M.  Sheffer3 ;  but,  to  my  knowledge, 
Sheffer  uses  his  ‘system  function’  as  an  equivalent  for  the  ‘doctrinal 
function’  of  Keyser.  For  the  reasons  given  above,  it  seems  advisable  to 
limit  the  term  ‘doctrinal  function’  to  the  use  as  introduced  by  Keyser, 
and  to  enlarge  the  meaning  of  Sheffer’s  term  ‘system  function’  to  the 
use  suggested  in  the  present  work,  this  natural  and  wider  meaning  to 
be  indicated  by  the  insertion  of  a  hyphen. 

In  a  ^-system,  when  we  realize  that  we  live,  act.,  in  accordance 
with  non-el  s.r,  always  involving  integrated  ‘emotions’  and  ‘intellect*  and, 
therefore,  some  explicit  or  implicit  postulates  which,  by  structural  neces¬ 
sity,  utilize  variable,  multiordinal  and  oo-valued  terms,  we  must  recognize 
that  we  live  and  act  by  some  system-functions  which  consist  of  doctrinal 
functions.  The  above  issues  are  not  only  of  an  academic  interest,  as, 
without  mastering  all  the  issues  emphasized  in  the  present  work,  it  is 

146  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

impossible  to  analyse  the  extremely  complex  difficulties  in  which,  as  a 
matter  of  fact,  we  are  immersed. 

At  present,  the  doctrinal  functions  and  the  system-functions  have 
not  been  worked  out,  and  even  in  mathematics,  where  these  notions 
originated,  we  speak  too  little  about  them.  But  in  mathematics,  as  the 
general  tendency  is  to  bring  all  mathematical  disciplines  to  a  postulational 
base,  and  these  postulates  always  involve  multiordinal  and  oo-valued 
terms,  we  actually  produce  doctrinal  or  system-functions,  as  the  case 
may  be.  In  this  way,  we  find  the  structure  of  a  given  doctrine  or  sys¬ 
tem,  and  so  are  able  to  compare  the  structures  of  different,  and  some¬ 
times  very  complex,  verbal  schemes.  Similar  structure- finding  methods 
must  be  applied  some  day  to  all  other,  at  present,  non-mathematical 
disciplines.  The  main  difficulty,  in  the  search  for  structure,  was  the 
absence  of  a  clear  formulation  of  the  issues  involved  and  the  need  for 
a  ^-system,  so  as  to  be  able  to  compare  two  systems ,  the  comparison  of 
which  helps  further  structural  discovery.  It  is  not  claimed  that  either 
the  A  or  A  system- functions  have  been  formulated  here,  but  it  seems 
that,  in  the  presence  or  absence  of  identification,  we  find  a  fundamental 
postulate  which,  once  formulated,  suggests  a  comparison  with  experience. 
As  we  discover  that  ‘identity'  is  invariably  false  to  facts,  this  A  postu¬ 
late  must  be  rejected  from  any  future  ^-system. 

It  happens  that  any  new  and  revolutionary  doctrine  or  system  is 
always  based  on  a  new  doctrinal  or  system- function  which  establishes 
its  new  structure  with  a  new  set  of  relations.  Thus,  any  new  doctrine  or 
system,  when  traced  to  its  postulates,  allows  us  to  verify  and  scrutinize 
the  initial  postulates  and  to  find  out  if  they  correspond  to  experience , . 

A  few  examples  will  make  it  clearer.  Cartesian  analytical  geometry 
is  based  on  one  system-function,  having  one  system-structure,  although 
we  may  have  indefinitely  many  different  cartesian  co-ordinates.  The 
vector  and  the  tensor  systems  also  depend  on  two  different  system- 
functions,  different  from  the  cartesian ;  they  have  three  different  struc¬ 
tures.  Intertranslations  are  possible,  but  only  when  the  fundamental 
postulates  do  not  conflict.  Thus,  the  tensor  language  gives  us  invariant 
and  intrinsic  relations,  and  these  can  be  translated  into  the  cartesian  rela¬ 
tions.  It  seems  certain,  however,  although  I  am  not  aware  that  this  has 
been  done,  that  the  indefinitely  many  extrinsic  characteristics  which  we 
can  manufacture  in  the  cartesian  system,  cannot  be  translated  into  the 
tensor  language,  which  does  not  admit  extrinsic  characteristics. 

Similar  relations  are  found  between  other  doctrines  and  systems, 
once  their  respective  structural  characteristics  are  discovered  by  the 

ON  FUNCTION 

formulating  of  their  respective  functions,  which,  by  the  explicit  or  im¬ 
plicit  postulates,  determine  their  structure. 

Thus  all  existing  schools  of  psychotherapy,  prior  to  1933,  result 
from  one  system- function  which  underlies  implicitly  the  system  orig¬ 
inated  by  Freud.4  The  particular  freudian  doctrine  is  only  one  of  the 
indefinitely  many  variants  of  similar  system-structure ,  which  can  be 
manufactured  from  the  one  system-function  underlying  the  particular 
freudian  system.  In  other  words,  it  is  of  no  importance  what  ‘complex' 
we  emphasize  or  manufacture,  the  structural  principles  which  underlie 
this  new  freudian  and  revolutionary  system-function  remain  unchanged. 
From  this  point  of  view,  all  existing  schools  of  psychotherapy  could  be 
called  ‘cartesian1,  because,  although  they  all  have  one  general  system- 
structure,  yet  they  allow  indefinitely  many  particular  variations.  The 
present  ^-system  suggests  that  the  ‘cartesian'  school  of  psychotherapy  is 
still  largely  A ,  el  and  fundamentally  of  one  structure. 

The  present  system  involves  a  different  system- function  Of  different 
structure,  rejecting  identity,  discovering  the  ‘structural  unconscious', 
establishing  psychophysiology,.  The  mutual  translatability  follows  the 
rules  of  general  semantic  principles  or  conditions  which  apply  also  to 
mathematics ;  namely,  that  a  /4-system,  being  based  on  relations ;  on  the 
elimination  of  identity ;  on  structure . ,  gives  us  only  intrinsic  characteris¬ 
tics  and  might  be  called  the  ‘tensor'  school  of  psychotherapy.  This  sys¬ 
tem  allows  all  the  intrinsic  characteristics  discovered,  no  matter  by  whom, 
but  has  no  place  for  the  indefinitely  many,  quite  consistent,  yet  irrele¬ 
vant  metaphysical,  extrinsic  characteristics,  which  we  can  manufacture 
at  will. 

Without  the  realization  of  the  structural  foundations  emphasized  in 
the  present  system,  it  is  practically  impossible  not  to  confuse  linguistic 
structural  issues,  which  lead  inevitably  to  semantic  blockages.  When  we 
deal  with  doctrines  or  systems  of  different  structure,  each  of  which 
involves  different  doctrinal  or  system-functions,  it  is  of  the  utmost 
importance  to  keep  them  at  first  strictly  separated;  to  work  out  each  sys¬ 
tem  by  itself,  and  only  after  this  is  accomplished  can  we  carry  out  an 
independent  investigation  as  to  the  ways  they  mutually  intertranslate . 
Let  me  again  repeat,  that  the  mixing  of  different  languages  of  different 
structures  is  fatal  for  clear  ‘thinking'.  Only  when  a  system  is  traced  to 
its  system- function,  and  the  many  implications  worked  out  in  their 
un-mixed  form,  can  we  make  a  further  independent  investigation  of  the 
ways  in  which  the  different  systems  intertranslate.  As  a  general  rule, 
every  new  scientific  system  eliminates  a  great  deal  of  spurious  meta¬ 
physics  from  the  older  systems.  In  practice,  the  issues  are  extremely 

148  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

simple  if  one  decides  to  follow  the  general  rule;  namely,  either  com¬ 
pletely  to  reject  or  completely  to  accept  provisionally ,  at  a  given  date,  a 
new  system;  use  exclusively  the  structurally  new  terms;  perform  our 
semantic  operations  exclusively  in  these  terms ;  compare  the  conclusions 
with  experience  ;  perform  new  experiments  which  the  structurally  new 
terminology  suggests ;  and  only  then,  as  an  independent  enquiry,  investi¬ 
gate  how  one  system  translates  into  the  other.  In  those  translations, 
which  correspond  to  the  transformation  of  frames  of  reference  in  mathe¬ 
matics,  we  find  the  most  important  invariant  characteristics  or  relations 
which  survive  this  translation.  If  a  characteristic  appears  in  all  formu¬ 
lations,  it  is  a  sign  that  this  characteristic  is  intrinsic ,  belongs  to  the 
subject  of  our  analysis,  and  is  not  accidental  and  irrelevant,  belonging 
only  to  the  accidental  structure  of  the  language  we  use.  Once  these 
invariant,  intrinsic  characteristics  are  discovered,  and  there  is  no  way  to 
discover  them  except  by  reformulating  the  problems  in  different  lan¬ 
guages  (in  mathematics  we  speak  about  the  transformation  of  frames  of 
reference),  we  then  know  that  we  have  discovered  invariant  relations, 
which  survive  transformation  of  different  forms  of  representations,  and 
so  realize  that  we  are  dealing  with  something  genuinely  important,  inde¬ 
pendent  from  the  structure  of  the  language  we  use. 

History  shows  that  the  discovery  of  isolated,  though  interesting, 
facts  has  had  less  influence  on  the  progress  of  science  than  the  discovery 
of  new  system-functions  which  produce  new  linguistic  structures  and 
new  methods .  In  our  own  lifetime,  some  of  the  most  revolutionary  of 
these  advances  in  structural  adjustment  and  method  have  been  accom¬ 
plished.  The  work  of  Einstein,  the  revision  of  mathematical  founda¬ 
tions,  the  new  quantum  mechanics,  colloidal  science,  and  advances  in 
psychiatry,  are  perhaps  structurally  and  semantically  the  most  important. 
There  seems  no  escape  from  admitting  that  no  modern  man  can  be 
really  intelligent  in  1933  if  he  knows  nothing  about  these  structural 
scientific  revolutions.  It  is  true  that,  because  these  advances  are  so  recent, 
they  are  still  represented  in  very  technical  terms ;  their  system- functions 
have  not  been  formulated,  and  so  the  deeper  structural,  epistemological 
and  semantic  simple  aspects  have  not  been  worked  out.  These  aspects  are 
of  enormous  human  importance.  But  they  must  be  represented  without 
such  an  abundance  of  dry  technicalities,  which  are  only  a  means,  and  not 
an  end,  in  search  for  structure. 

A  scientist  may  be  very  much  up  to  date  in  his  line  of  work,  let  us 
say,  in  biology ;  but  his  physico-mathematical  structural  knowledge  may 
be  somewhere  in  the  eighteenth  or  nineteenth  century  and  his  epistem¬ 
ology,  metaphysics,  and  structure  of  language  of  300  b.c.  This  classifi- 

ON  FUNCTION 

cation  by  years  gives  a  fairly  good  picture  of  his  semantic  status.  Indeed, 
we  can  fortell  quite  often  what  kind  of  reaction  such  a  man  will  exhibit. 

This  functional,  propositional- function,  and  system- function  struc¬ 
tural  attitude  is  in  accord  with  the  methods  developed  by  psychiatry.  In 
psychiatry,  ‘mental’  phenomena  are  considered,  in  some  instances,  from 
the  point  of  view  of  arrested  development;  in  others,  as  regression  to 
older  and  more  primitive  levels.  With  this  attitude  and  understanding, 
we  cannot  ignore  this  peculiar  intermixing  of  different  personalities  in 
one  man  when  different  aspects  of  him  exhibit  s.r  of  different  ages  and 
epochs  of  the  development  of  mankind.  In  this  connection  should  be 
mentioned  the  problem  of  the  multiple  personalities  which  often  occur 
in  the  ‘mentally’  ill.  Such  splitting  of  personality  is  invariably  a  serious 
semantic  symptom,  and  a  person  who  exhibits  different  ages  in  his 
semantic  development,  as,  for  instance,  1933  in  some  respects,  sixteenth 
century  in  others,  and  300,  or  even  5000,  b.c.  in  still  others,  cannot  be  a 
well  co-ordinated  individual.  If  we  teach  our  children,  whose  nervous 
systems  are  not  physically  finished  at  birth,  doctrines  structurally  belong¬ 
ing  to  entirely  different  epochs  of  human  development,  we  ought  not  to 
wonder  that  semantic  harm  is  done.  Opr  efforts  should  be  to  co-ordinate 
and  integrate  the  individual,  help  the  nervous  system,  and  not  split  the 
individual  semantically  and  so  disorganize  the  nervous  system. 

It  is  necessary  to  remember  that  the  organism  works  as-a-whole. 
In  the  old  days  we  had  a  comforting  delusion  that  science  was  a  purely 
‘intellectual’  affair.  This  was  an  el  creed  which  was  structurally  false  to 
facts.  It  would  probably  be  below  the  dignity  of  an  older  mathematician 
to  analyse  the  ‘emotional’  values  of  some  piece  of  mathematical  work,  as, 
for  instance,  of  the  ‘propositional  function’.  But  such  a  mathematician 
probably  never  heard  of  psychogalvanic  experiments,  and  how  his 
‘emotional  curve’  becomes  expressive  when  he  is  solving  some  mathemat¬ 
ical  problem. 

In  1933,  we  are  not  allowed  to  follow  the  older,  seemingly  easier, 
and  simpler  paths.  In  our  discussion,  we  have  tried  to  analyse  the  prob¬ 
lems  at  hand  as  oo-valued  manifestations  of  human  behaviour.  We  were 
analysing  the  doings  of  Smith,  Brown . ,  and  the  semantic  components 
which  enter  into  these  forms  of  behaviour  must  be  especially  emphasized, 
emphasized  because  they  were  neglected.  In  well-balanced  persons,  all 
psycho-logical  aspects  should  be  represented  and  should  work  har¬ 
moniously.  In  a  theory  of  sanity,  this  semantic  balance  and  co-ordination 
should  be  our  first  aim,  and  we  should,  therefore,  take  particular  care 
of  the  neglected  aspects.  The  non-el  point  of  view  makes  us  postulate 
a  permanent  connection  and  interdependence  between  all  psycho-logical 

150  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

aspects.  Most  human  difficulties,  and  ‘mental’  ills,  are  of  non-el  affective 
origin,  extremely  difficult  to  control  or  regulate  by  el  means.  Yet,  we 
now  see  that  purely  technical  scientific  discoveries,  because  structural, 
have  unsuspected  and  far-reaching  beneficial  affective  semantic  compo¬ 
nents.  Perhaps,  instead  of  keeping  such  discoveries  for  the  few  ‘high¬ 
brows',  who  never  use  them  fully,  we  could  introduce  them  as  structural, 
semantic  and  linguistic  devices  into  elementary  schools,  with  highly  bene¬ 
ficial  psycho-logical  results.  There  is  really  no  difficulty  in  explaining 
what  has  been  said  here  about  structure  to  children  and  training  them 
in  appropriate  s.r .  The  effect  of  doing  so,  on  sanity,  would  be  profound 
and  lasting. 

CHAPTER  XII 

ON  ORDER 

The  fundamental  importance  of  the  subject  of  order  may  be  inferred 
from  the  fact  that  all  the  concepts  required  in  geometry  can  be  expressed 
in  terms  of  the  concept  of  order  alone.  (237)  e.  v.  Huntington 

Dimensions,  in  geometry,  are  a  development  of  order.  The  conception 
of  a  limit ,  which  underlies  all  higher  mathematics,  is  a  serial  conception. 
There  are  parts  of  mathematics  which  do  not  depend  upon  the  notion  of 
order  but  they  are  very  few  in  comparison  with  the  parts  in  which  this 
notion  is  involved.  (455,  j  f  ,  bertrand  russell 

The  notion  of  continuity  depends  upon  that  of  order ,  since  continuity  is 
merely  a  particular  type  of  order.  (454,  bertrand  russell 

Logistic  may  be  defined  as  the  science  which  deals  with  types  of  order  as 
SUch .  (300,  c*  l-  LEWIS 

The  branch  of  physics  which  is  called  Elementary  Geometry  was  long 
ago  delivered  into  the  hands  of  mathematicians  for  the  purposes  of  in¬ 
struction.  But,  while  mathematicians  are  often  quite  competent  m  their 
knowledge  of  the  abstract  structure  of  the  subject,  they  are  rarely  so  in 
their  grasp  of  its  physical  meaning.  (529)  Oswald  veblen 

We  often  think  that  when  we  have  completed  our  study  of  one  we  know 
all  about  two ,  because  41  two"  is  "one  and  one".  We  forget  that  we  have 
still  to  make  a  study  of  "and".  Secondary  physics  is  the  study  of  and  — 
that  is  to  say,  of  organisation.  (149,  A.  s.  bddington 

...  the  geometry  of  paths  can  be  regarded  as  a  generalization  both  of 
the  earliest  part  of  elementary  geometry  and  of  some  of  the  most  refined 
of  physical  theories.  The  study  of  the  projective,  the  affine  and  the  metric 
geometry  of  paths  ought  to  result  in  a  comprehensive  idea  of  what  types 
of  physical  tneory  it  is  possible  to  construct  along  the  lines  which  have 
been  successful  in  the  past.  (529,  .  Oswald  veblen 

What  I  wish  to  emphasize  now  is  the  need  of  logistic  studies  which  will 
make  it  possible  to  say  more  definitely  than  is  yet  possible  in  this  field 
what  is  assumed,  what  is  proved,  and  how  the  group  of  theorems  and 
definitions  hang  together.  (529,  Oswald  veblen 

Memory,  in  fact,  is  nothing  but  the  reinforcement  and  facilitation  of 
the  passage  of  the  nervous  impulse  along  certain  paths.  (4ii,  henri  pieron 
Butbefore  dealing  with  the  brain,  it  is  well  to  distinguish  a  second 
characteristic  of  nervous  organization  which  renders  it  an  organization  in 

levels.  (4ii,  HE.NRI  plfeRON 

This  affective  repercussion  seems  to  take  place  at  the  penultimate  stage 
of  the  nervous  system  and  governs  complicated  reflexes  or  instinctive  re¬ 
actions  (411,  HENRI  PIERON 

Furthermore,  there  are  even  symbols  of  symbols,  evocative  of  images 
onlv  in  the  second  degree,  by  means  of  primary  stations  of  the  co-ordination 
centres.  (411,  HENRI  pi6ron 

In  this  way  it  is  seen  that  the  order  in  which  a  given  group  of  stimuli 
taking  part  in  a  stimulatory  compound  are  arranged  and  the  pauses  be¬ 
tween  them  are  the  factors  which  determine  the  final  result  of  the  stimu- 

152  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

la t ion,  and  therefore  most  probably  the  form  of  the  reaction,  and  we  know 
already  that  different  intensities  of  the  same  stimulus  can  be  differentiated 
very  accurately,  one  definite  intensity  being  connected  with  excitation  and 
another  with  inhibition.  (394)  I.  p.  favlov 

Whoever  studies  Leibniz,  Lambert  and  Castillon  cannot  fail  to  be  con¬ 
vinced  that  a  consistent  calculus  of  concepts  in  intension  is  either  im¬ 
mensely  difficult  or,  as  Couturat  has  said,  impossible.  <30o>  C.  i.  lewis 
The  relation  between  intensions  and  extensions  is  unsymmetrical ,  not 
symmetrical  as  the  medieval  logicians  would  have  it.  (300)  C.  I.  lewis 

The  old  "law"  of ^  formal  jogic,  that  if  a  is  contained  in  &  in  extension, 
then  0  is  contained  in  a  in  intension,  and  vice  versa,  is  false .  The  connec¬ 
tion  between  extension  and  intension  is  by  no  means  so  simple  as  that. 
^  c.  I.  LEWIS 

I  do  not  suggest  explicit  confusions  of  this  sort,  but  only  that  traditional 
elementary  logic,  taught  in  youth,  is  an  almost  fatal  barrier  to  clear  think¬ 
ing  in  later  years,  unless  much  time  is  spent  in  acquiring  a  new  technique. 
<*57)  BERTRAND  RUSSELL 

Section  A .  Undefined  terms . 

We  can  now  introduce  a  structural  non-el  term  which  underlies  not 
only  all  existing  mathematics,  but  also  the  present  work.  This  bridging 
term  has  equal  importance  in  science  and  in  our  daily  life ;  and  applies 
equally  to  ‘senses'  and  ‘mind’.  The  term  in  question  is  ‘order’,  in  the 
sense  of  ‘betweenness’.  If  we  say  that  a,  b ,  and  c  are  in  the  order  a,  b ,  c, 
we  mean  that  b  is  between  a  and  c,  and  we  say,  further,  that  a,  b,  c ,  has 
a  different  order  from  c,  b,  a ,  or  b,  a,  c , .  .The  main  importance  of  num¬ 
bers  in  mathematics  is  in  the  fact  that  they  have  a  definite  order.  In 
mathematics,  we  are  much  concerned  with  the  fact  that  numbers  repre¬ 
sent  a  definite  ordered  series  or  progression,  1,  2,  3,  4 , . 

In  the  present  system,  the  term  ‘order*  is  accepted  as  undefined.  It 
is  clear  that  we  cannot  define  all  our  terms.  If  we  start  to  define  all  our 
terms,  we  must,  by  necessity,  soon  come  to  a  set  of  terms  which  we 
cannot  define  any  more  because  we  will  have  no  more  terms  with  which 
to  define  them.  We  see  that  the  structure  of  any  language,  mathematical 
or  daily,  is  such  that  we  must  start  implicitly  or  explicitly  with  undefined 
terms.  This  point  is  of  grave  consequence.  In  this  work,  following 
mathematics,  I  explicitly  start  with  undefined  important  terms. 

When  we  use  a  series  of  names  for  objects,  ‘Smith,  Brown,  Jones’. , 
we  say  nothing.  We  do  not  produce  a  proposition.  But  if  we  say  ‘Smith 
kicks  Brown',  we  have  introduced  the  term  ‘kicks’,  which  is  not  a  name 
for  an  object,  but  is  a  term  of  an  entirely  different  character.  Let  us 
call  it  a  ‘relation-word’.  If  we  analyse  this  term,  ‘kicks’,  further,  we  will 
find  that  we  can  define  it  by  considering  the  leg  (objective)  of  Smith 
(objective),  some  part  of  the  anatomy  of  Brown  (objective),  and, 

ON  ORDER 

finally,  Brown  (objective).  We  must  use  a  further  set  of  terms  that 
describes  how  the  leg  of  Smith  ‘moves’  through  an  ‘infinity*  of  ‘places  in 
an  ‘infinity*  of  ‘instants*  of  ‘time*,  ‘continuously*  until  it  reaches  Brown. 

When  a  donkey  kicks  a  donkey,  there  may  be  a  broken  leg;  but 
that  is,  practically,  the  only  consequence.  Not  so  when  Smith  kicks 
Brown.  Should  Brown  happen  to  be  a  royal  or  a  business  man  in  Nica¬ 
ragua  or  Mexico,  this  might  be  considered  ‘a  mortal  offense  of  a  great 
sovereign  nation  to  another  great  sovereign  nation’,  a  war  might  follow 
and  many  non-royals  or  non-business  men  might  die.  When  a  symbolic 
class  of  life  enters  the  arena,  semantic  complications  may  arise  not  exist¬ 
ing  with  animals. 

In  the  relation  terms,  the  statement,  ‘Smith  kicks  Brown*,  has 
introduced  still  further  symbolic  complications.  It  involves  a  full-fledged 
metaphysics,  as  expressed  in  the  terms  ‘moves*,  ‘infinity’,  ‘space*,  ‘time*, 
‘continuity*,  and  what  not.  It  must  be  emphasized  that  all  human  state¬ 
ments,  savage  or  not,  involve  a  structural  metaphysics. 

These  relational  terms  should  be  elucidated  to  the  utmost.  Until 
lately,  the  ‘philosophers*,  in  their  ‘Jehovah  complex’,  usually  said  to  the 
scientists :  ‘Hands  off ;  those  are  superior  problems  with  which  only  we 
chosen  ones  can  deal*.  As  a  matter  of  history,  ‘philosophers*  have  not 
produced  achievements  of  any  value  in  the  structural  line.  But  the  ‘mere* 
scientists,  mainly  mathematicians  and  mathematical  physicists,  have  taken 
care  of  these  problems  with  extremely  important  structural  (1933) 
results.  In  the  solutions  of  these  semantic  problems,  the  term  ‘order* 
became  paramount. 

Perhaps  this  example  of  an  analysis  of  the  statement,  ‘Smith  kicks 
Brown*,  shows  the  justice  of  the  contention  of  this  work  that  no  man 
can  be  ‘intelligent*  if  he  is  not  acquainted  with  these  new  works  and 
their  structural  elucidations. 

We  see  that  no  statement  made  by  man,  whether  savage  or  civilized, 
is  free  from  some  kind  of  structural  metaphysics  involving  s.r .  We  see 
also  that  when  we  explicitly  start  with  undefined  words,  these  undefined 
words  have  to  be  taken  on  faith.  They  represent  some  kind  of  implicit 
creed,  or  metaphysics,  or  structural  assumptions.  We  meet  here  with  a 
tremendously  beneficial  semantic  effect  of  modern  methods,  in  that  we 
deliberately  state  our  undefined  terms.  We  thus  divulge  our  creeds  and 
metaphysics.  In  this  way,  we  do  not  blind  the  reader  or  student.  We 
invite  criticism,  elaboration,  verification,  evaluation . ,  and  so  accelerate 
progress  and  make  it  easier  for  others  to  work  out  issues.  Compare  the 
statement  of  Newton,  ( Hypotheses  non  Hugo*  (I  do  not  make  hypothe¬ 
ses),  in  his  PhUosophiae  Naturalis  Principia  MathemcUica,  when  he  pro- 

154  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

ceeded  to  coin  some  very  doubtful  hypotheses;  and  such  works  as 
produced  by  Peano,  Whitehead,  Russell,  and  others,  in  which  not  only  all 
assumptions  are  stated  explicitly,  but  even  the  assumptions,  given  in 
single  undefined  terms,  are  listed.  It  is  not  assumed  here  that  even 
Peano,  Whitehead,  Russell,  and  the  others  have  fulfilled  this  program 
entirely.  It  is  quite  probable  that  not  all  of  their  assumptions  are  stated 
explicitly.  However,  a  very  serious  and  revolutionary  beginning  has  been 
made  in  this  direction.  We  have  still  far  to  go,  for  at  present  even 
mathematicians  disregard  the  threefold  relational  character  of  mathe¬ 
matics,  and,  by  a  semantic  confusion  of  orders  of  abstraction,  make 
structurally  el  assumptions  false  to  the  facts  of  1933;  namely,  that 
mathematics  exists  ‘by  itself,  detached  from  the  producers,  Smith  and 
others.  This  procedure  reminds  one  of  the  old  N  ‘I  do  not  make 
hypotheses’,  proffered  just  at  the  moment  he  begins  to  legislate  about  the 
structure  of  the  universe  and  to  postulate  his  ‘absolute  space*  and  ‘abso¬ 
lute  time*  ‘without  reference  to  any  external  object  whatsoever*.  This, 
of  course,  was  structurally  unascertainable,  and  so  was  a  mere  figment  of 
his  imagination,  inside  of  his  skin,  and  may  become  a  pathological  seman¬ 
tic  projection  when  externalized  by  affective  pressure. 

That  we  must  all  start  with  undefined  terms,  representing  blind 
creeds  which  cannot  be  elucidated  further  at  a  given  moment,  may  fill  the 
hearts  of  some  metaphysicians  with  joy.  ‘Here*,  they  might  say,  ‘we 
have  the  goods  on  the  scientists ;  they  criticize  us  and  reject  our  theories, 
and  yet  they  admit  that  they  also  must  start  with  blind  creeds.  Now  we 
have  full  justification  for  assuming  whatever  we  want  to.’  But  this  joy 
would  be  short-lived  for  any  reasonably  sane  individual.  In  mathematics, 
we  deliberately  assume  the  minimum,  and  not  the  maximum,  as  in  meta¬ 
physics.  The  undefined  terms  selected  for  use  are  the  simplest  of  our 
experience;  for  instance,  ‘order*  (betweenness).  Also,  in  experimental 
sciences,  we  assume  the  least  possible.  We  demand  from  a  scientific 
theory,  according  to  the  standards  of  1933,  that  it  should  account  for  all 
relevant  facts  known  in  1933  and  should  serve  as  a  basis  for  the  predic¬ 
tion  of  new  facts,  which  can  be  checked  by  new  experiments.  If  meta¬ 
physicians  and  ‘philosophers*  would  comply  with  such  scientific  standards, 
their  theories  would  be  scientific.  But  their  old  theories  would  have  to 
be  abandoned  and  their  new  theories  would  become  branches  of  science. 
Under  such  structural  circumstances,  there  is  no  possibility  of  going 
outside  of  science,  as  we  can  enlarge  the  bounds  of  science  without 
known  limits,  in  search  for  structure. 

It  must  be  pointed  out  that  no  set  of  undefined  terms  is  ultimate. 
A  set  remains  undefined  only  until  some  genius  points  out  simpler  and 

ON  ORDER 

more  general  or  structurally  more  satisfactory  undefined  terms,  or  can 
reduce  the  number  of  such  terms.  Which  set  we  accept  is  determined, 
in  the  main,  by  pragmatic,  practical,  and  structural  reasons.  Out  of  two 
systems  which  have  many  characteristics  of  usefulness . ,  in  common,  we 
would  and  should  select  the  one  which  assumes  least,  is  the  simplest, 
and  carries  the  furthest.  Such  changes  from  one  set  to  another,  when 
scientific,  are  usually  epoch-making,  as  exemplified  in  mathematics. 

It  is  important  to  realize  that  this  semantic  attitude  signalizes  a  new 
epoch  in  the  development  of  science.  In  scientific  literature  of  the  old 
days,  we  had  a  habit  of  demanding,  ‘define  your  terms’.  The  new  1933 
standards  of  science  really  should  be,  ( state  your  undefined  terms'.  In 
other  words,  ‘lay  on  the  table  your  metaphysics,  your  assumed  structure, 
and  then  only  proceed  to  define  your  terms  in  terms  of  these  undefined 
terms'.  This  has  been  done  completely,  or  approximately  so,  only  in 
mathematics.  Yet,  probably  no  one  will  deny  that  the  new  requirements 
of  science  (1933),  no  matter  how  laborious,  are  really  desirable,  and 
constitute  an  advance  in  method,  in  accordance  with  the  structure  of 
human  knowledge. 

In  the  present  work,  this  method  will  be  employed  practically  all 
through.  Of  course,  names  for  objects  may  be  accepted  without  enquiry. 
So  we  have  already  a  large  vocabulary  at  our  disposal.  But  names  alone 
do  not  give  propositions.  We  need  relatipn-words,  and  it  is  here  where 
our  undefined  terms  become  important.  Up  to  this  stage  of  the  present 
work,  I  have  accepted,  without  over-full  explanation,  the  vocabularies 
made  by  the  linguists  of  exact  science,  whom  we  usually  call  mathema¬ 
ticians.  There  is  an  enormous  benefit  in  doing  so,  because,  no  matter 
how  imperfect  the  mathematical  vocabulary  may  be,  it  is  an  extensive 
and  developed  linguistic  system  of  similar  structure  to  the  world  around 
us  and  to  our  nervous  system  1933.  (See  Part  V.) 

Some  of  the  most  important  undefined  terms  which  play  a  marked 
role  in  this  work  are  'order*  (in  the  sense  explained),  ‘relation*,  and 
‘difference*,  although  we  could  define  relation  in  terms  of  multi¬ 
dimensional  order.  There  is  a  remarkable  structural  characteristic  of 
these  terms ;  namely,  that  they  are  non-el ,  and  that  they  apply  to  'senses* 
as  well  as  to  ‘mind*.  It  is,  perhaps,  well  to  suggest  that,  in  future  works, 
the  terms  selected  should  be  of  the  non-el  type.  Since  these  terms  apply 
equally  to  'senses*  and  to  ‘mind*,  we  see  that  in  such  terms  we  may 
attempt  to  give  a  ‘coherent*  account  of  what  we  experience.  The  expres¬ 
sion  ‘coherent*  implies  ‘mind*,  and  ‘experience*  implies  ‘senses*.  It  is 
amusing  to  watch  this  peculiar  circularity  of  human  knowledge,  many 
instances  of  which  will  appear  later  on.  Thus,  there  was  great  difficulty 

156  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANCUAGFS 

in  expressing  organism-as-a-whole  notions;  we  had  to  grope  about  in 
establishing  the  beginnings  of  a  suitable  vocabulary  before  we  could 
approach  problems  which  were  antecedent  in  order. 

It  is  necessary  to  notice  a  rather  curious  structural  similarity 
between  the  R  and  A  systems.  In  both  cases,  we  deal  with  certain  veloci¬ 
ties  about  which  we  know  positively  that  they  are  Unite .  The  velocity  of 
light  in  the  ALsystem  was  assumed  to  be  infinite,  although  we  know  it 
is  not  so,  and  so  ‘simultaneity’  had  absolute  meaning.  The  R  systems 
introduced  the  finite  velocity  of  light  by  ordering  events,  which  happens 
to  be  true  to  facts,  and  thus  ‘simultaneity’  lost  its  absolute  character. 
Likewise  in  the  ^-system  and  language,  the  velocity  of  nervous  impulses 
was  assumed  to  be  infinite,  to  spread  ‘instantaneously’.  And  so  we  had 
most  perplexing  ‘philosophical’  rigmaroles  about  ‘emotions',  ‘intellect’., 
taken  as  independent  separate  entities.  When  we  introduce  explicitly  the 
finite  velocity  of  nervous  impulses  (on  the  average,  120  metres  per  sec¬ 
ond  in  the  human  nerves),  we  are  able  to  reach  a  perfectly  clear  under¬ 
standing,  in  terms  of  order,  of  the  spread  of  impulses.  Some  ‘infinite 
velocity’  does  not  involve  order.  Conversely,  by  considering  the  order 
