of  events,  we  introduce  finite  velocities.  We  shall  see  later  that  ‘infinite 
velocity’  is  meaningless  and  so  all  actual  happenings  can  be  ordered.  The 
above  is  an  important  factor  in  our  s.r . 

Let  us  give  a  rough  example.  Assume  that  Smith  has  had  a  bad 
dinner.  Some  nervous  impulse,  originating  from  the  bad  dinner,  starts 
going.  At  this  stage,  we  may  call  it  an  ‘undifferentiated’  nervous  impulse. 
It  travels  with  finite  velocity,  reaches  the  brain-stem  and  the  approxi¬ 
mately  central  part  of  his  brain,  which  we  call  the  thalamus ;  is  affected 
by  them  and  is  no  longer  ‘undifferentiated’  but  becomes,  let  us  say, 
‘affective’.  In  the  cortex,  it  is  affected  again  by  the  lessons  of  past 
experiences.  It  returns  again  to  the  lower  centres  and  becomes,  let  us 
say,  ‘emotion’ ;  and  then  anything  might  happen,  from  sudden  death  to  a 
glorious  poem. 

The  reader  must  be  warned  that  this  example  is  rough  and  over¬ 
simplified.  Impulses  are  reinforced  and  ‘inhibited’  from  a  complex  chain 
of  nervous  interconnections.  But  what  I  wish  to  show  by  this  example, 
is  that,  by  accepting  the  finite  velocity  of  nerve  currents,  in  terms  of 
order,  we  can  build  up  a  definite  vocabulary  to  deal,  not  only  with  the 
‘organism-as-a-whole’,  but  also  with  the  different  stages  of  the  process. 
This  is  important  because,  without  some  such  ordinal  scheme,  it  is 
structurally  impossible  to  evade  enormous  verbal  and  semantic  difficul¬ 
ties  which  lead  to  great  confusion. 

ON  OKI  >KK 

In  the  analysis  of  the  above  example,  only  the  structural  and 
methodological  aspects  are  emphasized.  No  attempt  is  made  to  legislate 
for  neurologists  or  to  instruct  them  how  they  should  define  and  use 
their  terms. 

Section  B.  Order  and  the  nervous  system . 

We  know  that,  structurally,  not  all  parts  of  the  nervous  system  are 
of  equal  phylogenetic  age.  The  ventral  part  of  the  brain,  the  thalamus 
(in  the  rough),  which  is  of  most  interest  in  this  connection,  is  older 
than  the  cerebral  cortex.  By  the  term  ‘thalamus’  I  denote  all  the  sub¬ 
divisions  and  most  important  appendages  which  we  need  not  mention 
by  their  technical  names.  In  man,  both  the  thalamus  and  the  cerebral 
cortex  are  much  enlarged  and  have  a  complex  structural  cyclic  inter¬ 
connection.  The  cerebral  cortex  is  a  term  applied  to  a  superficial  layer 
of  grey  nervous  tissue  covering  the  cerebral  hemispheres.  It  is  called 
(lie  ‘new  brain*  by  Edinger.  The  higher  correlation  centres  in  the  cere¬ 
bral  hemispheres  can  act  only  through  the  agency  of  the  lower  centres, 

I  he  brain-stem,  and  the  thalamus.  In  other  words,  the  cerebral  cortex, 
the  functioning  of  which  is  connected  chiefly  with  the  higher  associa¬ 
tions,  is  of  such  structure  that  no  nervous  impulse  can  enter  it  without 
first  passing  through  the  lower  centres  of  the  ventral  parts  of  the  brain 
and  brain-stem. 

In  the  lower  vertebrates,  which  lack  the  cerebral  cortex,  the  sub¬ 
cortical  mechanisms  are  adequate  for  all  simple  exigencies  of  life  and 
simple  association  processes,  these  sub-cortical  mechanisms  being  older 
phylogenetically  than  the  cerebral  cortex,  yet  younger  than  some  still 
mure  ventral  parts. 

The  brush-like  connections  between  the  nerves  are  called  synapses, 
and  although  a  nerve-fibre  seems  to  be  capable  of  transmitting  nerve 
impulses  in  both  directions,  the  nervous  impulse  can  seemingly  pass 
the  synapse  in  only  one  direction;  so  a  nervous  polarity  is  established 
whenever  synapses  are  present.1 

The  following  diagram  and  explanations  are  taken  from  Professor 
Herrick’s  Introduction  to  Neurology,  pp.  60,  61,  62,  63,  69,  70.  In  the 
quotations  I  retain  the  spelling  but  change  Herrick’s  Fig.  18  to  my  Fig.  1 ; 
all  but  one  word  of  the  italics  are  mine* 

♦I  quote  here  from  the  Second  Edition  of  the  Introduction  to  Neurology  an 
account  of  the  classical  theory  of  reflex  circuits  which  is  quite  satisfactory  for  my 
purpose.  In  his  later  work  (see  my  bibliography),  Professor  Herrick  forcibly 
points  out  the  limitations  of  the  reflex  theories  as  partial  patterns,  as  opposed  to  the 
activity  of  the  organism-as-a-whole.  In  the  Fifth  Edition  (1931),  the  chapter  on 
reflex  circuits  has  been  entirely  rewritten,  and  the  non-el  attitude  is  expressed  very 
dearly.  I  am  much  indebted  to  Professor  Herrick  for  drawing  my  attention  to 
this  rewritten  chapter. 

158  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

)> - 

n 

fti 

Ftt 

C 

FCP 

IS 

Diagrams  representing  the  relations  of  neurons  in  five  types  of  reflex  arcs:  A, 
simple  reflex  arc ;  B,  chain  reflex ;  C,  a  complex  system  illustrating  allied  and  an* 
tagonistic  reflexes  and  physiological  resolution;  D,  a  complete  system  illustrating 
allied  and  antagonistic  reflexes  with  a  final  common  path;  E,  a  complex  system 
illustrating  the  mechanism  of  physiological  association  A,A ,  association  neurons; 
C,C\C",Clf  and  C2,  centres  (adjustors)  ;  E,E'fE",  El,  and  E2,  effectors ;  FCPt  final 
common  path ;  R,R\R",Rlt  and  R2,  receptors. 

'The  structure  of  the  simple  reflex  circuit  is  diagrammatically  illus¬ 
trated  in  Fig.  1,  A.  The  receptor  ( R )  may  be  a  simple  terminal  expansion 
of  the  sensory  nerve-fiber  or  a  very  complex  sense  organ.  The  effec¬ 
tor  (E)  may  be  a  muscle  or  a  gland.  The  cell  body  of  the  afferent  neuron 
(1)  may  lie  within  the  center  (C)  or  outside,  as  in  the  diagram.  ...  A 
simple  reflex  act  involving  the  use  of  so  elementary  a  mechanism  as  has 
just  been  described  is  probably  never  performed  by  an  adult  vertebrate. 
The  nervous  impulse  somewhere  in  its  course  always  comes  into  rela¬ 
tion  with  other  reflex  paths,  and  in  this  way  complications  in  the 
response  are  introduced.  . .  . 

'Separate  reflex  circuits  may  be  so  compounded  as  to  give  the 
so-called  chain  reflex  (Fig.  1,  B).  Here  the  response  of  the  first  reflex 
serves  as  the  stimulus  for  the  second,  and  so  on  in  series.  The  units  of 

ON  ORDER 

these  chain  reflexes  are  usually  not  simple  reflexes  as  diagrammed,  but 
t  omplex  elements  of  the  types  next  to  be  described.  .  .  .  The  chain  reflex 
...  is  a  very  common  and  a  very  important  type.  Most  of  the  ordinary 
acts  in  the  routine  of  daily  life  employ  it  in  one  form  or  another,  the 
completion  of  one  stage  of  the  process  serving  as  the  stimulus  for  the 
initiation  of  the  next .  .  .  . 

'Figure  1,  C  illustrates  another  method  of  compounding  reflexes  so 
that  the  stimulation  of  a  single  sense  organ  may  excite  either  or  both 
of  two  responses.  If  the  two  effectors,  £1  and  £2,  can  cooperate  in  the 
|)«rformance  of  an  adaptive  response,  the  case  is  similar  to  that  of 
Fig.  1,  A,  with  the  possibility  of  a  more  complex  type  of  reaction.  This 
is  an  allied  reflex.  If,  however,  the  two  effectors  produce  antagonistic 
movements,  so  that  both  cannot  act  at  the  same  time,  the  result  is  a 
physiological  dilemma.  Either  no  reaction  at  all  results,  or  there  is  a 
sort  of  physiological  resolution  (sometimes  called  physiological  choice), 
one  motor  pathway  being  taken  to  the  exclusion  of  the  other.  Which 
path  will  be  chosen  in  a  given  case  may  be  determined  by  the  physio¬ 
logical  state  of  the  organs.  If,  for  instance,  one  motor  system,  £2,  is 
greatly  fatigued  and  the  other  rested,  the  threshold  of  £2  will  be  raised 
and  the  motor  discharge  will  pass  to  £1. 

'Figure  1,  D  illustrates  the  converse  case,  where  two  receptors 
discharge  into  a  single  center,  which,  in  turn,  by  means  of  a  final  com¬ 
mon  path  ( FCP )  excites  a  single  effector  (£).  If  the  two  receptors 
upon  stimulation  normally  call  forth  the  same  response,  they  will 
reinforce  each  other  if  simultaneously  stimulated,  the  response  will  be 
strengthened,  and  we  have  another  type  of  allied  reflex.  But  there  are 
cases  in  which  the  stimulation  of  £1  and  £2  (Fig.  1,  D)  would  naturally 
call  forth  antagonistic  reflexes.  Here,  if  they  are  simultaneously  stimu¬ 
lated,  a  physiological  dilemma  will  again  arise  which  can  be  resolved 
only  by  one  or  the  other  afferent  system  getting  control  of  the  final 
common  path. 

‘Figure  1,  E  illustrates  still  another  form  of  combination  of 
reflexes.  Here  there  are  connecting  tracts  (A,  A)  between  the  two  cen¬ 
ters  so  arranged  that  stimulation  of  either  of  the  two  receptors 
(£1  and  £2)  may  call  forth  a  response  in  either  one  of  two  effectors 
(£1  and  £2).  These  responses  may  be  allied  or  antagonistic,  and  much 
more  complicated  reflexes  are  here  possible  than  in  any  of  the  preceding 
cases.  .  .  . 

'It  must  be  kept  in  mind  that  in  higher  vertebrates  all  parts  of  the 
nervous  system  are  bound  together  by  connecting  tracts  (internuncial 
pathways) ....  These  manifold  connections  are  so  elaborate  that  every 

160  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

part  of  the  nervous  system  is  in  nervous  connection  with  every  other 
part,  directly  or  indirectly.  This  is  illustrated  by  the  way  in  which  the 
digestive  functions  (which  normally  are  quite  autonomous,  the  nervous 
control  not  going  beyond  the  sympathetic  system,  .  .  .  )  may  be  dis¬ 
turbed  by  mental  processes  whose  primary  seat  may  be  in  the  association 
centers  of  the  cerebral  cortex;  and  also  by  the  way  in  which  strychnin- 
poisoning  seems  to  lower  the  neural  resistance  everywhere,  so  that  a  very 
slight  stimulus  may  serve  to  throw  the  whole  body  into  convulsions.  .  .  . 

'Our  picture  of  the  reflex  act  in  a  higher  animal  will,  then,  include 
a  view  of  the  whole  nervous  system  in  a  state  of  neural  tension.  The 
stimulus  disturbs  the  equilibrium  at  a  definite  point  (the  receptor) ,  and 
the  wave  of  nervous  discharge  thus  set  up  irradiates  through  the  complex 
lines  determined  by  the  neural  connections  of  the  receptor.  If  the  stimu¬ 
lus  is  weak  and  the  reflex  path  is  simple  and  well  insulated,  a  simple 
response  may  follow  immediately.  Under  other  conditions  the  nervous 
discharge  may  be  inhibited  before  it  reaches  any  effector,  or  it  may 
irradiate  widely,  producing  a  very  complex  reflex  pattern.  .  .  . 

The  mechanism  of  the  reflex  should  not  be  regarded  as  an  open 
channel  through  which  energy  admitted  at  the  receptive  end-organ  is 
transmitted  to  be  discharged  into  the  effector  organ.  It  is  rather  a 
complex  apparatus,  containing  reserves  of  potential  energy  which  can  be 
released  upon  the  application  of  an  adequate  stimulus  in  accordance  with 
a  pattern  determined  by  the  inherent  structure  of  the  apparatus  itself. 
In  other  words,  the  nervous  discharge  [italics  of  Professor  Herrick]  is 
not  a  mere  transmission  of  the  energy  of  the  stimulus,  but  it  implies 
active  consumption  of  material  and  release  of  energy  ( metabolism ) 
within  both  the  nerve  centers  and  the  nerve-fibers.  The  energy  acting 
upon  the  effector  organ  may,  therefore,  be  different  in  both  kind  and 
amount  from  that  applied  to  the  receptive  end-organ.  The  response 
likewise  involves  the  liberation  of  the  latent  energy  of  the  effector 
{muscle  or  gland),  the  nervous  impulse  serving  merely  to  release  the 
trigger  which  discharges  this  reserve  energy/ 

It  is  necessary  to  warn  the  reader  that  the  human  nervous  system  is 
structurally  of  inconceivable  complexity.  It  is  estimated  that  there  are  in 
the  human  brain  about  twelve  thousand  millions  of  nerve  cells  or  neu¬ 
rons,  and  more  than  half  of  these  afe  in  the  cerebral  cortex.  Most  prob¬ 
ably,  the  majority  of  the  neurons  of  the  cerebral  cortex  are  directly  or 
indirectly  connected  with  every  cortical  field.  Were  we  to  consider  a  mil¬ 
lion  cortical  nerve  cells  connected  one  with  another  in  groups  of  only 
two  neurons  each,  and  compute  the  possible  combinations,  we  would  find 
the  number  of  possible  interneuronic  connection-patterns  to  be  repre- 

ON  ORDER 

scnted  by  102-™'000.  What  such  a  number  is  like  is  hardly  possible 
to  imagine.  For  comparison,  it  may  be  said  that  probably  the  whole 
visible  sidereal  universe  does  not  contain  more  than  1066  atoms ! 2 

Our  present  knowledge  of  the  nervous  system  is  limited  as  regards 
its  complexities  and  possibilities,  but  we  know  many  structural  facts 
which  seem  to  be  well  established.  One  of  these  is  that  the  human 
nervous  system  is  more  complex  than  that  of  any  animal.  Another  is 
that  the  human  cortex  is  of  later  origin  than,  and  in  a  way  an  outgrowth 
from,  the  more  central  parts  of  the  brain  (which  establishes  a  structure 
of  levels) .  A  third  is  that  the  interconnection  of  the  parts  of  the  ner¬ 
vous  system  is  cyclic.  A  fourth  is  that  the  velocity  of  nerve  currents  is 
Unite .  The  last  fact  is  of  serious  structural  importance,  and,  as  a  rule, 
disregarded. 

Section  C.  Structure ,  relations ,  and  multi-dimensional  order . 

In  such  an  ordered  cyclic  chain,  the  nerve  impulses  reach  and  tra¬ 
verse  the  different  levels  with  Unite  velocity  and  so,  in  each  case,  in  a 
definite  order .  ‘Intelligence1  becomes  a  manifestation  of  life  of  the 
organism-as-a-whole,  structurally  impossible  in  some  fictitious  ‘isolation'. 
To  ‘be*  means  to  be  related.  To  be  related  involves  multi-dimensional 
order  and  results  in  structure . 

‘Survival’,  ‘adaptation’,  ‘response’,  ‘habit  formation’,  ‘orientation’, 
‘learning’,  ‘selection’,  ‘evaluation’,  ‘intelligence’,  ‘semantic  reactions’,  and 
all  similar  terms  involve  structurally  an  ordered,  interrelated  structural 
complex  in  which  and  by  which  we  live  and  function.  To  ‘comprehend’, 
to  ‘understand’,  to  ‘know’,  to  be  ‘intelligent’. ,  in  the  pre-human  as  well  as 
the  human  way,  means  the  most  useful  survival  adjustment  to  such  an 
ordered,  interrelated  structure  as  the  world  and  ourselves. 

In  this  vocabulary,  ‘structure’  is  the  highest  abstraction,  as  it  involves 
a  whole,  taken  as-a-whoie,  made  up  of  interrelated  parts ,  the  relations  of 
which  can  be  defined  in  still  simpler  terms  of  order.  ‘Knowing*,  in  its 
broadest  as  well  as  in  its  narrow  human  sense,  is  conditioned  by  struc¬ 
ture,  and  so  consists  of  structural  knowings.  All  empirical  structures 
involve  relations,  and  the  last  depend  on  multi -dimensional  order.  A 
language  of  order ,  therefore,  is  the  simplest  form  of  language,  yet  in 
structure  it  is  similar  to  the  structure  of  the  world  and  ourselves.  Such 
a  language  is  bound  to  be  useful  for  adaptation  and,  therefore,  sanity ;  it 
results  in  the  understanding  of  the  structural,  relational,  multi-dimen¬ 
sional  order  in  the  environment  on  all  levels. 

We  must  stress  the  structural  fact  that  the  introduction  of  order  as 
a  fundamental  term  abolishes  some  fanciful  and  semantically  very  harm- 

162  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

ful  ‘infinities*.  If  an  impulse  could  travel  in  ‘no  time*  or  with  ‘infinite 
velocity*,  which  is  a  structural  impossibility  in  this  world,  such  an  impulse 
would  reach  different  places  ‘instantaneously*,  and  so  there  would  be  no 
order  involved.  But,  as  soon  as  the  actual  order  in  which  impulses  reach 
their  destination  is  found,  ‘infinite  velocities*  are  abolished.  We  shall 
show  later  that  ‘infinite  velocity*  is  a  meaningless  noise ;  here  we  stress 
only  the  point  that  it  is  a  structural  impossibility,  as  structure  involves 
relations  and  orders,  and  order  could  not  exist  in  a  world  where  'infinite 
velocities*  were  possible. 

Conversely,  if  in  our  analysis  we  disregard  order,  we  are  bound  to 
disregard  relations  and  structure  and  to  introduce,  by  necessity,  some 
fanciful  ‘infinite  velocities*.  Any  one  who  treats  ‘mind*  in  ‘isolation* 
makes  a  structurally  false  assumption,  and,  by  necessity,  unconsciously 
ascribes  some  meaningless  ‘infinite  velocity’  to  the  nerve  currents. 

We  have  dwelt  upon  this  subject  at  such  length  because  of  its  gen¬ 
eral  structural  and  semantic  importance.  The  first  step  towards  under¬ 
standing  the  theory  of  Einstein  is  to  be  entirely  convinced  on  the  above 
points.  Newton’s  disregard  of  order  introduced  an  unconscious  false  to 
facts  assumption  of  the  ‘infinite  velocity*  of  light,  which  fatalistically 
leads  to  an  objectification  called  ‘absolute  time’,  ‘absolute  simultaneity*, 
and  so  introduces  a  terminology  of  inappropriate  structure.  A  similar 
remark  applies  to  arguments  about  ‘mind*  in  an  objectified,  ‘isolated*  way. 
These  arguments  disregard  the  order  in  which  the  nervous  impulses 
spread  and  so,  by  necessity,  introduce  a  silent  false  to  facts  assumption 
of  the  ‘infinite  velocity’  of  nerve  currents. 

On  empirical  structural  grounds,  we  know  neurological  and  general 
facts  on  two  levels.  ( 1 )  Macroscopically,  we  have  a  structure  in  levels, 
stratified,  so  to  say,  with  complexities  arising  from  the  general  colloidal 
physico-chemical  structure  of  the  organism-as-a- whole.  (2)  The  general 
sub-microscopic,  atomic,  and  sub-atomic  structure  of  all  materials  simply 
gives  us  the  persistence  of  the  macroscopic  characteristics  as  the  relative 
invariance  of  function ,  due  to  dynamic  equilibrium,  and  ultimately 
reflected  and  conditioned  by  this  sub-microscopic  structure  of  all  mate¬ 
rials.  Under  such  actual  structural  conditions,  terms  like  ‘substance*, 
‘material’*,  and  ‘function*,  ‘energy*,  ‘action*.,  become  interconnected— 
largely  a  problem  of  preference  or  necessity  of  selecting  the  level  with 
which  we  want  to  deal. 

On  sub-microscopic  levels,  ‘iron’,  or  anything  else,  means  only  a 
persistence  for  a  limited  ‘time*  of  certain  gross  characteristics,  represent* 
ing  a  process  (structurally  a  four-dimensional  notion  involving  ‘time’) 
which  becomes  a  question  of  structure.  With  the  1933  known  unit  of 

ON  ORDER 

the  world  called  an  ‘electron’,  which  appears  as  an  4 energy*  factor,  the 
relative  persistence  or  invariance  of  dynamic  sub-microscopic  structure 
gives  us,  on  macroscopic  levels,  an  average,  or  statistical,  persistence  of 
gross  macroscopic  characteristics,  which  we  label  ‘iron’. 

The  above  should  be  thoroughly  understood  and  digested.  As  a  rule, 
we  ail  identify  orders  and  levels  of  abstractions  and  so  have  difficulty  in 
keeping  them  separate  verbally  (and,  therefore,  ‘conceptually’).  Thor¬ 
ough  structural  understanding  helps  us  greatly  to  acquire  these  new  and 
beneficial  s.r . 

Under  such  structural  empirical  conditions,  a  language  of  order, 
which  implies  relations  and  structure,  as  enlarged  to  the  order  of  abstrac¬ 
tions  or  level  of  consideration,  largely  volitional,  becomes  the  only 
language  which,  in  structure ,  is  similar  to  the  structure  of  the  world, 
ourselves  included,  and  so,  of  necessity,  will  afford  the  maximum  of 
semantic  benefits. 

It  should  be  understood  that,  on  structural  grounds,  terms  like 
‘substance’  and  ‘function’  become,  in  1933,  perfectly  interchangeable , 
depending  on  the  order  of  abstraction.  ‘Substance’,  for  instance,  on  the 
macroscopic  level  becomes  ‘invariance  of  function’  on  the  sub-microscopic 
level.  It  follows  that  what  we  know  about  the  macroscopic  (‘anatomical  ) 
structure  can  be  quite  legitimately  enlarged  by  what  we  know  of  function 
(structure  on  different  levels).  This  interchangeability  and  complemen¬ 
tary  value  of  evidence  is  conditioned  by  structural  considerations,  and 
the  fact  that  ‘structure’  is  multiordinal.  On  gross  anatomical  grounds, 
we  know  a  great  deal  about  this  structure  of  the  nervous  system.  Because 
of  experimental  difficulties,  very  little  is  known  of  the  structural  sub- 
microscopic  happenings,  yet  we  can  speak  about  them  with  benefit  in 
functional  terms  ;  as,  for  instance,  of  ‘activation  ,  facilitation  ,  resistance  , 
‘psychogenetic  effects’,  ‘diffusion’,  ‘permeability’,  the  older  ‘inhibition’,. 

In  such  a  cyclic  chain  as  the  nervous  system,  there  is,  as  far  as 
energy  is  concerned,  no  last  stage  of  the  process.  If  there  is  no  motor 
reaction  or  other  reflex,  then  there  is  a  semantic  or  associative  reaction 
with  ‘inhibitory’  or  activating  consequences,  which  are  functionally 
equivalent  to  a  motor  reaction.  At  each  stage,  a  ‘terminal  receptor  is  a 
reacting  organ  in  the  chain.3 

We  know  quite  well  from  psychiatry  how  nervous  energy  may 
deviate  from  constructive  and  useful  channels  into  destructive  and  harm¬ 
ful  channels.  The  energy  is  not  lost,  but  misdirected  or  misapplied.  For 
instance,  an  ‘emotional’  shock  may  make  some  people  release  their 
energy  into  useful  channels,  such  as  concentrated  efforts  in  some  direc¬ 
tion,  which  would  have  been  impossible  without  this  shock;  but,  in 

164  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

others,  an  ‘emotional'  shock  leads  to  the  building  up  of  morbid  ‘mental’ 
or  physical  symptoms. 

Since  the  nervous  structure  is  cyclic  in  most  of  its  parts,  as  well  as 
as-a- whole,  and  since  these  cycles  are  directly  or  indirectly  interconnected, 
mutual  interaction  of  those  cycles  may  produce  most  elaborate  behaviour 
patterns,  which  may  be  spoken  of,  in  their  manifestations,  in  terms  of 
order .  As  each  more  important  nerve  centre  has  incoming  and  outgoing 
nerve-fibres,  the  activation,  or  reinforcement,  or  diffusion  of  nerve  cur¬ 
rents  may  sometimes  manifest  itself  in  our  s.r  as  reversal  of  order  in 
some  aspects.  Neurologically,  considered  on  the  sub-microscopic  level, 
it  would  only  be  a  case  of  activation,  or  of  diffusion,  or  of  ‘inhibition'. , 
probably  never  a  problem  of  reversed  order  in  the  actual  nerve  currents. 

The  semantic  manifestations  of  order  and  reversed  order  are  of 
crucial  importance,  for  we  are  able  to  train  the  individual  to  different 
orders  or  reversals  of  orders.  This  procedure  neurologically  involves 
activations,  enforcements,  diffusions,  ‘inhibitions',  resistances,  and  all 
the  other  types  of  nervous  activities,  which  without  the  formulation  of 
psychophysiology  were  all  most  inaccessible  to  direct  training.  The 
structural  fact  that  order  and  reversal  of  order  in  semantic  manifesta¬ 
tion,  which  all  are  on  the  un-speakable  objective  level,  have  such  intimate 
and  profound  connection  with  fundamental  nervous  processes,  such  as 
activation,  enforcement,  diffusion,  permeability,  ‘inhibition',  resistance . , 
gives  us  tremendous  new  powers  of  an  educational  character  in  building 
up  sanity,  and  supplies  methods  and  means  to  affect,  direct,  and  train 
nervous  activities  and  s.r,  which  we  were  not  able  formerly  to  train 
psychophysiologically.  Perhaps  one  of  the  main  values  of  the  present 
work  is  the  discovery  of  physiological  means,  to  be  given  presently,  for 
training  the  human  nervous  system  in  ‘sanity'. 

The  reader  should  be  aware,  when  we  speak  of  order  and  reversal 
of  order,  that  we  mean  the  order  and  reversal  of  order  in  the  un-speak- 
able  s.r;  but  the  neurological  mechanism  is  of  a  different  character,  as 
already  explained.  Our  analysis  of  the  simple  semantic  manifestations 
involve  evaluation  and  so  order,  permitting  a  most  complex  re-education 
and  re-training  of  the  nervous  system,  which  were  entirely  beyond  our 
reach  with  the  older  methods. 

Experimental  evidence  seems  to  corroborate  what  has  been  sug¬ 
gested  here,  and  the  analysis,  in  terms  of  order,  seems  to  have  serious 
practical  neurological  significance,  owing  to  similarity  of  structure , 
resulting  in  evaluation ,  and  so  appropriate  s.r . 

For  our  analysis  in  terms  of  order,  we  start  with  the  simplest  imag¬ 
inable  nervous  cycle ;  but  it  must  be  explicitly  understood  that  such  simple 

ON  ORDER 

cycles  actually  never  exist,  and  that  our  diagrams  have  value  only  as 
picturing  the  cyclic  order ,  without  complications.  Let  us  repeat  that  the 
introduction  of  an  analysis  in  terms  of  order  or  reversal  of  order  in  the 
manifestation  involves,  under  educational  influence,  various  other  and 
different  actml  nervous  activities ,  a  class  of  activities  which  hitherto 
have  always  evaded  our  educational  influences.  For  structural  purpose, 
it  is  sufficient  to  make  use  of  the  distinction  between  lower  and  higher 
centres  (a  rough  and  ready  distinction)  and  to  consider  the  lower  centres 
generally  in  connection  with  the  thalamus  and  brain-stem  (perhaps  also 
other  sub-cortical  layers),  and  the  higher  centres  generally  in  connection 
with  the  cortex.  This  lack  of  precision  is  intentional,  for  we  need  only 
sufficient  structural  stratification  to  illustrate  order,  and  it  seems  advis¬ 
able  to  assume  only  the  well-established  minimum  of  structure. 

We  have  already  mentioned  the  absolute  individuality  of  the  organ¬ 
ism  and,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  of  everything  else  on  objective  levels.  The 
reader  need  have  no  metaphysical  shivers  about  such  extreme  individual¬ 
ity  on  the  un-speakable  levels.  In  our  human  economy,  we  need  both 
similarities  and  differences,  but  we  have  as  yet,  in  our  ^-system,  chiefly 
concentrated  our  attention  and  training  on  similarities,  disregarding  dif¬ 
ferences.  In  this  work,  we  start  structurally  closer  to  nature  with 
un-speakable  levels,  and  make  differences  fundamental,  similarities 
appearing  only  at  a  later  stage  (order)  as  a  result  of  higher  abstractions . 
In  simple  words,  we  obtain  similarities  by  disregarding  differences,  by 
a  process  of  abstracting.  In  a  world  of  only  absolute  differences,  with¬ 
out  similarities,  recognition,  and,  therefore,  ‘intelligence’,  would  be 
impossible. 

It  is  possible  to  demonstrate  how  ‘intelligence’  and  abstracting  both 
started  together  and  are  due  to  the  physico-chemical  structure  of  proto¬ 
plasm.  All  living  material,  usually  called  protoplasm,  has,  in  some 
degree,  the  nervous  functions  of  irritability,  conductivity,  integration , . 
It  is  obvious  that  a  stimulus  S  does  not  affect  the  little  piece  of  primitive 
protoplasm  A  ‘all  over  and  at  once’  (infinite  velocity),  but  that  it  affects 
it  first  in  a  definite  spot  B ,  that  the  wave  of  excitation  spreads,  with 
finite  velocity  and  usually  in  a  diminishing  gradient,  to  the  more  remote 
portions  of  A .  We  notice  also  that  the  effect  of  the  stimulus  S  on  A  is 
not  identical  with  the  stimulus  itself.  A  falling  stone  is  not  identical 
with  the  pain  we  feel  when  the  stone  falls  on  our  foot.  Neither  do  our 
feelings  furnish  a  full  report  as  to  the  characteristics  of  the  stone,  its 
internal  structure,  chemistry,.  So  we  see  that  the  bit  of  protoplasm  is 
affected  only  partially,  and  in  a  specific  way,  by  the  stimulus.  Under 
physico-chemical  conditions,  as  they  exist  in  life,  there  is  no  place  for  any 

166  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

‘all ness’.  In  life,  we  deal  structurally  only  with  ‘non-allness’ ;  and  so  the 
term,  ' abstracting  in  different  orders',  seems  to  be  structurally  and 
uniquely  appropriate  for  describing  the  effects  of  external  stimuli  on 
living  protoplasm.  ‘Intelligence’  of  any  kind  is  connected  with  the 
abstracting  (non-allness)  which  is  characteristic  of  all  protoplasmic 
response.  Similarities  are  perceived  only  as  differences  become  blurred, 
and,  therefore,  the  process  is  one  of  abstracting. 

The  important  novelty  in  my  treatment  is  in  the  structural  fact  that 
I  treat  the  term  ‘abstracting’  in  the  non-el  way.  We  find  that  all  living 
protoplasm  ‘abstracts’.  So  I  make  the  term  abstracting  fundamental,  and 
I  give  it  a  wide  range  of  meanings  to  correspond  to  the  facts  of  life  by 
introducing  abstractions  of  different  orders .  Such  a  treatment  has  great 
structural  advantages,  which  will  be  explained  in  Part  VII. 

As  our  main  interest  is  in  ‘Smith*’,  we  will  speak  mostly  of  him, 
although  the  language  we  use  is  structurally  appropriate  for  character¬ 
izing  all  life.  Abstracting’  becomes  now  a  physiological  term  with  struc¬ 
tural,  actional,  physico-chemical,  and  non-el  implications. 

Accidentally,  some  light  is  thus  thrown  on  the  problem  of  ‘evolution’. 
In  actual  objective  life,  each  new  cell  is  different  from  its  parent  cell,  and 
each  offspring  is  different  from  its  parents.  Similarities  appear  only  as 
a  result  of  the  action  of  our  nervous  system,  which  does  not  register 
absolute  differences.  Therefore,  we  register  similarities,  which  evaporate 
when  our  means  of  investigation  become  more  subtle.  Similarities  are 
read  into  nature  by  our  nervous  system,  and  so  are  structurally  less 
fundamental  than  differences.  Less  fundamental,  but  no  less  important, 
as  life  and  ‘intelligence’  would  be  totally  impossible  without  abstracting . 
It  becomes  clear  that  the  problem  which  has  so  excited  the  s.r  of  the 
people  of  the  United  States  of  America  and  added  so  much  to  the  merri¬ 
ment  of  mankind,  ‘Is  evolution  a  “fact”  or  a  “theory”?*,  is  simply  silly. 
Father  and  son  are  never  identical — that  surely  is  a  structural  ‘fact’ — so 
there  is  no  need  to  worry  about  still  higher  abstractions,  like  ‘man’  and 
‘monkey’.  That  the  fanatical  and  ignorant  attack  on  the  theory  of  evolu¬ 
tion  should  have  occurred  may  be  pathetic,  but  need  concern  us  little,  as 
such  ignorant  attacks  are  always  liable  to  occur.  But  that  biologists 
should  offer  ‘defences',  based  on  the  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions, 
and  that  philosophers  should  have  failed  to  see  this  simple  dependence 
is  rather  sad.  The  problems  of  ‘evolution’  are  verbal  and  have  nothing  to 
do  with  life  as  such,  which  is  made  up  all  through  of  different  individ¬ 
uals,  ‘similarity’  being  structurally  a  manufactured  article,  produced  by 
the  nervous  system  of  the  observer. 

ON  ORDER 
