
In  my  own  practice,  I  have  become  painfully  aware  of  a  similar 
discrepancy  in  the  learned  s.r  of  some  older  professors  of  biology,  who 
quite  often  try  to  inform  me  that  ‘Life  is  overlapping',  and  that  ‘no  sharp 
distinction  between  “man”  and  “animal”  can  be  made'.  They  forget 
or  do  not  know  that,  structurally,  actual  ‘life'  is  composed  of  absolute 
individuals,  each  one  unique  and  different  from  all  other  individuals. 
Each  individual  should  have  its  individual  name,  based  on  mathematical 
extensional  methods ;  for  instance,  xlt  x2f  x5,  ...  xn;  of  Smithi,  Smith, . , 
or  Fidoi,  Fido2 , .  ‘Man'  and  ‘animal’  are  only  labels  for  verbal  fictions 
and  are  not  labels  for  an  actual  living  individual.  It  is  obvious  that  as 
these  verbal  fictions,  ‘man’  and  ‘animal’,  are  not  the  living  individual, 
their  ‘overlapping’  or  ‘not  overlapping'  depends  only  on  our  ingenuity, 
our  power  of  observation  and  abstraction,  and  our  capacity  of  coining 
non-el  functional  definitions. 

Let  us  see  how  adaption  might  work  in  practice.  Let  us  consider 
two  or  three  caterpillars,  which  we  may  name  Cu  C2t  C3,  since  each  of 
them  is  an  absolute  individual  and  different  from  the  others.  Let  us 
assume  that  Ci  is  positively  heliotropic,  which  means  that  he  is  compelled 
to  go  toward  light ;  that  C2  is  negatively  heliotropic,  which  means  that 
he  would  tend  to  go  away  from  light;  and  that  C3  is  non-heliotropic, 
which  means  that  light  would  have  no  effect  on  him  of  a  directional  char¬ 
acter.  At  a  certain  age,  Cx  would  crawl  up  the  tree  near  which  he  was 
born  and  so  reach  the  leaves,  eat  them,  and,  after  eating  them,  would  be 
able  to  complete  his  development.  C2,  and  probably  C3,  would  die,  as 
they  would  not  crawl  up  the  tree  toward  sufficient  food.  Thus,  we  see 
that  among  the  indefinite  number  of  possible  individual  make-ups  of  C* 
(fc  —  1,  2,  3,  .  .  .  n),  each  one  being  different,  only  those  which  were 
positively  heliotropic  would  survive  under  the  conditions  of  this  earth, 
and  all  the  rest  would  die.  The  positively  heliotropic  would  propagate 
and  their  positive  heliotropism  might  be  perpetuated,  the  negatively 
heliotropic  and  non-heliotropic  becoming  extinct.  This  would  only  occur, 
however,  in  a  world  in  which  trees  have  roots  in  the  ground  and  leaves 
on  their  parts  toward  the  sun.  In  a  world  where  the  trees  grew  with  their 
roots  toward  the  sun  and  leaves  in  the  ground,  the  reverse  would  hap¬ 
pen;  namely,  the  negatively  heliotropic  and  non-heliotropic  would  sur¬ 
vive,  and  the  positively  heliotropic  would  die  out.  We  can  not  foretell 
whether,  in  such  a  world,  there  would  be  caterpillars;  so  this  is  an 
hypothetical  example. 

Experiments  made  with  such  caterpillars  have  Shown  that  the  posi¬ 
tively  heliotropic  ones  crawl  toward  the  sun,  even  upon  a  plant  which 
has  been  turned  over,  with  the  roots  toward  the  sun.  They  crawl  a  way 

168  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

from  food ,  and  die.  We  see  that  the  external  environmental  conditions 
determine  which  characteristics  survive,  and  so  we  reach  the  notion  of 
adjustment. 

The  practical  result  of  these  conditions  is  that  the  indefinite  numbei 
of  individual  variations,  although  they  undoubtedly  exist,  seldom  come 
to  our  attention,  as  those  variations  which  do  not  fit  their  environmental 
conditions  become  extinct ;  their  variations  do  not  become  hereditary,  and 
consequently  we  can  seldom  find  them  outside  of  a  laboratory. 

This  shows,  also,  the  permanent  connection  and  interdependence 
of  the  facts  of  nature.  The  structural  fact  that  our  trees  grow  with  their 
roots  in  the  ground  and  their  leaves  upward  is  not  an  independent  fact ; 
it  has  something  to  do  with  the  structure  of  the  world  and  the  position 
and  the  effect  of  the  sun , .  So  the  fact  that  we  have  positively  heliotropic 
caterpillars  of  a  special  kind,  and  not  negatively  heliotropic  ones,  has 
something  to  do  with  the  structure  of  the  rest  of  the  world. 

To  illustrate  this  interconnection  and  interdependence  of  nature  still 
more  clearly,  let  me  suggest  an  hypothetical  question.  How  would  condi¬ 
tions,  as  they  are  on  this  earth,  compare  with  those  which  would  obtain, 
if  it  were,  let  us  say,  one  mile  greater  in  diameter?  Some  try  to  guess 
the  answer ;  yet  this  question  cannot  be  answered  at  all.  The  diameter  of 
this  earth  is  strictly  dependent  on  all  the  structural  conditions  which  pre¬ 
vail  in  this  world.  Since  it  is  impossible  to  know  what  kind  of  a  universe 
it  would  be,  in  which  this  earth  could  be  different  from  what  we  know, 
it  is,  of  course,  equally  impossible  to  foresee  whether  on  such  a  fictitious 
earth,  in  such  a  fictitious  universe,  there  would  even  be  life  at  all. 
Because  the  structure  of  the  world  is  such  as  we  know  it,  our  sun,  our 
earth,  our  trees,  our  caterpillars,  and,  finally,  ourselves  have  their  struc¬ 
ture  and  characteristics.  We  do  not  need  to  enter  here  into  the  problems 
of  determinism  versus  indeterminism,  as  these  problems  are  purely  verbal, 
depending  on  our  orders  of  abstractions,  the  ‘logic'  we  accept,  and  so, 
finally,  on  our  pleasure,  as  is  explained  more  in  detail  later  on,  and  could 
not  be  solved  satisfactorily  in  an  A,  el  system,  with  its  two-valued  ‘logic*. 

According  to  the  evidence  at  hand  in  1933,  ‘Smith*'  appears  among 
the  latest  inhabitants  of  this  earth,  and  subject  to  the  general  test  of 
survival,  as  already  explained.  The  few  thousand  years  during  which 
there  had  been  any  ‘Smith*'  are  too  short  a  period  to  test,  with  any  certi¬ 
tude,  his  capacity  for  survival.  We  know  of  many  species  of  animals, 
and  also  races  of  man,  of  which  very  little  trace  has  been  left.  What  we 
know  about  their  history  is  mostly  through  a  few  fossils,  which  are  kept 
in  museums. 

ON  ORDER 

The  external  world  is  full  of  devastating  energies  and  of  stimuli  too 
strong  for  some  organisms  to  endure.  We  know  that  only  those  organ¬ 
isms  have  survived  which  could  successfully  either  protect  themselves 
from  over-stimulations  or  else  were  under  protective  circumstances.  If 
we  look  over  the  series  of  surviving  individuals,  paying  special  attention 
to  the  higher  animals  and  man,  we  find  that  the  nervous  system  has, 
besides  the  task  of  conducting  excitation.,  the  task  of  so-called  ‘inhibi¬ 
tion’.  Response  to  stimuli,  by  survival,  proved  its  usefulness.  But  to 
diminish  the  response  to  some  stimuli  or  avoid  stimuli,  proved  also  to  be 
useful,  again  by  survival.  It  is  known  that  the  upper  or  latest  layers  of 
the  nervous  system  are  mostly  such  protective  layers,  to  prevent  imme¬ 
diate  responses  to  stimulation.  With  the  development  of  the  nervous 
system  from  the  simplest  to  the  most  complex,  we  see  an  increase  in 
behaviour  of  a  modifiable  or  individually  adjustable  type.  In  terms  of 
order ,  and  using  the  old  language,  ‘senses’  came  first  in  order  and  ‘mind’ 
next,  in  all  their  forms  and  degrees. 

If  we  speak  in  neurological  terms,  we  may  say  that  the  present 
nervous  structure  is  such  that  the  entering  nerve  currents  have  a  natural 
direction,  established  by  survival ;  namely,  they  traverse  the  brain-stem 
and  the  thalamus  first,  the  sub-cortical  layers  next,  then  the  cerebral 
cortex,  and  return,  transformed,  by  various  paths.  Experience  and 
science  in  1933  are  showing  that  this  is  the  order  established  under  a 
heavy  toll  of  destruction  and  non-survival  in  a  system  of  adjustment,  and 
so  should  be  considered  the  ‘natural’  order,  because  of  its  survival  value. 

We  all  know  in  practice  about  a  ‘sensation’,  and  a  ‘mental  picture* 
or  ‘idea’.  As  ‘sensations’  were  often  very  deceptive  and,  therefore,  did 
not  always  lead  to  survival,  a  nervous  system  which  somehow  retained 
vestiges,  or  ‘memories’,  of  former  ‘sensations’  and  could  recombine 
them,  shift  them . ,  proved  of  higher  survival  value,  and  so  ‘intelligence’ 
evolved,  from  the  lowest  to  the  highest  degrees. 

Experience  and  experiments  show  that  the  natural  order  was  ‘sensa¬ 
tion’  first,  ‘idea’  next ;  the  ‘sensation’  being  an  abstraction  of  some  order, 
and  the  ‘idea’  already  an  abstraction  from  an  abstraction  or  an  abstrac¬ 
tion  of  higher  order. 

Experience  shows  again  that  among  humans ,  this  order  in  manifes¬ 
tations  is  sometimes  reversed;  namely,  that  some  individuals  have  ‘idea’ 
first ;  namely,  some  vestiges  of  memories,  and  ‘sensations’  next,  without 
any  external  reason  for  the  ‘sensations’.  Such  individuals  are  considered 
‘mentally’  ill ;  in  legal  terms,  they  are  called  ‘insane’.  They  ‘see’,  where 
there  is  nothing  to  see ;  they  ‘hear’,  where  there  is  nothing  to  hear ;  they 
are  paralysed,  where  there  is  no  reason  to  be  paralysed ;  they  have  pains, 

170  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

when  there  is  no  reason  to  have  pains,  and  so  on,  endlessly.  Their  sur¬ 
vival  value,  if  not  taken  care  of,  is  usually  nil.  This  reversal  of  order, 
but  in  a  mild  degree,  is  extremely  common  at  present  among  all  of  us 
and  underlies  mainly  all  human  misfortunes  and  un-sanity. 

This  reversal  of  order  in  its  mild  form  is  involved  in  identification 
or  the  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions ;  namely,  when  we  act  as  if  an 
‘idea’  were  an  ‘experience'  of  our  ‘senses',  thus  duplicating  in  a  mild 
form  the  mechanism  of  the  ‘mentally'  ill.  This  implies  nervous  disturb¬ 
ances,  since  we  violate  the  natural  ( survival )  order  of  the  activities  of  the 
nervous  system.  The  mechanism  of  projection  is  also  connected  with 
this  reversal  of  order .  This  reversal  transforms  the  external  world  into 
a  quite  different  and  fictitious  entity.  Both  ignorance  and  the  old  meta¬ 
physics  tend  to  produce  these  undesirable  nervous  effects  of  reversed 
order  and  so  non-survival  evaluation.  If  we  use  the  nervous  system  in  a 
way  which  is  against  its  survival  structure,  we  must  expect  non-survival. 
Human  history  is  short,  but  already  we  have  astonishing  records  of 
extinction. 

That  such  reversal  of  order  in  the  manifestations  of  the  functioning 
of  the  nervous  system  must  be  extremely  harmful,  becomes  evident  when 
we  consider  that  in  such  a  case  the  upper  layers  of  our  nervous  system 
(the  cortex)  not  only  do  not  protect  us  from  over-stimulation  originat¬ 
ing  in  the  external  world  and  inside  us,  but  actually  contribute  to  the 
over-stimulation  by  producing  fanciful,  yet  very  real,  irritants.  Experi¬ 
ments  on  some  patients  have  shown  how  they  benefit  physically  when 
their  internal  energy  is  liberated  from  fighting  phantoms  and  so  can  be 
redirected  to  fight  the  colloidal  disturbances.  Such  examples  could  be 
cited  endlessly  from  practically  every  field  of  medicine  and  life.  This 
problem  of  ‘reversal  of  order’  is  not  only  very  important  semantically, 
but  also  very  complex,  and  it  will  be  analysed  further  on. 

The  reader  should  not  miss  the  fact  that  an  analysis  in  terms  of 
order  throws  a  new  light  on  old  problems,  and  so  the  scientific  benefit  of 
the  use  of  such  a  term  is  shown.  But  this  is  not  all ;  the  use  of  the  term 
order  has  brought  us  to  the  point  where  we  can  see  far-reaching  prac¬ 
tical  applications  of  the  knowledge  we  already  possess,  and  of  which  we 
have  not  so  far  made  any  systematic  use. 

We  know  that  the  activity  of  the  nervous  system  is  facilitated  by 
repetition,  and  we  can  learn  useful  habits  as  easily  as  harmful.  In  the 
special  case  of  s.r  also  we  can  train  ourselves  either  way,  though  one  may 
have  useful  survival  value;  the  other  being  harmful,  with  no  survival 
value.  The  problem  is  again  one  of  order,  and,  among  others,  a  problem 
of  extension  and  intension,  as  has  already  been  mentioned  several  times. 

ON  ORDER 

Section  D.  Order  and  the  problems  of  extension  and  intension. 

The  problems  of  extension  and  intension  are  not  new,  but  have  been 
treated  as  yet  only  casually  by  ‘philosophers’,  ‘logicians’,  and  mathema¬ 
ticians,  and  it  has  not  been  suspected  what  profound,  far-reaching,  and 
important  structural  psycho-logical,  semantic  components  they  represent. 

At  this  point,  to  avoid  confusion,  a  warning  is  necessary.  The 
problems  with  which  we  are  dealing  have  never  been  analysed  from  the 
point  of  view  of  this  work ;  namely,  from  that  of  structure.  So,  naturally, 
all  that  has  been  accomplished  in  these  fields  is  over-simplified,  and 
leaves  out  vital  characteristics.  Discrepancies  have  arisen  between  the 
structure  of  the  old  verbiage  and  that  of  the  new.  Before  it  is  possible 
to  formulate  the  general  theory  of  this  work,  it  will  be  necessary  to  go 
ahead  in  spite  of  discrepancies,  and  then  to  formulate  the  general  theory 
and  show  how  these  discrepancies  had  a  perfectly  general  origin  in  the 
stratified— and,  therefore,  ordered — structure  of  human  knowledge.  The 
discrepancies  were  inherent  and  unavoidable  in  the  old  way,  but  are 
avoidable  in  the  new.  It  is  the  main  aim  of  the  present  theory  to  eluci¬ 
date  structural  issues  in  connection  with  s.r  and  many  problems  of 
human  and  scientific  conduct,  mathematics  and  insanity  included,  and,  in 
general,  with  all  known  problems  of  scientific  method  and  theory  of 
knowledge.  But  we  ought  not  to  be  surprised  if  such  a  pioneering 
enquiry  proves  to  need  many  corrections  and  elaborations  in  the  future. 
Psychiatrists  are  the  least  likely  to  disregard  the  problems  of  structure 
and  s.rt  since  their  science  is  young  and  still  flexible.  Besides,  the  psychia¬ 
trists  know  a  great  deal  about  ‘human  nature’  and  behaviour,  though  they 
are  handicapped  by  insufficient  knowledge  of  the  exact  sciences  and  the 
absence  of  A,  non-el  semantics.  The  opposite,  perhaps,  would  be  true 
about  mathematicians.  They  know  a  great  deal  about  how  to  play  with 
symbols.  Their  work  is  engrossing  and  exacting.  But  very  few  are 
capable  of  separating  themselves  enough  from  this  play  to  contemplate 
the  broader,  more  ‘human’,  aspects  of  their  own  science,  the  interplay 
of  symbols  in  language,  their  structure,  and  the  bearing  of  structure  on 
s.r  and  adaptation. 

Some  of  these  specialists  might  say  that  the  author  uses  their  terms 
in  a  sense  different  from  that  in  which  they  use  them,  and  that,  conse¬ 
quently,  from  their  point  of  view,  this  work  is  not  strictly  legitimate. 
However,  when  a  mathematician  lays  down  a  definition,  such  as  1+1=2, 
this  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  application  we  make  of  it  when  we  say 
that  one  penny  and  one  penny  make  two  pennies.  Neither  can  he  object 
when  we  add  one  gallon  (of  water)  to  one  gallon  (of  alcohol)  and  do 

172  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANOUAGKS 

not  obtain  two  gallons  (of  the  alcohol-water  mixture),  but  slightly  less, 
This  last  is  a  profound  experimental  fact,  intimately  connected  with  the 
structure  of  ‘matter’  and,  therefore,  of  the  world  around  us.  The  mathe¬ 
matician  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  fact  that  his  additive  definitions, 
important  as  they  are,  do  not  cover  the  facts  of  the  world  around  us, 
which  happens  not  to  be  additive  in  its  more  fundamental  aspects. 

Also,  the  mathematical  definition,  one  and  one  make  two,  is  not 
invalidated  by  such  non-additive  facts.  The  mathematician  does  not 
claim,  but  rather  disclaims,  content  in  its  formulae.  There  is  no  mention 
of  pennies  or  apples  or  gallons  of  alcohol , .  It  is  simply  a  definite  lan¬ 
guage  of  definitive  structure  for  talking  about  anything  which  can  be 
covered.  If  facts  cannot  be  covered  by  given  linguistic  forms  and 
methods,  new  forms,  new  structures,  new  methods  are  invented  or 
created  to  cover  the  structure  of  facts  in  nature. 

The  mathematician  created  such  a  different  language  long  ago.  He 
now  calls  his  additive  language  ‘linear’,  and  the  corresponding  equations 
are  of  ‘first  degree’.  He  calls  his  non-additive  language  ‘non-linear’  and 
the  equations  are  of  ‘higher  degrees’.  These  latter  equations  happen  to 
be  much  more  difficult  than  the  former  and  of  complex  structure,  so  that 
very  often  they  can  be  solved  only  by  approximation  to  linear  equations. 
Now,  without  anybody’s  fault,  the  world  around  us  does  not  happen  to 
be  an  additive  affair  in  its  more  fundamental  structural  aspects.  Perhaps 
the  most  important  and  beneficial  results  of  the  new  physical  theories  is 
that  they  point  out  this  structural  fact,  and  take  it  into  consideration. 
The  reader  should  recall  the  example  about  the  man-made  green  leaf 
and  the  non-man-made  green  leaf,  which  differ  in  structure,  and  he 
will  understand  how  our  additive  tendencies  are  the  result  of  our  primi¬ 
tive  state  of  development  and  of  this  projection  of  our  anthropomorphic 
point  of  view  on  the  world.  We  reversed  the  natural  order  and  imposed 
on  the  world  the  structure  of  our  verbal  forms,  instead  of  the  natural 
order  of  patterning  the  structure  of  language  after  the  structure  of  the 
world. 

This  digression  was  especially  necessary  before  approaching  the 
problem  of  ‘extension’  and  ‘intension’.  These  have  never  been  analysed 
from  the  point  of  view  of  structure  and  order,  and  whatever  is  known 
about  them  is  taken  for  granted.  It  is  true  that  we  hear  now  and  then 
casual  remarks  that  mathematicians  had  a  predilection  for  extension  and 
‘philosophers’  for  intension,  but  these  true  remarks  are  not  further 
analysed. 

We  usually  forget  that  whenever  a  mathematician  or  a  ‘philosopher’ 
produces  a  work,  this  involves  his  ‘attitude’,  which  represents  an  ex- 

ON  OKDKR 

trcmely  complex  psycho-logical  s.r  of  the  organism-as-a-whole.  In  most 
cases,  these  attitudes  determine  not  only  the  character  of  our  work,  but 
also  other  reactions  which  make  up  our  individual  and  social  life.  His¬ 
torically,  the  mathematicians  have  a  steady  record  of  achievement,  and 
‘philosophers’  (excluding  epistemologists)  one  of  uselessness  or  failure. 

I  las  this  record  something  to  do  with  the  extensional  and  intensional 
attitudes  ?  In  fact,  it  has.  It  is  easy  to  show  that  the  extensional  attitude 
is  the  only  one  which  is  in  accordance  with  the  survival  order  and  ner¬ 
vous  structure ,  and  that  the  intensional  attitude  is  the  reversal  of  the 
natural  order,  and,  therefore,  must  involve  non-survival  or  patho¬ 
logical  s.r. 

One  of  the  simplest  ways  of  approaching  the  problems  of  ‘extension’ 
and  ‘intension’  is  perhaps  to  point  its  connection  with  definitions.  A  col¬ 
lection  may  be  defined,  so  we  are  told,  by  enumeration  of  its  members, 
as,  for  instance,  when  we  say  that  the  collection  contains  Smith,  Brown, 
Jones , .  Or  we  may  define  our  collection  by  giving  a  defining  ‘property’. 
We  are  told  that  the  first  type  of  definitions  which  enumerates  individual 
members  is  to  be  called  a  definition  by  extension,  the  second,  which  gives 
a  defining  ‘property’,  is  to  be  called  a  definition  by  intension. 

We  can  easily  see  that  a  ‘definition  by  extension’  uniquely  charac¬ 
terizes  the  collection,  Smithi,  Browni,  Jonesi,.  Any  other  collection, 
Smith2,  Brown2,  Jones2 . ,  would  obviously  be  different  from  the  first  one, 
since  the  individuals  differ.  If  we  ‘define’  our  collection  by  intension ; 
that  is,  by  ascribing  some  characteristic  to  each  of  the  individuals,  for 
instance,  that  they  have  no  tails,  many  collections  of  individuals  without 
tails  might  be  selected.  Since  these  collections  would  be  composed  of 
entirely  different  individuals,  they  would  be  entirely  different,  yet  by 
‘intension’,  or  defining  characteristic,  they  all  would  be  supposed  to  be 
one  collection. 

Similar  contrast  exists  between  relations  in  extension,  and  relations 
in  intension.  These  relations  have  been  defined  more  or  less  as  follows: 
‘Intensional  relations  are  relations  of  “concepts” ;  extensional  relations 
are  relations  of  denoted  facts'.  Or,  ‘relations  of  intension  are  those 
which  are  ascertainable  a  priori;  a  relation  of  extension  is  discoverable 
only  by  inspection  of  the  existent ’.  Or,  ‘intension  covers  the  relations 
which  hold  for  all  the  possible  individuals,  while  extension  holds  only  for 
the  existent \  ‘A  relation  of  intension  is  one  which  is  only  discoverable 
by  logical  analysis ;  a  relation  of  extension  is  one  which  is  only  discover¬ 
able  by  the  enumeration  of  particulars’,  .* 

All  that  has  just  been  said  are  perhaps  standard  definitions;  but, 
for  my  purpose,  they  are  profoundly  unsatisfactory.  Because  we  have 

174  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

had  no  better  understanding  of  this  most  important  question  of  order,  a 
great  deal  of  confusion  has  occurred  in  human  'thought'  and  many  of  our 
disciplines  have  become  twisted  in  undesirable  directions.  This,  to  a  large 
degree,  accounts  for  the  obscurity  which  characterizes  the  problems  we 
are  dealing  with  in  this  book.  But  it  should  be  emphasized  that  even  in 
this  very  unsatisfactory  form,  'intension*  and  'extension',  as  they  were 
felt  and  applied  ( s.r ,  largely  disregarding  the  verbal  formulations),  have 
played  an  enormous  role  in  the  development  of  our  forms  of  representa¬ 
tion,  and  our  'civilization*.  Unfortunately,  without  an  ordinal  analysis, 
it  was  impossible  to  evaluate  properly  the  relative  importance  of  these 
semantic  attitudes,  and  to  realize  the  serious  importance  of  these  prob¬ 
lems  for  a  theory  of  sanity  and  resulting  consequences. 

Here,  again,  the  knowledge  which  psychiatry  gives  will  help  a  great 
deal.  We  know,  in  the  rough,  quite  a  little  about  two  semantic  mechan¬ 
isms  which  are  called  extroversion  and  introversion.  In  the  rough, 
again,  the  extrovert  projects  all  that  is  going  on  within  himself  upon 
the  outside  world,  and  believes  that  his  personal  projections  have  some 
kind  of  non-personal  objective  existence,  and  so  have  'the  same'  validity 
and  value  for  other  observers.  As  a  result,  quite  naturally,  the  extrovert 
is  due  to  receive  a  great  many  unpleasant  shocks,  for  the  other  observer 
does  not  necessarily  observe  or  'perceive'  in  the  external  events  the 
characteristics  which  the  first  observer  ‘finds'.  He  has  often  projected 
them  from  his  'inside',  but  they  were  entirely  personal.  The  first  ob¬ 
server,  in  his  semantic  conviction  that  his  observations  are  the  only, 
uniquely  correct,  observations,  feels  that  the  second  observer  is  either 
blind  in  some  way,  or  unfair  to  him.  In  acute  cases,  he  develops  a  mania 
of  persecution.  He  feels  that  everybody  misunderstands  him ;  nobody  is 
fair  to  him;  everybody  is  hostile  to  him;  he  will  get  even  with  them;  in 
the  name  of  'justice',  he  will  punish  them , .  A  dangerous  and  quite  often 
incalculable  bitterness  and  hostility  follow.  Such  types  are  usually  trou¬ 
blesome,  and,  if  the  affective  components  are  strong,  then  such  types  are 
dangerously  ill  and  liable  to  produce  bloodshed  or  make  other  attacks. 
The  most  pronounced  types  in  this  extreme  direction  are  called  paranoids 
and  paranoiacs. 

The  introvert  type  is  different.  He  is  mostly  concentrated  on  what 
is  going  on  inside  of  his  own  skin.  Almost  all  of  what  is  going  on  out¬ 
side  of  his  skin,  he  interprets  in  personal  terms  and  feelings.  Whatever 
unpleasant  happens,  he  is  always  guilty ;  always  willing  to  take  the  blame, 
which  is  quite  often  just,  for  many  psycho-logical  reasons  upon  which  we 
cannot  dwell  here.  This  type,  in  its  extreme  development,  quite  often 

ON  ORDER 

finds  a  solution  in  suicide.  The  most  extreme  cases  are  called  ‘dementia 
praecox*  or  ‘schizophrenic*  types. 

In  everyday  experience,  it  is  seldom  that  such  clear-cut  types  as 
just  described  can  be  observed.  For  the  purpose  of  studying  such  ex¬ 
treme  types,  one  has  to  do  researches  in  asylums.  Even  there  we  find 
a  great  number  of  mixed  cases.  In  daily  life  we  find  in  practically 
everybody  a  predominance  of  one  or  the  other  of  these  types  of  s.r,  but 
in  some  the  two  types  appear  to  be  inextricably  mixed.  Observations 
upon  this  problem  among  so-called  ‘normal*  men  is  difficult,  as  they  rep¬ 
resent  great  complexities. 

It  has  been  already  mentioned  that  the  well-balanced  man,  a  man 
who  has  survival  value,  should  be  a  well-balanced  mixture  of  both  ten¬ 
dencies  ;  namely,  an  extroverted-introvert,  or,  if  we  wish,  an  introverted- 
extrovert.  As  yet,  these  problems,  no  matter  how  important  they  may  be, 
are  beyond  our  educational  methods,  and  only  in  acute  cases  are  they 
taken  care  of  by  physicians,  and  then  mostly  in  asylums.  It  is  important 
to  have  simple  means  to  deal  with  these  semantic  problems  in  elementary 
education  as  a  preventive  method,  or  as  a  branch  of  semantic  hygiene. 

Even  this  brief  analysis  shows  how  tremendously  powerful  the 
affective  factors  are  which  may  be  behind  the  unbalanced  semantic  atti¬ 
tudes.  The  reader  should  not  miss  the  fact  that  in  both  types,  when  well 
developed,  there  is  material  for  an  extreme  amount  of  self-imposed 
suffering.  Then  the  nervous  energy  produced  by  the  organism  is  ab¬ 
sorbed  in  fighting  phantoms,  instead  of  being  directed  toward  useful  ends, 
such  as  regulating  the  normal  activities  of  the  organism,  or  fighting 
internal  enemies,  whereas,  there  should  also  be  some  energy  left  for 
activities  and  interests  useful  socially  or  for  the  survival  of  the  race. 

While  the  majority  of  individuals  present  different  degrees  of 
prevalence  of  one  mechanism  over  the  other,  yet  fairly  clear-cut  cases 
are  to  be  found.  The  extreme  complexity  of  the  structure  of  the  nervous 
system  of  man  justifies  the  enormous  number  of  degrees  recognized. 
So  large,  indeed,  is  this  number  of  possibilities,  that  we  have  little  dif¬ 
ficulty  in  understanding  that  the  individuality  of  every  one  is  unique. 

Extroverted  and  introverted  individuals  are  usually  born  such; 
at  least,  they  usually  have  a  predisposition  to  be  the  one  or  the  other.  To 
what  extent  these  tendencies  can  be  aggravated  or  improved  by  education 
is  not  yet  solved,  and,  indeed,  has  never  been  much  bothered  about.  To 
consider  our  activities  merely  as  results  of  inborn  tendencies  is  too  nar¬ 
row  a  view.  The  human  nervous  system  is  not  finished  at  birth,  and  it 
continues  its  development  for  some  time  after  the  birth  of  the  child. 
So  it  is  much  more  influenced  by  environmental  conditions,  the  verbal 

176  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

included,  than  is  the  nervous  system  of  an  animal.  The  make-up  of  the 
individual  is  thus  some  function  of  different  variables,  among  which  the 
hereditary  inclinations  and  the  environmental  conditions  appear  in  a 
relation,  at  present,  not  fully  known.  The  individual  feels  and  acts  ac¬ 
cording  to  his  complex  make-up,  including  acquired  s.r,  no  matter  what 
factors  have  played  a  role  in  its  moulding,  and,  as  a  rule,  he  is  little  in¬ 
fluenced  by  the  way  he  rationalizes  his  activities.  From  this  point  of 
view,  we  may  consider  that  the  extensional  make-ups  and  intensional 
characters  are  bound  to  show  themselves  later  on  in  life,  no  matter  how 
the  subject  may  have  rationalized  them,  if  his  s,r  have  not  been  modified. 

It  seems  evident  that  the  extroverted  and  introverted  tendencies 
have  some  connection  with  extensional  and  ihtensional  types  of  reac¬ 
tion  ;  but,  of  course,  they  are  not  identical.  They  influence  the  individual 
in  the  selection  of  a  profession,  and  in  the  preference  for  some  special 
trend  of  activity.  Thus,  mathematicians,  generally,  have  an  inclination 
toward  extension,  ‘philosophers’  toward  intension.  Now,  it  is  interesting 
to  note  that  mathematicians  have  a  record  of  continuous  constructive 
progress,  and  at  each  epoch  have  produced  the  highest  kind  of  language 
known.  Also,  the  most  important  achievements  in  the  fields  which  tra¬ 
ditionally  belonged  to  ‘philosophers’  have  actually  been  produced  by 
mathematicians.  The  ‘philosophers’,  in  the  main,  have  a  record  of 
failure. 

The  reason  for  this  difference,  which  is  too  remarkable  to  be  a  mere 
coincidence,  may  be  found  by  application  of  the  term  ‘order’  in  our 
analysis.  The  extensional  method  is  the  only  method  which  is  in  accord¬ 
ance  with  the  structure  of  our  nervous  system  as  established  by  survival . 
Reversed  intensional  methods  disorganize  this  normal  mode  of  activity 
of  the  nervous  system,  and  so  lead  toward  nervous  and  ‘mental’  illnesses. 

As  explained  before,  the  structure  of  our  nervous  system  was  estab¬ 
lished  with  ‘senses’  first,  and  ‘mind’  next.  In  neurological  terms,  the 
nervous  impulses  should  be  received  first  in  the  lower  centres  and  pass 
on  through  the  sub-cortical  layers  to  the  cortex,  be  influenced  there  and 
be  transformed  in  the  cortex  by  the  effect  of  past  experiences.  In  this 
transformed  state  they  should  then  proceed  to  different  destinations, 
as  predetermined  by  the  structure  established  by  survival  values.  We 
know,  and  let  us  remember  this,  that  the  reversed  order  in  semantic 
manifestation — namely,  the  projection  into  * senses*  of  memory  traces  or 
doctrinal  impulses— is  against  the  survival  structure,  and  hallucinations, 
delusions,  illusions,  and  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions  are  to  be 
considered  pathological.  In  a  ‘normal’  human  nervous  system  with 
survival  value,  the  nervous  impulses  should  not  be  lost  in  the  sub-cortical 

ON  ORDER 

layers.  In  such  a  case,  the  activity  of  our  human  nervous  system  would 
correspond  to  the  activity  of  the  less-developed  nervous  systems  of  ani¬ 
mals  which  have  no  cortex  at  all.  It  must  be  remembered,  also,  that  the 
sub-cortical  layers  which  have  a  cortex,  as  in  man,  are  quite  different  from 
corresponding  layers  of  those  animals  which  have  never  developed  a  cor¬ 
tex.  It  is  impossible  to  avoid  the  conclusion  that  survival  values  are 
sharply  characterized  by  adequacy ,  and  that  animals  without  cortex  have 
nervous  systems  adequate  for  their  needs  under  their  special  conditions ; 
otherwise,  they  would  not  have  survived.  This  applies,  also,  to  those  ani¬ 
mals  who  have  a  cortex.  Their  activities  for  survival  depend  on  this 
cortex ;  and  when  the  cortex  is  removed,  their  activities  become  inade¬ 
quate.  Their  sub-cortical  layers  alone  are  not  adequate  to  insure  sur¬ 
vival.  For  survival,  such  animals  must  use  not  only  their  lower  centres 
and  their  sub-cortical  layers,  but  also  their  cortices. 

Among  animals,  as  all  evidence  shows,  the  enormous  majority  have, 
without  human  interference,  nervous  systems  working  usually  in  the 
‘ normal*  way;  that  is,  according  to  the  survival  structure.  ‘Insanity'  and 
kindred  nervous  disturbances  are  known  only  among  ourselves  (how¬ 
ever,  see  Part  VI ) .  Apparently,  the  cortex,  through  its  enormous  internal 
complexity,  which  provides  many  more  pathways,  and  through  its  com¬ 
plex  interconnections,  which  offer  many  more  possibilities,  with  a  greater 
number  of  degrees  of  ‘inhibition',  of  excitability,  of  delayed  action,  of 
activation . ,  introduces  not  only  a  much  greater  flexibility  of  reaction,  but, 
through  this  flexibility,  a  possibility  for  abuse,  for  reversal  of  manifesta¬ 
tions,  and  so  for  a  deterioration  of  the  survival  activity  of  the  nervous 
