system  as-a-whole.  The  sub-cortical  layers  and  other  parts  of  the  brain 
of  man  are  different  from  the  corresponding  parts  of  the  animal  brain, 
which  has  a  less-developed  cortex.  The  nervous  system  works  as-a- 
whole,  and  the  anatomical  homology  of  the  parts  of  different  nervous 
systems  is  a  very  inadequate,  perhaps  even  a  misguiding,  foundation  for 
inferring  a  priori  the  functioning  of  these  systems,  which  ultimately 
depend  not  only  on  the  macroscopic  but  also  on  the  microscopic  and 
sub-microscopic  structures.  For  instance,  we  can  cut  off  the  head  of 
some  insects,  and  they  go  along  quite  happily  and  do  not  seem  to  mind 
the  operation  much.  But  we  could  not  repeat  this  with  higher  animals. 
The  behaviour  is  changed.  A  decorticated  pigeon  behaves  differently  from 
a  decorticated  rat,  though  neither  of  them  seems  affected  greatly  by  the 
operation.  A  decorticated  dog  or  ape  is  affected  much  more.  Man  is  entirely 
changed.  None  of  the  higher  types  is  able  to  survive  long  if  decorticated. 

There  is  on  record  the  medical  history,  reported  by  Edinger  and 
Fischer,  of  a  boy  who  was  born  entirely  without  cerebral  cortex.  There 

178  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

were  apparently  no  other  important  defects.  This  child  never  showed 
any  development  of  sensory  or  motor  power,  or  of  ‘intelligence’,  or  signs 
of  hunger  or  thirst.  During  the  first  year  of  his  life,  he  was  continually 
in  a  state  of  profound  stupor,  without  any  movements,  and  from  the 
second  year  on,  until  his  death  (at  three  years  and  nine  months),  was 
continually  crying.5 

Although  many  animals,  for  instance  fishes,  have  no  differentiated 
cortex,  yet  their  nervous  system  is  perfectly  adequate  for  their  lives  and 
conditions.  But  in  a  more  complex  nervous  system,  the  relative  func¬ 
tions  of  different  parts  of  the  brain  undergo  fundamental  transforma¬ 
tion.  In  the  most  complex  nervous  system,  as  found  in  man,  the  older 
parts  of  the  brain  are  much  more  under  the  control  of  the  cerebral 
cortex  than  in  any  of  the  animals,  as  is  shown  in  the  example  above. 
The  absence  of  the  human  cortex  involves  a  much  more  profound  dis¬ 
turbance  of  the  activities  of  the  other  parts  of  the  brain.  Since  the 
cortex  has  a  profound  influence  upon  the  other  parts  of  the  brain,  the  in¬ 
sufficient  use  of  the  cortex  must  reflect  detrimentally  upon  the  function¬ 
ing  of  the  other  parts  of  the  brain.  The  enormous  complexity  of  the 
structure  of  the  human  brain  and  the  corresponding  complexity  of  its 
functioning  accounts  not  only  for  all  human  achievements,  but  also  for  all 
human  difficulties.  It  also  explains  why,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  our 
anatomy  differs  but  little  from  that  of  some  higher  animals,  veterinary 
science  is  more  simple  than  human  medicine. 

Because  of  the  structure  of  the  nervous  system,  we  see  how  the 
completion  of  one  stage  of  the  process  which  originated  by  an  external 
stimulus  (A)  and  has  itself  become  a  nervously  elaborated  end-product 
(B),  may,  in  its  turn,  become  the  stimulus  for  a  still  further  nervously 
elaborated  new  end-product  (C),  and  so  on.  When  association  or  rela¬ 
tion  neurons  enter,  the  number  of  possibilities  is  enormously  increased. 

It  must  be  emphasized  that  A,  B,  C . ,  are,  fundamentally,  entirely 
different .  For  instance,  the  external  event  A*  may  be  a  falling  stone, 
which  is  an  entirely  different  affair  from  the  pain  we  have  when  this 
stone  falls  on  our  foot.  It  thus  becomes  clearer  what  is  meant  by  a  state¬ 
ment  that  the  ‘senses’  abstract  in  their  own  appropriate  way,  determined 
by  survival  value,  the  external  events ;  give  these  abstractions  their  spe¬ 
cial  colouring  (a  blow  on  the  eye  gives  us  the  feeling  of  light) ;  discharge 
these  transformed  stimuli  to  further  centres,  in  which  they  become  again 
abstracted,  coloured,  transformed , .  The  end-product  of  this  second 
abstracting  is  again  an  entirely  different  affair  from  the  first  abstraction. 

Obviously,  for  survival  value,  this  extremely  complex  nervous  sys¬ 
tem  should  work  in  complete  co-ordination.  Processes  should  pass  the 

ON  ORDER 

entire  cycle .  If  not,  there  must  be  something  wrong  with  the  system. 
The  activities  of  the  organism  are  then  regressive,  of  lower  order,  a  con¬ 
dition  known  as  ‘mental’  illness.  The  gross  anatomical  divisions  of  the 
nervous  system  should  not  be  relied  upon  too  much  as  an  index  of  func¬ 
tion.  Perhaps  these  anatomical  speculations  are  even  harmful  for  under¬ 
standing,  because  they  falsify  the  facts,  emphasize  the  macroscopic 
similarities  unduly  and  disregard  subtle  yet  fundamentally  important 
microscopic  and  sub-microscopic  structures  and  differences,  which  are 
perfectly  manifest  in  the  functioning,  but  which  are  difficult  to  observe 
directly  on  their  level. 

The  term  ‘abstracting*  is  a  multiordinal  term,  and  hence  has  differ¬ 
ent  meanings,  depending  on  the  order  of  abstractions.  It  is  a  functional 
term  and,  to  indicate  the  differences  in  meanings,  it  is  necessary  to  indi¬ 
cate  the  different  orders.  It  is  structurally  a  non~el  term,  built  upon  the 
extensional  mathematical  pattern  x/f  x?\  x"'.,  or  xlr  x2,  .  -  .  xn,  or  x * 

( k  =  1,  2,  3,  .  .- .  »).  This  allows  us  to  give  the  term  ‘abstracting  of  dif¬ 
ferent  orders’  a  perfectly  unique  meaning  in  a  given  problem  and  yet  to 
keep  in  a  fluid  state  its  most  important  functional  implications .  Some¬ 
thing  similar  happens  when  the  mathematician  discusses  his  x„ .  No  one 
can  miss  the  fact  that  he  deals  with  a  variable  which  can  take  n  values ; 
so  this  symbol  has  a  quite  definite  descriptive  structural  and  semantic 
value.  So  has  the  ‘abstracting  of  different  orders’. 

It  is  desirable  to  introduce  consciously  and  deliberately  terms  of  a 
structure  similar  to  the  structure  of  human  knowledge,  of  our  nervous 
system,  and  of  the  world,  involving  appropriate  s.r.  Multiordinal  terms 
are  uniquely  appropriate,  since  they  take  their  00-valued  structure  from 
the  structure  of  events  (1933)  and  do  not  reflect  their  older,  one- valued, 
false  to  fact  character  on  the  events.  (Note  the  order.) 

Now  we  are  ready  to  reformulate  the  problem  of  extension  and 
intension  in  terms  of  order . 

If  the  natural  survival  order  is  lower  abstractions  first  and  higher 
next,  then  extension  starts  with  absolute  individuals,  and  conforms  to 
the  proper  survival  order.  Extension  recognizes  the  uniqueness,  with 
corresponding  one-value,  of  the  individual  by  giving  each  individual  a 
unique  name,  and  so  makes  confusion  impossible.  Training  in  s.r  of 
sanity  becomes  a  possibility,  and  order  becomes  paramount.  Extension 
and  order  cannot  be  divided.  When  we  speak  about  ‘order’,  we  imply 
extension,  and,  when  we  speak  about  extension,  order  is  implied.  That 
modern  mathematics  and  mathematical  ‘logic’  has  so  much  to  do  with 
order,  as  to  make  this  term  fundamental,  is  a  necessary  consequence  of 
the  extensional  method  which  starts  with  unique  individuals,  labels  them 

180  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

by  unique  names  and  only  then  generalizes  or  passes  to  oo-valued  higher 
order  abstractions  like  ‘numbers’, .  The  direction  of  the  process  of  ab¬ 
straction  is  here  in  the  survival  order,  from  lower  abstractions  to  higher. 
It  hardly  needs  to  be  emphasized  that,  to  the  best  of  our  knowledge  in 
1933,  it  is  the  only  possible  way  to  follow  the  natural  order  and  to  evade 
reading  into  a  fundamentally  one-valued  external  event,  our  older  undif¬ 
ferentiated  oo-valued  fancies  (which  happens  if  the  process  is  reversed 
in  order)  involving  powerful  factors  in  our  s.r . 

Intension  means  structurally  the  reversal  of  the  survival  order,  since 
it  starts  with  undifferentiated  oo-valued  higher  abstractions  and  distorts 
or  disregards  the  essential  one-values  of  the  individuals  and  reads  into 
them  as  uniquely  important  undifferentiated  oo-valued  characteristics. 

Historically,  mathematicians  have  had  a  predilection  and,  because  of 
the  character  of  their  ‘element’  (numbers)  and  their  technique,  a  struc¬ 
tural  necessity,  for  the  use  of  extensional  methods.  It  does  not  need 
much  imagination  to  see  why  they  have  produced  results  of  utmost 
(although  relative)  importance  and  validity  at  each  date. 

‘Philosophers’  and  reasoners  of  that  class  have  had  a  predilection 
for  intension,  and  this  also  explains  why,  in  spite  of  tremendously  acute 
verbal  exercises,  they  have  not  produced  anything  of  lasting  value,  for 
they  were  carried  away  by  the  structure  of  the  language  they  used.  This 
predilection  being  already  based  on  the  reversal  of  the  survival  order,  it 
was  bound  to  lead  in  the  less-resistant  individuals  to  nervous  and  ‘mental’ 
defects. 

The  issues,  as  presented  here,  are  very  clear-cut,  and,  in  fact,  too 
clear-cut,  as  we  have  disregarded  for  the  present  the  cyclic  order  of  the 
nervous  process.  This  last  fact  first  abolishes  the  sharp  distinction  be¬ 
tween  ‘pure’  extension  and  ‘pure’  intension,  each  process  never  being 
‘pure’,  but  always  ‘impure’,  one  influencing  the  other.  ‘Pure’  intension 
and  ‘pure’  extension  are  delusional,  to  be  found  only  in  ‘mentally’  ill, 
with  no  survival  value.  This  explains  why  we  have  to  use  the  terms  of 
preference  and  order.  Without  these  terms  I  would  not  have  been  able 
to  carry  through  this  analysis  at  all.  This  reversal  of  order  in  s.r  implies 
different  distribution,  diffusion,  intensity  of  nerve  currents  in  the  sub- 
microscopic  field,  and  so  involves  important,  different  semantic  com¬ 
ponents  of  non-survival  value.  It  is  most  desirable  to  learn  to  control 
the  activities  on  the  sub-microscopic  level  by  means  of  training  on  the 
macroscopic  level,  if  means  to  do  this  can  be  devised. 

The  writer  is  not  at  all  convinced  that,  acting  as  we  do  under  the 
spell  of  intensional  and  ignorant  ‘philosophers’,  the  existing  systems  and 
educational  methods  are  not  largely  following  the  reversal  of  the  sur- 

ON  OKI )KK 

vival  order  of  our  nervous  processes.  It  seems  unnecessary  to  point  out 
that  a  structural  and  semantic  enquiry  on  this  particular  question  might 
be  important  and  beneficial.  It  seems,  without  much  doubt,  that  human 
institutions  and  activities  should  be  in  accord  with  ‘human  nature  ,  if  we 
are  to  expect  them  to  survive  without  crushing  us,  and  a  scientific 
enquiry  in  this  ‘human  nature'  would  be  not  only  desirable  but  exceed¬ 
ingly  important. 

The  reader,  with  the  help  of  another  person,  should  perform  a  very 
simple  experiment.  Let  the  assistant  select  secretly  a  dozen  newspaper 
headlines  of  letters  of  equal  size.  Let  the  reader  then  sit  in  a  chair  with¬ 
out  altering  his  distance  from  the  assistant  and  let  the  assistant  show 
him  one  of  these  headlines.  If  he  is  able  to  read  the  headline,  it  should 
be  rejected,  and  a  new  one  selected  by  the  assistant  and  put  a  foot  or 
more  farther  away.  If  this  one  is  read  correctly,  it  should  be  rejected, 
and  a  third  one  placed  still  farther  away.  By  such  trials  we  can  finally 
find  a  distance  which  is  slightly  greater  than  the  maximum  range  of  clear 
visibility  for  the  reader,  so  that,  although  the  headline  is  only  slightly 
beyond  the  distance  at  which  one  could  read  it,  yet  it  would  be  illegible. 
Let  the  reader  then  try  as  hard  as  possible  to  read  headlines  which  are 
just  beyond  his  visual  range.  When  he  is  convinced  that  he  cannot  read 
the  headline,  let  the  assistant  tell  him  the  content  of  it.  Then  the  sitter 
can  usually  see  with  his  eyes  the  letters,  when  he  knows  whatsis  sup¬ 
posed  to  be  there.  The  question  arises,  what  part  in  the  ‘seeing  is  due 
to  ‘senses',  and  what  to  ‘mind’?  The  answer  is,  that,  structurally,  the 
‘seeing*  is  the  result  of  a  cyclic  interdependent  process,  which  can  be  split 
only  verbally .  The  independent  elements  are  fictitious  and,  structurally, 
have  little  or  nothing  to  do  with  actual  facts.  The  human  nervous  sys¬ 
tem  represents,  structurally,  a  mutually  interdependent  cyclic  chain, 
where  each  partial  function  is  in  the  functional  chain,  together  with 
enforcing  and  ‘inhibiting',  and  other  mechanisms. 

Up  to  this  stage,  we  have  used  the  term  ‘cyclic  order ,  but,  in  real¬ 
ity,  the  order  is  recurrent ,  though  of  a  character  better  described  by  the 
‘spiral  theory*,  as  explained  in  my  Manhood  of  Humanity  on  p.  233.  In 
the  ‘spiral  theory',  we  find  the  foundation  for  this  peculiar  stratification 
in  levels  and  orders,  which  is  necessitated  by  the  structure  and  function 
of  the  human  nervous  system.  It  should  be  noticed  that  the  equations 
of  the  circle  and  spiral  are  non-linear,  non-plus  equations. 

The  above  relation  underlies  a  fundamental  mechanism,  known  in 
psychiatry  as  ‘sublimation',  in  which,  and  by  which,  quite  primitive  im¬ 
pulses,  without  losing  their  intensity  and  fundamental  character,  quite 
often  are  transformed  from  very  primitive  levels,  which  frequently 

182  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

represent  vicious  and  anti-social  effects,  into  desirable  characteristics, 
socially  useful.  Thus,  a  sadistic  impulse  may  be  sublimated  into  the 
socially  useful  vocation  of  the  butcher,  or,  still  further,  into  the  skill  and 
devotion  to  the  service  of  their  fellowmen,  shown  by  many  surgeons. 
We  see  that  this  mechanism  is  of  tremendous  importance,  and  respon¬ 
sible  for  what  we  call  ‘culture’  and  many  other  values.  Our  educational 
methods  should  understand  this  mechanism  and  apply  this  knowledge 
in  the  semantic  training  of  youth.  It  is  important  to  realize  that  this 
mechanism  appears  as  the  only  semantic  mechanism  of  correction  which 
is  in  accord  with  the  structure  of  the  human  nervous  system,  and  so  it 
seems  workable.  Various  metaphysical  preachings  usually  start  by  dis¬ 
organizing  the  proper  survival  working  of  the  human  nervous  system, 
and  then  we  wonder  that  they  fail,  and  that  we  cannot  change  ‘human 
nature’.  To  deal  with  ‘human  nature’,  which  is  not  something  static  and 
absolute,  we  need  to  approach  it  with  more  structural  understanding  and 
less  prejudice.  Then,  and  then  only,  can  we  eventually  look  for  better 
semantic  results. 

The  writer  does  not  want  the  reader  to  conclude  that,  because  in 
mathematics  we  have  followed  the  survival  order  through  extension,  the 
mathematicians  must,  by  necessity,  be  the  sanest  of  the  sane.  Quite  often 
this  is  not  true,  since  many  complexities  exist  which  will  be  taken  under 
analysis  later. 

Section  E.  Concluding  remarks  on  order . 

One  thing  remains  fundamental ;  namely,  that  the  problems  of  order 
and  extension  are  of  paramount  structural  importance  for  sanity  and  our 
lives.  They  should  be  worked  out  and  applied  to  the  semantic  training 
of  the  young  in  elementary  education , .  This  would  certainly  produce 
a  new  generation  saner  than  we  are,  and  one  which  would,  perhaps,  lead 
lives  less  troubled  than  our  own,  and  so,  perhaps,  of  better  survival 
value. 

To  appreciate  fully  the  immensity  of  the  task  of  a  more  detailed 
analysis  of  the  problems  of  ‘extension’  and  ‘intension’,  the  reader  is 
advised  to  read  the  Survey  of  Symbolic  Logic ,  by  Professor  C.  I.  Lewis, 
University  of  California  Press,  1918,  in  which  Chapter  V  is  devoted 
to  an  important  attempt  at  a  formulation  of  strict  implication  of  both 
extensional  and  intensional  character,  which  is  the  only  organism- 
as-a-whole,  non-el  possibility.  Lewis’s  theory  of  ‘strict  implication’ 
introduces  the  notions  of  impossible  propositions  and  so  throws  consid¬ 
erable  light  on  the  problem  of  non-sense,  a  light  which  is  very  seriously 
needed. 

ON  ORDER 

In  concluding,  it  must  be  mentioned  that  a  theory  of  sanity,  because 
of  the  survival  value  of  order,  cannot  start  with  the  older,  undifferen¬ 
tiated  similarities,  which  are  a  product  of  higher  abstractions,  and  thus 
of  later  origin,  but  must  start  with  differences  as  fundamental,  and  so 
preserve  the  structure  and  order  of  the  survival  trend  as  applied  in  this 
work. 

Animals  do  not  possess  such  a  highly  differentiated  nervous  sys¬ 
tem  as  human  beings.  The  difference  between  their  higher  and  lower 
abstractions  is  thus  not  so  fundamental,  as  we  shall  see  later  on.  With 
them  the  question  of  order  is  less  important,  as  they  cannot  alter  it. 
Animals  have  the  benefit  of  better  co-ordination,  since  in  them  the  above- 
described  structural  difficulties  do  not  arise.  They  have  normally  no 
'insane*.  But,  also,  for  the  same  reason,  animals  are  not  able  to  start 
every  generation  where  the  older  left  off.  In  other  words,  animals  are 
not  time-binders. 

The  structural  complexity  and  differentiation  of  the  nervous  sys¬ 
tem  in  man  is  responsible,  as  is  well  known,  not  only  for  all  our  achieve¬ 
ments  and  control  over  the  world  around  us,  but  also  for  practically  all 
our  human,  mostly  semantic  difficulties,  many  ‘mental*  ills  included.  The 
analysis  in  terms  of  order  on  the  macroscopic  level  (semantic  manifesta¬ 
tions)  reveals  a  profound  connection  with  sub-microscopic  processes  of 
distribution . ,  of  nervous  energy.  When  the  mechanism  which  controls 
these  processes  is  properly  understood,  then  they  can  be  controlled  and 
educated  by  special  semantic  training.  In  other  words,  theoretical,  doc¬ 
trinal,  higher  abstractions  may  have  a  stabilizing  and  regulating  physio¬ 
logical  effect  on  the  function  of  our  nervous  system. 

The  reader  may  be  interested  to  know  that  ‘order*  is  very  important 
in  animal  life.  An  analysis  of  nest-building  and  the  rearing  of  young 
among  birds  shows  that  each  step  of  the  cycle  is  necessary  before  the 
next  step  is  taken.  If  the  cycle  is  broken,  they  usually  cannot  adjust 
themselves  to  the  new  state  of  affairs,  but  must  start  from  the  begin¬ 
ning.6  This  is  a  situation  similar  to  our  own  when  we  cannot  recall  a 
line  in  a  poem,  but  have  to  start  from  the  beginning  of  the  piece  in  order 
to  recapture  it.  Pavlov  was  able,  by  the  change  of  four-dimensional 
order  of  stimuli,  to  induce  profound  nervous  disturbances  in  the  nervous 
systems  of  his  dogs , . 

It  appears,  also,  that  in  mild  cases  of  aphasia,  which  is  a  neurologi¬ 
cal  disturbance  of  linguistic  processes,  with  word-blindness,  word-deaf¬ 
ness  . ,  the  notion  of  ‘order*  and  ‘relations*  is  often  the  first  to  be  disturbed. 
In  some  cases,  lower  order  abstractions  are  carried  out  successfully,  but 
calculation,  algebra,  and  other  higher  order  abstractions,  which  require 

184  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

ordered  chains,  become  impossible.  The  aphasic  seems  to  have  a  general 
incapacity  for  grasping  relations,  realizing  ordered  series ,  or  grasping 
their  succession.7 

We  see  that  the  problems  of  order  are  somehow  uniquely  important ; 
and  so  the  investigation  of  the  psycho-logics  of  mathematics,  which  is 
based  on  order,  might  give  us  means  of  at  least  partial  control  of  dif¬ 
ferent  undesirable  human  semantic  afflictions. 

But,  after  all,  we  should  not  be  surprised  that  it  is  so.  The  struc¬ 
ture  of  nervous  systems  consists  of  ordered  chains  produced  by  the  im¬ 
pact  of  external  and  internal  stimuli  in  a  four-dimensional  space- time 
manifold,  which  have  a  spatial  and  also  a  temporal  order.  The  introduc¬ 
tion  of  the  finite  velocity  of  nerve  currents,  which,  although  known,  was, 
as  a  rule,  disregarded  by  all  of  us,  introduces  automatically  our  ordering 
in  ‘space'  and  ‘time'  and,  therefore,  in  space-time.  That  is  why  the  old 
anatomical  three-dimensional  analogies  are  vicious  and  false  to  facts 
when  generalized.  For  better  or  worse,  we  happen  to  live  in  a  four¬ 
dimensional  world,  where  ‘space'  and  ‘time’  cannot  be  divided.  Whoever 
does  this  splitting  must  introduce  fictitious,  non-survival  entities  and 
influences  into  his  system,  which  is  moulded  by  this  actual  world  and 
unable  to  adjust  itself  to  fictions. 

It  seems  obvious  that  all  these  problems  of  ‘adjustment*  and  ‘non- 
adjustment*,  ‘fictitious' or ‘actual'  worlds . ,  are  strictly  connected  with  our 
s.r  toward  these  problems,  and  so  ultimately  with  some  structural  knowl¬ 
edge  about  them.  But  attitudes  involve  lower  order  abstractions,  ‘emo¬ 
tions',  affective  components,  and  other  potent  semantic  factors  which 
we  have  usually  disregarded  when  dealing  with  science  and  with  scien¬ 
tific  problems  and  method.  For  adjustment,  and,  therefore,  for  sanity, 
we  must  take  into  account  the  neglected  aspects  of  science,  of  mathe¬ 
matics,  and  of  scientific  method ;  namely,  their  semantic  aspects.  In  this 
way  we  shall  abandon  that  other  prevalent  structural  fiction  referred  to 
at  the  beginning  of  the  present  chapter ;  namely,  that  science  and  mathe¬ 
matics  have  an  isolated  existence. 

The  above  considerations  of  order  lead  to  a  formulation  of  a  funda¬ 
mental  principle  (a  principle  underlying  the  whole  of  the  non-aristotelian 
system)  ;  namely,  that  organisms  which  represent  processes  must  develop 
in  a  certain  natural  survival  four-dimensional  order,  and  that  the  reversal 
of  that  order  must  lead  to  pathological  (non-survival)  developments. 
Observations  disclose  that,  in  all  human  difficulties,  ‘mental*  ills  included, 
a  reversal  of  the  natural  order  can  be  found  as  a  matter  of  fact,  once 
we  decide  to  consider  order  as  fundamental.  Any  identification  of  inher¬ 
ently  different  levels,  or  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions,  leads  auto- 

ON  ORDER 

niatically  to  the  reversal  of  natural  order.  As  a  method  of  preventive 
education  and  psychotherapy,  whenever  we  succeed  in  reversing  the 
reversed  order  or  restoring  the  natural  survival  order,  serious  beneficial 
results  are  to  be  expected.  These  theoretical  conclusions  have  been  fully 
justified  by  experience  and  the  work  of  Doctor  Philip  S.  Graven  in 
psychotherapy.  It  should  be  noticed  that  different  primitive  ‘magic  of 
words’,  or  modem  ‘hypostatizations’,  ‘reifications’,  ‘misplaced  concrete¬ 
ness*,  ‘objectifications*. ,  and  all  semantic  disturbances  represent  nothing 
else  but  a  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions,  or  identifications  in  value 
of  essentially  different  orders  of  abstractions. 

The  above  considerations  are  entirely  general,  but,  because  of  their 
novelty,  they  have  not,  as  yet,  been  applied  in  the  non-aristotelian  simple 
and  workable  form  to  psychiatry  or  education.  In  a  very  instructive 
paper  on  The  Language  of  Schizophrenia*  Doctor  William  A.  White 
applies  some  of  these  notions.  Because  of  the  method  of  approach,  I 
will  quote  from  this  paper.  It  should  be  understood  that  this  paper 
deals,  also,  with  other  issues,  and  the  quotations  do  not  do  justice  to  the 
author,  because  I  quote  only  those  passages  which  are  of  particular  inter¬ 
est  here,  omitting  the  literature  given  by  Doctor  White.  The  italics  and 
one  footnote  are  mine. 

*It  requires  but  a  moment's  serious  consideration  to  realize  that  the  subject 
of  schizophrenic  language  must  be  immense  if  for  no  other  reason  than,  that  it 
involves  an  understanding  of  the  whole  subject  of  language  of  which  it  is  but  a 
part.  The  extent  and  depth  of  the  subject  of  language  may  be  further  appreciated 
from  the  fact  that  the  single  feature  of  its  neuronic  background  as  it  is  brought 
to  attention  in  aphasia  constitutes  one  of  the  most  complex  problems  in  the  whole 
field  of  neurology  and  one  with  respect  to  which  we  are  still  hopelessly  ignorant, 
especially  when  the  enormous  amount  of  work  that  has  been  done  in  this  field  is 
considered.  .  .  , 

‘There  have  been  a  few  other  recent  contributions  to  the  subject  of  schizo¬ 
phrenic  thought  and  speech  which,  as  they  run  more  in  line  with  my  own  thinking 
on  the  subject,  I  will  refer  to  more  fully.  These  studies  equate  the  processes  of 
thinking  of  schizophrenic  persons  with  those  of  primitive  peoples  and  of  children . 

*.  .  .  In  the  archaic  thinking  of  a  prelogical  kind,  found  among  primitive  sav¬ 
age  races,  the  vividness  of  the  images  is  greater  than  among  more  highly  developed 
races,  and  the  effect  produced  in  the  observer  is  projected  and  believed  to  be  an 
inherent  attitude  of  the  object,  which  thus  acquires  a  “demonic”  character.  All 
things  which  arouse  a  similar  emotion  are  thought  of  as  being  actually  the  same. 
In  dementia  praecox  there  is  a  similar  loss  of  objectivity;  hallucinations  and  reality 
are  imperfectly  distinguished,  and  every  happening  has  a  meaning  and  effect  on  the 
observer ;  the  idea  of  an  action  produces  the  action  directly,  instead  of  offering  a 
possibility  of  action,  and  this  is  interpreted  as  a  compulsion  from  without.  Para¬ 
logical  thinking  is  a  stage  beyond  this;  identification  of  objects  is  based  on  simi¬ 
larities,  differences  being  neglected.  .  .  .  This  form  of  thought  is  common  in  dementia 
praecox. 

.  .  While  for  the  normal  person  the  chief  criterion  of  the  world  of  real  ob¬ 
jects  is  their  independence  of  him,  whereas  imaginary  things  depend  for  their 

186  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

existence  on  him,  the  general  characteristic  of  the  schizophrenic  patient’s  experience 
is  that  his  mental  and  imaginary  experiences  have  a  substantial  and  concrete  nature 
when  the  normal  person  would  see  only  symbols  and  analogies.  His  thoughts  have 
magic  power  and  can  produce  real  results ;  they  have  for  him  a  substance  and  he 
can  manipulate  them  physically.  ... 

Ma>ny. other  childish  manifestations  resemble  those  of  schizophrenic  persons: 
children  s  jokes,  tricks,  and  plays  in  words  have  a  similar  autistic  character,  with 
no  apparent  meaning  in  relation  to  actualities,  and  this  changes  at  puberty.  Chil¬ 
dren,  like  the  patients,  love  to  make  up  a  sort  of  neoplastic  language  of  their  own, 
having  meanings  known  only  to  themselves  or  their  immediate  circle.  Persevera¬ 
tion  and  stereotypy  in  speech  and  actions  are  often  observed  in  children.  Their 
musical  performances  show  the  same  mechanical  rendering,  and  the  same  prefer¬ 
ence  for  simple  melodies  and  rhythms  as  are  found  in  schizophrenic  patients.  .  .  . 

'Just  in  the  same  way  we  must  be  careful  not  to  equate  the  regressive  psychotic 
and  the  primitive  too  literally .  That  there  are  close  analogies  in  their  respective 
ways  of  thinking  there  is  no  doubt  and  that  the  recognition  of  these  analogies  has 
been  of  the  utmost  importance  in  enabling  us  to  understand  schizophrenic  thinking 
must  be  acknowledged  but  perhaps,  to  be  on  the  safe  side,  the  matter  should  rest 
there  for  the  present  at  least. 

'Another  point  should  be  made  at  this  time,  after  what  has  been  said  of  the 
loss  of  the  boundaries  of  the  ego,  its  indefiniteness,  etc.  These  expressions  are  apt 
to  be  equated,  if  we  do  not  think  carefully,  with  such  concepts  as  disintegration 
and  dementia.  We  must  not  lose  sight  of  the  magic  of  words  and  not  be  led  astray 
by  the  old  meanings  when  we  are  striving  for  new  ones  but  are  forced  to  use  the 
words  in  current  use.  .  .  .  Now  regression  to  a  childish  or  primitive  level  of  this 
sort,  which  is  what  occurs  in  those  conditions  in  which  the  ego  is  said  to  lose  its 
clearness  of  definition,  does  not  imply  disintegration  in  the  sense  of  disorder  but 
regression  to  a  different  kind  of  order  or,  as  my  friend  Korzybski  would  say,  to  a 
lower  order  of  abstraction. 

‘This  is  important  for  a  principle  is  embodied  in  the  nature  of  this  change.  .  .  . 

'This  principle ,  namely,  that  the  schizophrenic  thought  processes  and  language 
are  of  a  lower  order  of  abstraction ,  accounts,  in  part  at  least,  for  another  phe¬ 
nomenon.  If  by  a  process  of  regression  the  mechanisms  of  thinking  tend  to  ever 
more  primitive  levels  then  we  should  expect  them  ultimately  to  arrive  at  a  con¬ 
crete  perceptional  level,  and  when  this  occurs  hallucinations,  which  have  long  been 
regarded  as  evidence  of  the  schizophrenic  splitting,  come  into  the  picture.  While 
I  believe  that  there  must  be  other  factors  to  account  for  the  hallucinations  they  are 
at  least  to  be  expected  as  the  natural  outcome  of  regression — as  are  the  forms  of 
thought  already  referred  to. . . . 

‘It  comes  about,  therefore,  that  we  cannot  understand  the  language  of  the 
schizophrenic  patient  without  the  aid  of  these  principles,  because  the  language  of 
a  lower  level  of  psychologic  development,  or  a  lower  order  of  abstraction,  must 
remain  unintelligible  to  those  who  think  in  the  terms  of  higher  levels.  The  whole 
problem  of  the  understanding  of  the  psychoses,  from  this  point  of  view,  might  be 
well  considered  as  the  problem  of  the  translation  of  the  language  of  the  psychoses. 

'Summary  and  Conclusions 

'1.  A  complete  understanding  of  the  language  of  schizophrenia  would  imply 
an  understanding  of  language  in  general  of  which  schizophrenic  language  is  only 
a  part.  This  would  further  imply  an  understanding  of  thought  in  general  of  which 
language  is  largely  an  expression.  Because  of  its  extent  this  program  is  quite 
impossible,  but  certain  principles  need  to  be  clearly  in  mind  in  order  to  avoid 
taking  over,  in  any  attempt  to  understand  the  language  of  schizophrenia,  certain 
misconceptions  in  both  of  these  territories  which  are  still  rife,  not  having  been 
as  yet  fully  replaced  by  the  newer  ways  of  thinking  about  the  matters  involved.  .  .  . 

ON  ORDER 

‘2.  There  is  one  psychiatric  assumption  I  have  made  and  which  is  fundamental 
to  my  approach  to  the  problem  of  the  language  of  schizophrenia.  It  is  that  schizo¬ 
phrenia  is  a  regression  psychosis.  This  is  of  the  greatest  importance  for,  if  it  is 
true,  we  should  expect  to  find  in  the  thinking  and  ih  the  language  of  schizophrenic 
patients  characteristics  of  earlier  stages  of  development,  earlier  genetic  levels. 

‘3.  The  development  or  evolution  of  thought  and  speech,  the  assumption  of 
genetic  levels,  implies  that  there  must  be  a  taw  in  accordance  with  which  this  devel¬ 
opment  proceeds .  This  law  is  that  thought  and  language  in  their  development 
change  from  feeling,  concreteness  and  perception  in  the  direction  of  reasoning, 
differentiation  and  abstraction. 

‘4.  The  law  of  schizophrenic  thought  and  language  must  be  the  reverse  of  the 
law  for  their  development,  on  the  assumption  that  schizophrenia  is  a  regression 
psychosis. 

‘5.  This  reversal  of  the  taw  of  development  implies  results  that  are  very  dif¬ 
ferent  from  those  implied  in  the  old  terms  “disintegration”  and  “dementia” 

‘6.  This  reversal  can  be  briefly  and  simply  indicated.  The  language  of  schizo¬ 
phrenia  is  of  a  lower  order  of  abstraction  than  normal  adult  language. 

*7.  The  thinking  and  the  speech  of  schizophrenia  while  of  a  lower  order  of 
abstraction  nevertheless  make  use  of  words  which  we  are  accustomed  to  use  to 
