express  a  higher  order.  This  discrepancy  is  one  reason  why  such  language  is  so 
hard  for  us  to  understand.  Another  reason  for  our  difficulty  in  understanding  the 
schizophrenic  patient  is  that  while  some  of  his  symbols  are  of  a  lower  order  of 
abstraction  by  no  means  all  of  them  are  so  that  there  is  a  strange  mixture  which 
further  confuses  our  understanding.  Still  another  difficulty  is  due  to  the  magic 
of  words.*  We  are  still  far  from  free  of  this  influence  and  are  therefore  forced 
to  think  that  when  there  is  a  word  there  must  be  a  thing  corresponding  to  it  and 
also  forced  to  think  of  the  wording  as  necessarily  meaning  what  it  usually  has 
meant  in  our  experience. 

‘8.  The  reversal  of  the  law  of  development  in  schizophrenia  also  accounts,  in 
P^t  at  least,  for  hallucinations  which  have  long  been  regarded  as  signs  of  the 
schizophrenic  splitting.  Regression  must  lead  ultimately  to  concrete,  perceptional 
configurations  and  all  that  that  implies. 

For  the  t  understanding  of  the  language  of  schizophrenia,  therefore,  the 
whole  dynamic  situation  needs  to  be  comprehended.  The  main  obstacle  to  this  un¬ 
derstanding  has  been,  in  the  past,  the  magic  of  words.*  . .  .* 

Identification,  or  the  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions,  in  an 
aristotelian  or  infantile  system,  plays  a  much  more  pernicious  role  than 
the  present  official  psychiatry  recognizes.  Any  identification,  at  any  level, 
or  of  any  orders,  represents  a  non-survival  s.r  which  leads  invariably  to 
the  reversal  of  the  natural  survival  order,  and  becomes  the  foundation 
for  general  improper  evaluation,  and,  therefore,  general  lack  of  adjust¬ 
ment,  no  matter  whether  the  maladjustment  is  subtle  as  in  daily  life,  or 
whether  it  is  aggravated  as  in  cases  of  schizophrenia.  A  non-aristotelian 
system,  by  a  complete  elimination  of  ‘identity’  and  identification,  supplies 
simple  yet  effective  means  for  the  elimination  by  preventive  education 
of  this  general  source  of  maladjustment.  Book  II  is  entirely  devoted 
to  this  subject. 

.  Magic  of  words’  represents  only  a  minor  yet  very  complex  manifestation  of 
anstotehan  s.r  of  identification  and,  naturally,  exhibits,  also,  the  reversed  natural 
order  m  evaluation. — A.  K.J 

CHAPTER  XIII 

ON  RELATIONS 

To  be  is  to  be  related.  (266)  cassius  j.  keyser 

Science,  in  other  words,  is  a  system  of  relations.  <4i7)  h.  poincar£ 

Asymmetrical  relations  are  involved  in  all  series — in  space  and  time, 
greater  and  less,  whole  and  part,  and  many  others  of  the  most  important 
characteristics  of  the  actual  world.  All  these  aspects,  therefore,  the  logic 
which  reduces  everything  to  subjects  and  predicates  is  compelled  to  con¬ 
demn  as  error  and  mere  appearance.  (453)  bertrand  russell 

My  own  investigations  in  this  field,  extending  over  some  fifteen  years, 
together  with  the  facts  already  at  hand,  as  I  see  them,  have  forced  me  to 
the  conclusion  that  the  organic  individual  is  fundamentally  ...  a  system 
of  relations  between  a  physical  substratum  or  structure  and  chemical  re¬ 
actions.  (90)  CHARLES  M.  CHILD 

The  thalamus,  which  in  the  lower  vertebrates  deprived  of  the  cortex 
ensures  the  general  reactions  of  the  organism  and  the  elementary  mental 
functions,  possesses  an  affective  excitability  in  relation  with  the  profound 
biological  tendencies  of  the  organism;  among  the  higher  mammals,  indeed, 
it  seems  to  preserve  this  r61e  of  affective  regulation,  whose  importance  in 
the  behaviour  of  the  organism  and  mental  life  is  so  often  misunderstood. 

(411)  ....  HENRI  PlfeRON 

.  .  .  organic  impressions  ('interoceptive*  sensibility)  appear  in  all  cases 
to  arrive  at  the  cortex  only  when  translated  by  the  thalamus,  with  its 
own  affective  elaboration.  (4ii)  henri  pi£ron 

Nevertheless,  the  consuming  hunger  of  the  uncritical  mind  for  what  it 
imagines  to  be  certainty  or  finality  impels  it  to  feast  upon  shadows  in  the 
prevailing  famine  of  substance.  (22)  E.  t.  bell 

In  the  foregoing  chapters  I  made  use  of  an  expression,  The  organ- 
ism-as-a-whole’,  which  is  employed  continually  in  biology,  psychiatry, 
and  other  branches  of  science.  This  expression  is  a  restricted  form  of 
the  general  structural  principle  of  non-elementalism.  This  expression 
implies  that  an  organism  is  not  a  mere  algebraic  sum  of  its  parts,  but  is 
more  than  that,  and  must  be  treated  as  an  integrated  whole.  It  was  men¬ 
tioned  that  the  non-additivity  and  the  ‘more’  than  a  mere  ‘sum*  are 
complex  problems  which  call  for  a  new  method  of  analysis.  We  have 
already  seen  that  a  simple  analysis  of  the  expression,  ‘Smith  kicks 
Brown',  involves  a  full-fledged  structural  metaphysics,  or  set  of  assump¬ 
tions  and  terms  which  are  taken  on  faith,  since  they  cannot  be  defined, 
except  circularly.  In  the  present  chapter,  these  subjects  of  great  semantic 
importance  will  be  developed  further. 

One  of  the  fundamental  structural  defects  and  insufficiencies  of  the 
traditional  ^-system  was  that  it  had  no  place  for  ‘relations7,  since  it 

ON  RKLATIONS 

assumed  that  everything  could  be  expressed  in  a  subject-predicate  form. 
As  we  shall  see,  this  is  not  true.  Restriction  to  the  subject-predicate  form 
leaves  out  some  of  the  most  important  structural  means  we  have  for 
representing  this  world  and  ourselves  and  has  resulted  in  a  general  state 
of  un-sanity.  The  explicit  introduction  of  ‘relations'  is  rather  a  recent 
innovation.  A  few  words  may  be  said  about  them,  although  the  term 
‘relation'  is  one  of  the  terms  that  we  may  accept  as  undefined,  or  that  we 
may  define  in  terms  of  multi-dimensional  order. 

Some  relations,  when  they  hold  between  A  and  B,  hold  also  be¬ 
tween  B  and  A.  Such  relations  are  called  symmetrical.  For  instance,  the 
relation  ‘spouse'.  If  it  holds  between  A  and  B,  it  holds  also  between 
B  and  A.  If  A  is  the  spouse  of  B,  B  is  the  spouse  of  A.  Terms  like 
‘similarity'  and  ‘dissimilarity'  also  designate  relations  of  this  kind.  If 
A  is  similar  or  dissimilar  to  B,  so  is  B  similar  or  dissimilar  to  A.  In 
general,  a  symmetrical  relation  is  such  that,  if  it  holds  between  A  and  B, 
it  also  holds  between  B  and  A.  In  other  words,  the  order  in  which  we 
consider  the  relation  of  our  entities  is  immaterial. 

It  is  easy  to  see  that  not  all  relations  are  of  such  a  character.  For 
instance,  in  the  relation  ‘A  is  the  brother  of  B',  B  is  not  necessarily  a 
brother  of  A,  because  B  might  be  the  sister  of  A.  In  general,  relations 
which  hold  between  A  and  B,  but  not  necessarily  between  B  and  A,  are 
called  non-symmetrical .  In  these  relations  order  becomes  important.  It 
is  not  a  matter  of  indifference  in  what  order  we  consider  our  entities. 

If  a  relation  is  such  that,  if  it  holds  between  A  and  B,  it  never  holds 
between  B  and  A,  it  is  called  asymmetrical.  Let  us  take,  for  instance, 
the  relations  ‘father',  ‘mother',  ‘husband', .  We  readily  see  that  if  A  is 
a  father,  or  mother,  or  husband  of  B,  B  is  never  a  father,  or  mother,  or 
husband  of  A.  The  reversal  of  order  is  impossible  in  asymmetrical  rela¬ 
tions,  and  so  any  asymmetrical  relation  establishes  a  definite  order. 

Relations  such  as  before ,  after ,  greater,  more,  less ,  above ,  to  the 
right ,  to  the  left,  part,  and  whole,  and  a  great  many  others  of  the  most 
important  terms  we  have,  are  asymmetrical.  The  reader  may  easily 
verify  this  for  himself.  For  instance,  if  A  is  more  than  B,  B  is  never 
more  than  A, .  We  see  at  once  that  the  troublesome  little  words,  which 
are  necessary  to  express  order  as  ‘before'  and  ‘after' ;  terms  of  evalua¬ 
tion,  such  as  ‘more'  and  ‘less' ;  and  terms  on  which  elementalism  or 
non-elementalism  depends,  such  as  ‘part'  and  ‘whole',  are  in  the  list  of 
asymmetrical  relations. 

Relations  can  be  classified  in  another  way,  when  three  or  more 
terms  are  considered.  Some  relations,  called  transitive,  are  such  that, 
whenever  they  hold  between  A  and  B  and  also  between  B  and  C,  they 

190  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

hold  between  A  and  C.  For  example,  if  A  is  before,  or  after,  or  above, 
or  more . ,  than  B,  and  B  is  before,  or  after,  or  above,  or  more . ,  than  C, 
then  A  is  before,  or  after,  or  above,  or  more . ,  than  C. 

It  should  be  noted  that  all  relations  which  give  origin  to  series  are 
transitive.  But  so  are  many  others.  In  the  above  examples,  the  rela¬ 
tions  were  transitive  and  asymmetrical,  but  there  are  numerous  relations 
which  are  transitive  and  symmetrical.  Among  these  are  relations  of 
equality,  of  being  equally  numerous , . 

Relations  which  are  not  transitive  are  called  non-transitive.  For 
instance,  dissimilarity  is  not  transitive.  If  A  is  dissimilar  to  B,  and  B 
dissimilar  to  C,  it  does  not  follow  that  A  is  dissimilar  to  C. 

Relations  which,  whenever  they  hold  between  A  and  B,  never  hold 
between  A  and  C  are  called  intransitive .  ‘Father’,  ‘one  inch  longer’, 
‘one  year  later’. ,  are  intransitive  relations. 

Relations  are  classified  in  several  other  ways ;  but,  for  our  purpose, 
the  above  will  be  sufficient. 

It  is  necessary  now  to  compare  the  relational  forms  with  the  sub¬ 
ject-predicate  form  of  representation,  which  structurally  underlies  the 
traditional  ^-system  and  two-valued  ‘logic’.  The  structural  question 
arises  whether  all  relations  can  be  reduced  to  the  subject-predicate  forms 
of  language. 

Symmetrical  relations,  which  hold  between  B  and  A  whenever  they 
hold  between  A  and  B,  seem  plausibly  expressed  in  the  subject-predicate 
language.  A  symmetrical  and  transitive  relation,  such  as  that  of  ‘equal¬ 
ity’,  could  be  expressed  as  the  possession  of  a  common  ‘property’.  A 
non-transitive  relation,  such  as  that  of  ‘inequality’,  could  also  be  consid¬ 
ered  as  representing  ‘different  properties’.  But  when  we  analyse  asym¬ 
metrical  relations,  the  situation  becomes  obviously  different,  and  we  find 
it  a  structural  impossibility  to  give  an  adequate  representation  in  terms 
of  ‘properties’  and  subject-predicates. 

This  fact  has  very  serious  semantic  consequences,  for  we  have  al¬ 
ready  seen  that  some  of  the  most  important  relations  we  know  at  pres¬ 
ent  belong  to  the  asymmetrical  class.  For  example,  the  term  ‘greater’ 
obviously  differs  from  the  term  ‘unequal’,  and  ‘father’  from  the  term 
‘relative’.  If  two  things  are  said  to  be  unequal,  this  statement  conveys 
that  they  differ  in  the  magnitude  of  some  ‘property’  without  designating 
the  greater.  We  could  also  say  that  they  have  different  magnitudes,  be¬ 
cause  inequality  is  a  symmetrical  relation ;  but  if  we  were  to  say  that  a 
thing  is  unequal  to  another,  or  that  the  two  have  different  magnitudes, 
when  one  of  them  was  greater  than  the  other,  we  simply  should  not  give 
an  adequate  account  of  the  structural  facts  at  hand .  If  A  is  greater  than 

ON  RELATIONS 

B,  and  we  merely  state  that  they  are  unequal  or  of  different  magnitudes, 
we  imply  the  possibility  that  B  is  greater  than  A,  which  is  false  to  facts. 
To  give  an  adequate  account,  and  to  prevent  false  implications ,  there 
is  no  other  way  than  to  say  which  one  is  greater  than  the  other.  We 
see  that  it  is  impossible  to  give  an  A  adequate  account  when  asymmetri¬ 
cal  relations  are  present.  The  possession  of  the  ‘same’  ‘property’,  or  of 
different  ‘properties’,  are  both  symmetrical  relations  and  seem  covered 
by  the  subject-predicate  form.  But  it  is  impossible  to  account  adequately 
for  asymmetrical  relations  in  terms  of  ‘properties’.  In  other  words,  we 
see  that  a  language  and  ‘logic*  based  upon  subject-predicate  structure 
may  perhaps  express  symmetrical  relations,  but  fail  to  express  adequately 
asymmetrical  relations,  because  both  ‘sameness*  and  difference  of  predi¬ 
cates  are  symmetrical.1  Asymmetrical  relations  introduce  a  language  of 
new  structure,  involving  new  s.r.  Yet  asymmetrical  relations  include 
many  of  the  most  important  ones.  They  are  involved  in  all  order,  all 
series,  all  function,  in  ‘space’,  in  ‘time’,  in  ‘greater’  and  ‘less’,  ‘more’  and 
‘less’,  ‘whole’  and  ‘part’,  ‘infinity’,  ‘space-time’, .  If  we  are  restricted  to 
the  use  of  forms  of  representation  unfitted  for  the  expression  of  asym¬ 
metrical  relations,  ordinal,  serial,  functional,  and  structural  problems 
could  not  be  dealt  with  adequately.  We  should  also  have  many  insoluble 
semantic  puzzles  in  connection  with  ‘space’,  ‘time’,  ‘cause  and  effect’, 
and  many  other  relations  in  the  world  around  us,  and  ourselves. 

A  very  interesting  structural  and  semantic  fact  should  be  noticed, 
that  in  symmetrical  relations  order  is  immaterial,  in  non-symmetrical 
relations  it  is  important,  and  in  asymmetrical  relations  order  plays  an 
all-important  role  and  cannot  be  reversed.  Order  itself  is  expressed  in 
terms  of  asymmetrical  relations;  as,  for  instance,  ‘before’  or  ‘after’, 
which  apply  to  ‘space’,  to  ‘time’,  ‘space-time’,  ‘structure’. ,  and  also  to 
all  processes  and  activities,  the  activities  of  the  nervous  system  included. 
The  asymmetrical  relations  ‘greater’,  ‘father’. ,  imply  ordering,  while  the 
‘unequal*  (having  different  ‘properties’)  or  a  ‘relative’.,  do  npt  imply 
ordering.  If  we  consider  subject-predicate  forms  as  expressing  a  rela¬ 
tion  between  the  ‘observer’  and  the  ‘observed*,  excluding  humans,  this 
last  relation  is  also  asymmetrical.  Applying  correct  symbolism:  if  a 
leaf  appears  green  to  me,  I  certainly  do  not  ‘appear  green’  to  the  leaf ! 
The  last  remark  suggests  that  any  A  revision  of  the  ^-system  is  struc¬ 
turally  impossible.  To  attempt  a  revision,  we  must  begin  with  the  formu¬ 
lation  of  a  ^-system  of  different  structure. 

The  above  simple  considerations  have  very  far-reaching  conse¬ 
quences,  as  without  relations,  and  particularly  without  asymmetrical 
relations,  we  cannot  have  order,  and  without  order,  in  the  analysis  of 

192  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

processes,  we  are  bound  to  introduce  explicity  or  implicitly  some  objec¬ 
tively  meaningless  ‘infinite  velocities’  of  the  propagation  of  the  process. 
Thus,  the  ‘infinite  velocity’  of  light,  which  is  known  to  be  false  to  facts, 
is  at  the  very  foundation  of  the  iV-system.  The  equally  false  to  facts 
silent  assumption  of  the  ‘infinite  velocity’  of  nerve  currents  underlies 
A  animalistic  ‘psychology’  and  results  in  elementalism.  This  el  ‘psychol¬ 
ogy’,  until  this  day,  vitiates  all  human  concerns  and  even  all  science,  the 
newer  quantum  theories  not  excluded. 

General  non-elementalism  and,  in  particular,  its  restricted  aspect, 
the  ‘organism-as-a-whole’,  implies  the  relation  of  the  ‘parts’  to  the  ‘whole’, 
for  which  we  need  asymmetrical  relations.  In  the  statement  ‘ more  than 
an  algebraic  sum’,  ‘more’  is  also  an  asymmetrical  relation.  When  we 
analysed  the  statement,  ‘Smith  kicks  Brown’,  we  saw  that  the  prob¬ 
lems  of  ‘space’,  ‘time’,  ‘infinity’. ,  entered,  the  solution  of  which  requires 
serial  notions,  which  evade  analysis  without  asymmetrical  relations. 

The  solution  of  the  problems  of  ‘space’  and  ‘time’  are  fundamental 
for  a  theory  of  sanity,  as  they  are  potent  structural  factors  in  all  s.r. 
In  the  majority  of  ‘mentally’  ill,  we  find  a  disorientation  as  to  ‘space’ 
and  ‘time*.  Similar  milder  forms  of  disorientation  appear  in  all  forms 
of  semantic  disturbances,  as  they  are  disturbances  of  evaluation  and 
meanings  in  the  form  of  delusional  ‘absolute  space’  and  ‘absolute  time’. 
These  semantic  disturbances  cart  be  eliminated  only  by  considerations  of 
multi-dimensional  order,  which  are  impossible  without  asymmetrical  re¬ 
lations,  and  so  could  not  have  been  accomplished  in  an  ^-system. 

The  problems  of  multi-dimensional  order  and  asymmetrical  rela¬ 
tions  are  strictly  interdependent  and  are  the  foundation  of  structure  and 
so  of  human  ‘knowledge’ ;  and  they  underlie  the  problems  of  human  ad¬ 
justment  and  sanity.  Without  going  into  details,  I  shall  suggest  some 
relational  and  ordinal  aspects  as  found  in  the  structure  and  function  of 
the  human  nervous  system  and  their  bearing  on  semantic  reactions  and 
sanity.  I  shall  also  apply  these  considerations  to  the  analysis  of  a  his¬ 
torically  very  important  delusional  factor  which  has  influenced,  until 
now,  the  s.r  of  mankind  away  from  sanity.  I  am  dealing  only  with 
selected  topics,  important  for  my  purpose,  which,  to  the  reader,  may 
appear  one-sided  and  unduly  isolated.  In  fact,  all  issues  involved  are 
strictly  interconnected  in  a  circular  way,  and  no  verbal  analysis  of  objec¬ 
tive  levels  can  ever  be  ‘complete’  or  ‘exhaustive’,  and  this  should  be 
remembered.  On  the  A  silent  assumption  of  the  infinite  velocity  of 
nervous  impulses,  that  the  nervous  impulses  spread  ‘instantaneously’,  ‘in 
no  time’  (to  use  an  Alice-in- Wonderland  expression),  order  was  of  no 
importance.  But  when  we  take  into  account  the  Unite  and  known  velocity 

UN  RELATIONS 

rtcx 
Subcortical 
layers 

of  nervous  impulses,  and  the  serial,  chain  structure  of  the  nervous  sys¬ 
tem,  order  becomes  paramount.  In  such  a  serial  structure,  the  problems 
of  resistance,  ‘inhibitions’,  blockage,  activation . ,  become  intelligible,  so 
that  some  sane  orientation  is  possible  in  this  maze.  It  may  be  added  that 
the  intensity  and  the  transformation  of  nervous  impulses  must  somehow 
be  connected  with  the  paths  they  travel  and  are,  therefore,  problems  to 
be  spoken  about  in  terms  of  order. 

What  has  just  been  said  may  be  illustrated  by  a  rough  and  over¬ 
simplified  hypothetical  diagram.  Fig.  1  shows  how  the  normal  (survival 
in  man)  impulse  should  travel.  It  should 
pass  the  thalamus,  pass  the  sub-cortical  lay¬ 
ers,  reach  the  cortex,  and  return.  That  the 
impulse  is  altered  in  passing  this  complicated 
chain  is  indicated  in  the  diagram  by  the  arbi¬ 
trarily  diminishing  thickness  of  the  line  of 
the  impulse. 

Fig.  2  illustrates  an  hypothetical  abnor¬ 
mal  (non-survival  in  man)  impulse.  It 
emerges  from  the  lower  centres.  For  some 
reason  or  other,  the  main  impulse  is  blocked 
semantically,  or  otherwise,  and  does  not 
reach  the  cortex;  only  a  weak  impulse  does, 
in  such  a  case?  We  should  expect  regression  to  the  level  of  activities  of 
organisms  which  have  no  cortex,  or  a  cortex  very  little  developed.  But 
this  could  not  be  entirely  true,  as  organisms 
without  a  cortex  have  a  nervous  system  ade¬ 
quate  for  their  lives,  activities . ,  in  their  en¬ 
vironment,  with  survival  values.  But  a  higher 
organism  with  a  cortex,  no  matter  how  rudi¬ 
mentary,  has  the  other  parts  of  the  nervous 
structure  quite  different  in  function,  and 
without  the  cortex  they  are  inadequate  for 
survival,  as  experience  shows.  We  see  that 
the  order  in  which  the  impulses  pass,  or,  are 
deviated  from  their  survival  path,  is  para¬ 
mount.  A  great  many  different  reasons 
may  produce  such  deviation,  too  many  to 
list  conveniently.  A  great  many  of  them  are  known,  in  spite  of  the  fact 
that,  in  general,  we  know  very  little  about  nerve  mechanisms.  Suffice 
to  say,  that  we  know,  on  colloidal  grounds  and  from  experience,  that 
macroscopic  or  microscopic  lesions,  drugs,  and  false  doctrines  affecting 

Nervous 
Impulse 

Fig.  1 

What  should  be  expected 

rtex 
Subcortical 
layers 

rvout 

impulse 

Fig.  2 

194  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

the  sub-microscopic  levels,  may  often  produce  similar  end-results.  Here 
I  use  the  term  ‘false  doctrines'  in  the  non-el  sense,  and,  therefore,  take 
into  account  affective  and  evaluation-components,  which  are  usually  dis¬ 
regarded  when  we  speak  about  ‘false  doctrines'. 

Here  we  must  consider  a  problem  of  crucial,  general  human  sig¬ 
nificance.  It  seems  evident  that  evaluation  in  life,  and  particularly  in 
human  life,  represents  a  most  fundamental  psycho-logical  process  under¬ 
lying  motivation  and,  in  general,  s.r ,  which  shape  our  behaviour  and 
result  in  collective  structures  which  we  may  call  ‘stages  of  civilization’. 

We  may  distinguish  three  periods  of  human  development  as  char¬ 
acterized  by  their  standards  of  evaluation : 

1)  The  pre-human  and  primitive  period  of  literal,  general,  and 
unrestricted  identification.  The  semantics  of  this  period  could  be  for¬ 
mulated  roughly  as  ‘everything  is  everything  else',  which  might  be  called 
one- valued  semantics. 

2)  The  infantile,  or  A  period  of  partial  or  restricted  identification, 
allowing  symmetrical  relations,  to  the  exclusion  of  asymmetrical  rela¬ 
tions.  Its  semantics  involve,  among  others,  the  ‘law  of  identity' — ‘every¬ 
thing  is  identical  with  itself',  its  two-valued  character  being  expressed 
by  the  postulate  ‘A  is  B  or  not  B\ 

3)  The  adult,  or  A ,  or  scientific  period  based  on  the  complete 
elimination  of  identification,  by  means  of  asymmetrical  and  other  rela¬ 
tions,  which  establishes  structure  as  the  foundation  of  all  ‘knowledge'. 
Its  semantics  follow  the  oo-valued  semantics  of  probability  and  recognize 
‘equality',  ‘equivalence'. ,  but  no  ‘identity'. 

Before  analysing  the  above  three  periods  separately,  it  must  be 
stated  that  ‘identity',  defined  as  ‘absolute  sameness',  necessitates  ‘abso¬ 
lute  sameness'  in  ‘all’  aspects,  never  to  be  found  in  this  world,  nor  in 
our  heads.  Anything  with  which  we  deal  on  the  objective  levels  repre¬ 
sents  a  process,  different  all  the  ‘time',  no  matter  how  slow  or  fast  the 
process  might  be;  therefore,  a  principle  or  a  premise  that  ‘everything 
is  identical  with  itself'  is  invariably  false  to  facts.  From  a  structural 
point  of  view,  it  represents  a  foundation  for  a  linguistic  system  non¬ 
similar  in  structure  to  the  world  or  ourselves.  All  world  pictures,  specu¬ 
lations  and  s.r  based  on  such  premises  must  build  for  us  delusional 
worlds,  and  an  optimum  adjustment  to  an  actual  world,  so  fundamentally 
different  from  our  fancies,  must,  in  principle,  be  impossible. 

If  we  take  even  a  symbolic  expression  1  =  1,  ‘absolute  sameness'  in 
‘all’  aspects  is  equally  impossible,  although  we  may  use  in  this  connection 
terms  such  as  ‘equal',  ‘equivalent’,.  ‘Absolute  sameness  in  all  aspects' 
would  necessitate  an  identity  of  different  nervous  systems  which  produce 

ON  RELATIONS 

and  use  these  symbols,  an  identity  of  the  different  states  of  the  nervous 
system  of  the  person  who  wrote  the  above  two  symbols,  an  identity  of 
the  surfaces . ,  of  different  parts  of  the  paper,  in  the  distribution  of  ink, 
and  what  not.  To  demand  such  impossible  conditions  is,  of  course, 
absurd,  but  it  is  equally  absurd  and  very  harmful  for  sanity  and  civ¬ 
ilization  to  preserve  until  this  day  such  delusional  formulations  as  stan¬ 
dards  of  evaluation ,  and  then  spend  a  lifetime  of  suffering  and  toil  to 
evade  the  consequences.  This  may  be  comparable  to  the  spending  of 
many  years  in  teaching  and  training  our  children  that  one  and  one  never 
equal  two,  that  twice  two  never  equal  four . ,  and  then  they  would  have 
to  spend  a  lifetime  full  of  surprises  and  disappointments,  if  not  trage¬ 
dies,  to  learn,  when  they  are  about  to  die,  that  the  above  statements  are 
always  correct  in  mathematics  and  very  often  true  in  daily  life,  and 
finally  acquire  the  sadly  belated  wisdom  that  they  were  taught  false 
doctrines  and  trained  in  delusional  s.r  from  the  beginning. 

If  we  revised  these  false  doctrines,  we  would  not  twist  the  lives  of 
younger  generations  to  begin  with.  It  seems  that,  for  the  sake  of  sanity, 
the  term  ‘identity*,  symbolizing  such  a  fundamental  false  structural  doc¬ 
trine,  should  be  entirely  eliminated  from  the  vocabulary,  but  the  term 
‘identification’  should  be  retained  in  psychiatry  as  a  label  for  extremely 
wide-spread  delusional  states  which,  at  present,  in  a  mild  form,  affect 
the  majority  of  us. 

If  we  investigate  the  standards  of  evaluation  of  animals,  the  ex¬ 
periments  of  Pavlov  and  his  followers  show  that,  after  establishing  a 
‘conditional  reflex*  (which  means  a  physiological  relating  of  a  signal 
with  food,  for  instance),  the  physiological  effect  of  the  signal  on  the 
nervous  system  of  the  animal  is  to  produce  secretions  similar  in  quan¬ 
tity  and  quality  to  those  the  food  produces.  We  can  thus  say  that,  from 
a  physiological  point  of  view,  the  animal  organism  identifies  the  signal 
with  food.  That  represents  the  animal  standard  of  evaluation  at  that 
given  period.  But  even  the  animal  nervous  system  is  flexible  enough  to 
learn  by  experience  that  identification  has  no  survival  value,  for,  if,  after 
the  signal,  food  is  repeatedly  not  forthcoming,  he  identifies  again  the 
signal  with  the  absence  of  food.  In  more  complex  experiments,  when 
both  these  identifications  are  interplayed,  the  result  is  a  real  physiological 
dilemma,  culminating,  usually,  in  a  more  or  less  profound  nervous  dis¬ 
turbance,  corresponding  to  ‘mental’  ills  in  humans. 

Identification  represents  a  comparatively  unflexible,  rigid  form  of 
adaptation,  of  low  degree  conditionality,  so  to  say,  and,  by  neurological 
necessity,  represents  the  processes  of  animal  adaptation,  inadequate  for 
modern  man.  On  human  levels,  it  is  found  best  exemplified  in  primitive 

196  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

peoples  and  in  cases  of  ‘mentally’  ill.  In  less  severe  cases  of  semantic 
disturbances,  we  also  find  identification  of  different  degrees  of  intensity. 
The  milder  cases  are  usually  considered  as  ‘normal’,  which,  in  principle, 
is  very  harmful,  because  it  establishes  an  animalistic,  or  primitive,  stan¬ 
dard  of  evaluation  for  ‘normal’.  ‘Identity’,  as  we  have  seen,  is  invariably 
false  to  facts ;  and  so  identification  produces,  and  must  produce,  non¬ 
survival  s.r,  and,  therefore,  must  be  considered  pathological  for  mod¬ 
ern  man. 

That  identification  afflicts  the  majority  of  us  today  is  also  shown 
by  experiments  with  conditional  reflexes  and  the  psychogalvanic  experi¬ 
ments  which  show  clearly  that  the  majority  of  humans  identify  the  sym¬ 
bol  with  actualities,  and  secretions  very  often  follow ,  In  other  words, 
the  reactions  are  of  such  a  low  order  of  conditionality  as  we  find  in 
animals  and  in  primitive  men.  In  principle,  it  makes  no  difference 
whether  a  sound  (or  word),  or  other  signal  (symbol)  is  identified  with 
food  or  other  actualities  which  are  not  symbols,  and  the  secretions  are 
produced  by  the  adrenal  glands,  for  instance,  resulting  in  fear  or  anger, 
instead  of  by  the  salivary  or  sweat  glands.  In  all  such  cases,  in  experi¬ 
ments  with  humans,  the  evaluation  is  false  to  facts,  and  the  physiological 
secretion  is  uncalled  for  if  the  evaluation  would  be  appropriate  to  the 
situation.  In  very  few  instances,  the  human  experiments  with  condi¬ 
tional  and  psychogalvanic  reflexes  break  down,  in  the  sense  that  the 
signal-symbol  is  not  identified  with  first  order  actualities,  and  so  such 
an  organism  has  no  uncontrolled  glandular  secretions  for  signal-symbols 
alone .  In  a  ^-system  of  evaluation,  which  involves  on  semantic  levels 
the  consciousness  of  abstracting,  these  exceptional  persons  (1933),  with 
proper  evaluation  and  controlled  reactions,  prove  the  rule  for  modern 
man.  In  other  words,  modern  man,  when  he  stops  the  pre-human  and 
primitive  identification,  will  have  a  much-increased  and  conscious  con¬ 
trol  of  his  secretions,  colloidal  states  of  his  nervous  system . ,  and  so  of 
his  reactions  and  behaviour.  The  above  applies  to  all  j.r,  ‘logical’  pro¬ 
cesses  included. 

Identification  is  found  in  all  known  forms  of  ‘mental’  ills.  A  sym¬ 
bol,  in  any  form,  or  any  s.r  may  be  identified  in  value  with  some  fictitious 
‘reality’  at  a  given  date,  resulting  in  macro-physiological  (glandular,  for 
instance)  or  micro-physiological  (colloidal.,)  activities  or  disturbances 
which  result  in  particular  semantic  states  and  behaviour.  It  is  impos¬ 
sible  to  deny  that  ‘mentally’  ill  have  inappropriate  standards  of  evalua¬ 
tion,  and  that  identification  appears  always  as  an  important  factor  in 
pathological  evaluations.  Experiments  with  ‘mentally’  ill  show  clearly 
that  this  evaluation  can  be  altered  or  improved  by  different  chemical 

ON  RELATIONS 

agencies  which  affect  the  colloids  of  the  nervous  system,  by  environ¬ 
mental  changes  . ,  and  by  changing  the  standards  of  evaluation  which,  at 
present,  is  usually  called  ‘psychotherapy*.  The  analysis  of  the  mechan¬ 
ism  of  evaluation  leads,  naturally,  to  a  generalized  and  simplified  method, 
