which  may  have  not  only  a  therapeutic  but  also  an  important  new  pre¬ 
ventive  value. 

Literal  identification  is  found  in  all  primitive  peoples  and  accounts 
for  their  semantic  states,  reactions,  their  metaphysics,  low  development . , 
but  it  is  impossible,  for  lack  of  space,  to  go  into  details  here. 

The  A  standard  of  evaluation  departed  from  literal  identification  to 
some  extent.  We  still  preserve  in  our  school  books  as  the  most  funda¬ 
mental  law  of  thought —the  law  of  identity* — often  expressed  in  the 
form  ‘everything  is  identical  with  itself*,  which,  as  we  have  seen,  is 
invariably  false  to  facts.  We  do  not  realize  that,  in  a  human  world,  we 
are  dealing  at  most  only  with  ‘equality*,  ‘equivalence*. ,  at  a  given  place 
and  date,  or  by  definition,  but  never  with  ‘identity*,  or  ‘absolute  same¬ 
ness*,  disregarding  entirely  space-time  relations,  involving  ‘all*  the 
indefinitely  many  aspects  which,  through  human  ingenuity,  we  often 
manufacture  at  will.  In  an  actual  world  of  four-dimensional  processes 
and  the  indefinitely  many  ‘aspects*  manufactured  by  ourselves,  adjustment 
in  principle  is  impossible,  or,  at  best,  only  accidental,  if  we  retain  ‘iden¬ 
tity*.  The  A  evaluation  was  based  on  symmetrical  relations  of  ‘identity* 
and  also  partial  ‘identity*,  expressed  even  in  our  political,  economic . , 
doctrines  and  corresponding  behaviour,  the  analysis  of  which  would 
require  a  special  volume  to  be  written,  I  hope  soon,  by  some  one. 

Under  the  pre-human  and  primitive  standards  of  evaluation,  science 
was  not  possible.  Under  the  A  standards  the  beginnings  of  science  be¬ 
came  possible,  but  if  science  had  not  departed  from  those  standards,  we 
would  have  had  no  modern  science.  Lately,  when  the  persecution  of 
science  has  increasingly  relaxed  (not  in  all  countries  in  a  similar  de¬ 
gree)  and  scientists  were  allowed  to  develop  their  disciplines  with  much 
less  fear  of  persecution,  sometimes  even  encouraged  and  helped  by  public 
interest,  scientists  found  that  they  invariably  had  to  build  their  own 
vocabularies  of  a  distinctly,  although  unrealized,  A  character.  The  chasm 
between  human  affairs  and  science  became  wider  and  wider.  The  reason 
for  it  was  that,  in  life,  even  at  present,  we  preserve  A  standards  of 
evaluation,  and  science  mainly  depends  on  subtler  A  means  involving 
asymmetrical  relations  which  alone  can  give  us  structure .  I  will  return 
repeatedly,  later  on,  to  the  A  re-evaluation  of  the  A  standards  of  values. 

The  A  evaluation  is  based  on  asymmetrical  and  other  relations.  I 
shall  not  attempt  to  summarize  it  here  because  the  problems  are  very 

198  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

large  and  this  whole  volume  is  devoted  to  that  subject.  Here  I  shall 
mention,  once  more,  that  only  with  A  standards  of  evaluation  does  a 
scientific  treatment  of  man  and  his  affairs  become  possible.  A  ^-system 
depends  on  a  complete  elimination  of  identification  which  affects  bene¬ 
ficially  all  our  s.r,  as  experience  and  experiments  show. 

It  has  been  already  emphasized  that  in  the  human  child  the  nervous 
system  is  not  physically  finished  at  birth,  and  that  for  some  years  there¬ 
after  it  is  plastic.  Hence,  the  ‘environment’ — which  includes  languages, 
doctrines,  with  their  structure,  all  connected  with  evaluation-components 
conditions  the  future  functioning  of  the  system.  The  way  in  which  the 
nervous  system  works,  the  ‘sanity’,  ‘un-sanity’  and  ‘insanity’  of  the  in¬ 
dividual  depends  to  a  large  extent  on  how  this  plastic  and  sensitive 
apparatus  is  treated,  particularly  in  childhood.  Because  of  the  serial 
structure  of  the  nervous  system,  the  language  and  doctrines  supplied 
should  be  of  the  structure  necessary  for  the  adequate  representation  of 
serial  structures  and  functions.  With  the  old  A  means  this  could  not 
be  accomplished. 

At  this  point,  it  will  be  well  to  introduce  an  important  semantic 
subject,  to  which  we  shall  return  later;  namely,  the  connection  between 
the  primitive  subject-predicate  language  and  identification.  For  ex¬ 
ample,  the  statement,  ‘the  leaf  is  green’,  is  taken  to  imply  ‘greenness’, 
which,  by  its  verbal  structure,  has  the  character  of  a  ‘substantive’  and 
implies  some  sort  of  objective  independence.  It  is  not  considered  as  an 
asymmetrical  relation  between  the  observer  and  the  observed  and,  ac¬ 
cordingly,  tends  toward  an  additive  implication.  ‘Greenness’  is  thus 
objectified  and  added  to  the  leaf  in  describing  a  ‘green  leaf’.  The  objec¬ 
tified  greenness’  leads  to  an  anthropomorphic  mythology,  which,  in  turn, 
involves  and  develops  the  undifferentiated  projecting  mechanism  so  fun¬ 
damental  in  semantic  disturbances.  The  objectification  is  evaluated 
structurally  as  a  ‘real’  situation,  and  this  introduces  the  non-survival 

reversed  order  evaluation  in  which  the  use  of  the  ‘is’  of  identity,  result- 
ing,in  identification,  is  the  main  factor.  The  stronger  the  structural  ‘be¬ 
lief  in  the  truth  of  the  representation,  or,  in  other  words,  the  more 
we  identify  the  higher  order  abstractions  with  the  lower,  which,  in  fact, 
are  different,  the  more  dangerous  becomes  the  ‘emotional’  tension  in  the 
form  of  unjustified  evaluation ,  which,  ultimately,  must  involve  delusional 
factors,  no  matter  how  slight,  and  result  in  semantic  disturbances.  Ignor¬ 
ance,  involving  strong  faith  in  the  erroneous  structural  belief,  is  dan¬ 
gerously  akin  to  more  developed  symptoms  of  ‘mental’  illness  called 
illusions,  delusions,  and  hallucinations.  We  are  mostly  semantic  vic¬ 
tims  of  the  primitive  doctrines  which  underlie  the  A  structure  of  our 

ON  RKLATIONS 

language,  and  so  we  populate  the  world  around  us  with  semantic  phan¬ 
toms  which  add  to  our  fears  and  worries,  or  which  lead  to  abnormal 
cheerfulness,  well  known  among  some  'mentally'  ill. 

It  should  be  realized  that  in  the  A  system  of  evaluation  many  indi¬ 
viduals  profit  in  various  ways  by  what  amounts  to  distracting  the  atten¬ 
tion  of  mankind  from  actual  life  problems,  which  make  us  forget  or 
disregard  actualities.  They  often  supply  us  with  phantom  semantic  struc¬ 
tures,  while  they  devote  their  attention  to  the  control  of  actualities  not 
seldom  for  their  personal  benefit.  If  one  surveys  the  A  situation  impar¬ 
tially,  one  occasionally  feels  hopeless.  But,  no  matter  how  we  now  con¬ 
spire  one  against  another,  and  thus,  in  the  long  run,  against  ourselves, 
the  plain  realization  that  the  difficulty  is  found  in  the  standards  of 
evaluation,  establishes  the  necessary  preliminary  step  to  the  escape. 

It  is  a  well-known  fact  that,  in  a  large  proportion  of  'mental*  ills, 
we  find  a  semantic  flight  from  'reality*  ( m.o )  when  their  'reality*  be¬ 
comes  too  hard  to  endure.  It  is  not  difficult  to  see  that  different  myth¬ 
ologies,  cults . ,  often  supply  such  structural  semantic  ‘flights  from  reality* ; 
and  that  those  who  actually  help,  or  who  are  professionally  or  otherwise 
engaged  in  producing  and  promulgating  such  semantic  flights,  help  man¬ 
kind  to  be  un-sane,  to  deal  with  phantoms,  to  create  dream  states , .  There 
is  no  longer  any  excuse  in  the  old  animalistic  law  of  supply  and  demand 
— that,  because  there  is  a  demand  for  such  flights,  they  should  be  sup¬ 
plied.  That  argument  is  not  held  to  apply  to  those  who  peddle  drugs  or 
wood  alcohol.  The  flights  from  reality  always  have  the  earmarks  of 
'mental*  illness.  Very  often  such  actively  engaged  individuals  are  them¬ 
selves  ill  to  the  point  of  hallucinations;  they  often  'hear  voices',  'see 
visions*,  ‘speak  tongues*,.  Very  often  other  morbid  symptoms  occur 
which  are  similar  to  those  shown  by  the  'mentally'  ill  of  the  usual  hos¬ 
pital  types.  It  is  not  generally  realized  that,  although  the  patient  suffers 
intensely,  he  usually  shows  marked  resistance  to  any  attempt  to  relieve 
him  of  his  semantic  affliction.  Only  after  he  is  relieved  by  semantic 
re-education  does  the  patient  realize  how  very  unhappy  he  was. 

The  situation  is  very  serious.  There  is  a  powerful  well-organized 
system,  with  enormous  wealth  behind  it,  based  on  A  and  pre-aristotelian 
standards  of  evaluation  which  keeps  mankind  in  delusional  semantic 
states.  Its  members  do  their  best,  better  than  they  know,  to  keep  man¬ 
kind  uttrsane  in  flights  from  ‘reality*,  instead  of  helping  to  revise  the  A 
standards  of  evaluation  and  to  reorganize  the  horrible  ‘realities',  all  of 
our  own  making,  into  realities  less  painful.  The  comparatively  few  psy¬ 
chiatrists  are  naturally  not  a  match  for  such  vast  numbers  of  well- 

200  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

organized  men  and  women  who,  in  their  blissful  ignorance,  work  in  the 
opposite  direction ;  and  all  of  us  pay  the  price. 

The  activities  of  these  individuals  often  promulgate  something  simi¬ 
lar  to  the  well-known  ‘induced  insanity’.  Quite  often  paranoid  or  para¬ 
noiac  and,  more  rarely,  hypomanic  patients  can  influence  their  immediate 
companions  to  such  an  extent  that  they  join  in  believing  in  their  delu¬ 
sions  and  copy  their  s.r .  Susceptible  associates  begin  to  develop  similar 
delusions  and  hallucinations  and  to  pass  through  episodes  themselves, 
perfectly  oblivious  to  contradictions  with  external  m.o  reality.  There 
are  many  paranoiac-like  semantic  epidemics  of  this  kind  on  record.  It 
is  instructive  to  visit  some  ‘meetings’  and  watch  the  performer  and  the 
audience.  The  pathetic  side  of  it  is  that  these  performers,  themselves  not 
realizing  the  harmfulness  of  the  situation,  often  pretend,  or  genuinely 
believe,  that  they  are  helping  mankind  by  preaching  some  metaphysical 
‘morals’.  What  they  actually  produce  is  a  disorganization  of  the  survival¬ 
working  of  the  human  nervous  system,  particularly  if  they  train  the 
structurally  undeveloped  nervous  system  of  children  to  delusional  evalu¬ 
ations  and  s.r ,  and,  in  general,  make  sanity  and  higher  and  effective 
ethical  standards  very  difficult  or  impossible.  It  is  positively  known  that 
s.r  are  inextricably  connected  with  electrical  currents,  secretions  of  dif¬ 
ferent  glands . ,  which,  in  turn,  exert  a  powerful  influence  on  colloidal 
structure  and  behaviour,  and  so  condition  our  neurological  and  physio¬ 
logical  development.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  imposing  delusional 
s.r  on  the  undeveloped  child  must  result  in  at  least  colloidal  injury,  which 
later  on  facilitates  arrested  development  or  regression,  and,  in  general, 
leads  away  from  adjustment  and  sanity. 

Lack  of  space  and  the  essentially  constructive  aims  of  the  present 
system  do  not  allow  me  to  analyse  many  fundamental  interrelations  in 
the  development  of  man,  but  a  brief  list,  worthy  of  analysis,  may  be  sug¬ 
gested  : 

1 )  The  relation  between  the  pre-human  reactions  and  the  reactions 
of  the  primitive  man,  involving  always  some  copying  by  mutants  of  the 
responses  of  the  prevailing  simpler  organisms. 

2)  The  interrelation  between  the  reactions  of  the  primitive  man, 
his  animism,  anthropomorphism,  his  other  s.r  and  the  structure  of  his 
language  and  semantics. 

3)  The  relation  between  the  structure  of  primitive  languages  and 
the  structure  of  the  ‘philosophical  grammar’  formulated  by  Aristotle, 
generally  called  ‘logic’. 

4)  The  relation  between  this  grammar,  the  structure  of  language, 
and  the  further  development  of  our  structural  metaphysics  and  s.r. 

ON  RELATIONS 

5)  The  influence  the  last  conditions  exerted  on  the  structure  of 
our  institutions,  doctrines,  and  the  s.r  related  to  them. 

6)  The  relation  between  the  ‘copying  animals  in  our  nervous  pro¬ 
cesses’  and  semantic  blockages . ,  preventing  an  adult  civilization,  agree¬ 
ment,  sanity,  and  other  desirable  human  reactions. 

This  brief  list  suggests  an  enormous  field  for  further  research,  but, 
even  now,  the  formulation  of  a  ^-system  of  evaluations  makes  a  few 
points  clearer. 

An  infant,  be  it  primitive  or  modern,  begins  life  with  s.r  of  identity 
and  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions,  natural  to  his  age,  yet  false  in 
principle,  and  structurally  false  to  fact.  At  present,  parents  and  teachers 
seldom  check  or  counteract  this  tendency,  mostly  not  realizing  the  impor¬ 
tance  of  this  semantic  factor  and  its  role  in  the  future  adjustment  of  the 
individual.  In  the  rough,  to  a  baby,  his  cry  ‘is*  food.  Words  ‘are’  magic. 
This  identification  is  structurally  false  to  facts,  but  in  babyhood  it  mostly 
works .  To  the  infant,  experience  proves  that  the  noises  he  makes,  a  cry 
or  a  word,  have  the  objective  value, — food.  The  semantic  identity  of  the 
symbol  and  the  un-speakable  object  level, — food, — has  been  established. 
This  infantile  attitude  or  s.r  is  carried  on  into  grown-up  life. 

Under  very  simple  conditions  of  primitive  peoples,  in  spite  of  many 
difficulties,  this  attitude  of  identification  is  not  always  checked  by 
experience,  and  experimenting  is  non-existent  at  this  stage.  If  it  is,  then 
such  checking  of  identification  is  ‘explained’  by  some  sort  of  demonology 
and  ‘good’  or  ‘evil’  ‘spirits’, .  Delusional,  from  the  modern  point  of  view, 
s.r  are  compensated  by  mythologies,  making  the  two  sides  of  the  semantic 
equation  equivalent.  This  equating  tendency  is  inherent  in  all  human  s.r. 
It  expresses  the  instinctive  ‘feel’  for  the  similarity  of  structure  as  the 
base  of  ‘knowledge’,  and  it  ultimately  finds  its  expression  in  mathematical 
equations.  In  all  psycho-logical  processes  of  ‘understanding’,  we  must 
have  some  standards  of  evaluation  and  ‘equivalence’.  On  primitive  levels, 
this  is  accomplished  by  literal  identification  and  delusional  mythology  of 
the  type,  that  a  storm  at  sea  is  ‘caused’  by  a  violent  quarrel  between  a 
‘god’  and  his  ‘wife’ ;  or,  in  contemporaneous  mythology,  a  draught,  or 
fire,  or  death  by  lightning,  is  explained  as  ‘punishment’  for  ‘sins’,. 
Semantic  compensation  is  needed  and  produced.  A  similar  semantic 
process  produces  scientific  theories,  but  with  different  standards  of  eval¬ 
uation.  At  present,  scientific  theories  do  not  cover  all  semantic  needs  and 
urges  of  mankind,  owing  to  the  prevailing  false  to  fact  identification  of 
different  orders  of  abstractions.  With  the  full  consciousness  of  abstract¬ 
ing,  which  means  proper  evaluation  or  differentiation  between  orders  of 
abstractions,  science  will  then  cover  all  our  non-pathological  semantic 

202  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

needs,  and  different  primitive  mythologies  will  become  unnecessary.  A 
very  harmful,  primitive,  delusional  semantic  factor  of  blockages  would 
be  eliminated. 

The  ‘is’  of  identity  plays  a  great  havoc  with  our  s.r,  as  any  ‘identity’ 
is  structurally  false  to  fact.  An  infant  does  not  know  and  cannot  know 
that.  In  his  life,  the  ‘is’  of  identity  plays  an  important  semantic  role, 
which,  if  not  checked  intelligently,  becomes  a  pernicious  semantic  factor 
in  his  grown-up  reactions,  which  preserve  the  infantile  character  and 
with  which  adult  adjustment  and  semantic  health  is  impossible.  The 
infant  begins  to  speak  and  again  he  is  trained  in  the  ‘is’  of  identity. 
Symbols  are  identified  with  the  un-speakable  actions,  events  and  objects 
under  penalty  of  pain  or  even  death.  The  magic  of  words  begins  its  full 
sway.  As  a  rule,  parental,  crude  disciplining  of  the  infant,  particularly 
in  former  days,  trained  the  s.r  of  the  infant  again  in  the  delusional  ‘is* 
of  identity.  The  results  are  semantically  and  structurally  very  far- 
reaching  and  are  found  to  underlie  modern  mythologies,  militarism,  the 
prevailing  economic  and  social  systems,  the  control  by  fear  (be  it  ‘hell’ 
or  machine  guns),  illusory  gold  standards,  hunger, . 

Experience  shows  that  such  identification  of  symbols  with  the 
un-speakable  levels  works  very  well  with  animals.  With  man,  it  leads 
only  to  the  misuse  of  the  human  nervous  system,  semantic  disturbances 
of  evaluation,  and  the  prevailing  unstable  animalistic  systems  in  practi¬ 
cally  all  fields,  resulting  in  the  general  chaos  in  human  affairs. 

It  should  be  noticed  that  the  ‘is’  of  predication  also  expresses  a  sort 
of  partial  identity ,  leading  to  primitive  anthropomorphism  and  general 
confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions.  By  an  inherent  necessity,  our  lives 
are  lived  on  the  un-speakable  objective  levels,  which  include  not  only 
ordinary  objects  but  also  actions  and  immediate  feelings,  symbols  being 
only  auxiliary  means.  The  natural  ordinal  evaluation,  which  should  be 
the  foundation  for  healthy  s.r ,  appears  as  the  event-process  level  first, 
the  object  next  in  importance ;  the  objective  level  first,  the  symbolic  next 
in  importance ;  the  descriptive  level  first,  the  inferential  level  next  in 
importance , .  The  semantic  identification  of  these  different  levels  not  only 
abolishes  the  natural  evaluation,  but,  in  fact,  reverses  the  natural  order. 
Once  this  is  realized,  we  see  clearly  that  all  statements  about  the  objec¬ 
tive  level,  which  is  made  up  of  absolute  individuals,  are  only  probable  in 
different  degrees  and  can  never  be  certain.  The  ‘is’  of  identity  underlies, 
also,  the  two-valued,  too  primitive,  too  restricted,  and  structurally 
fallacious  A  'logic’. 

The  crucial  semantic  importance  of  asymmetrical  relations  becomes 
obvious  when  we  consider  that  all  evaluation  and  non-el  meanings 

ON  RELATIONS 

depend  ultimately  on  asymmetrical  relations.  In  the  technical  fields, 
mathematics  and  the  exact  sciences;  in  the  semi-scientific  fields,  eco¬ 
nomics,  politics,  sociology.;  in  the  as  yet  non-scientific  fields,  ‘ethics’, 
‘happiness*,  ‘adjustment*. ,  represent  ultimately  different  forms  of  evalua¬ 
tion,  impossible  to  formulate  adequately  under  aristotelianism. 

Obviously,  a  ^-system  based  on  proper  semantic  evaluation  leading 
to  non-pathological  reactions,  adjustments . ,  must  make  relations  and 
multi-dimensional  order  fundamental  for  sanity.  The  semantic  connec¬ 
tion  between  mathematical  methods  and  all  the  other  concerns  of  man 
becomes  also  necessary  and  obvious. 

In  mathematics,  recently,  the  notion  of  equality  needed  a  refinement 
and  the  notion  of  ‘identity*  has  been  introduced.  The  present  analysis 
discloses  that,  although  the  refinement  and  the  symbol  may  be  retained, 
yet  the  name  should  be  entirely  abandoned,  because  it  conceals  a  very 
semantically  vicious  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions.  If,  by  definition, 
we  produce  new  terms,  these  new  terms  are  of  a  higher  order  abstraction 
than  the  terms  used  in  the  definition,  and  so  the  identification  of  them 
as  to  the  orders  of  abstractions  is  physiologically  and  structurally  false 
to  facts. 

The  problems  discussed  in  the  present  chapter  have  been  felt 
vaguely  for  more  than  two  thousand  years  and  found  their  first  histor¬ 
ical  expression  in  the  rift  between  Aristotle,  the  biologist,  and  Plato,  the 
founder  of  mathematical  philosophy.  Mathematics  is,  in  principle,  A , 
and  so,  in  the  study  of  mathematics,  we  can  learn  most  about  the  princi¬ 
ples  of  non-aristotelianism.  In  physics,  only  very  recently,  do  we  begin 
to  eliminate  the  ‘is*  of  identity  and  elementalism  which  resulted  in  the 
Ef  systems.  All  sciences  strive  to  become  more  mathematical  and  exact 
and  so  A.  In  fact,  all  advances  in  science  are  due  to  the  building  of  new 
A  languages,  usually  called  ‘terminology*.  We  can  go  further  and  say, 
definitely,  that,  to  have  any  science,  we  must  make  a  A  revision  of  the 
languages  used.  Similarly  with  ‘man*,  either  we  decide  to  introduce 
into  human  affairs  scientific  evaluation,  and  so  part  company  with  the 
A  and  pre-aristotelian  system  of  evaluation,  or  preserve  A  structure, 
and  have  no  science  of  man,  or  science  of  sanity,  but  continue  in  the 
prevailing  chaos. 

CHAPTER  XIV 

ON  THE  NOTION  OF  INFINITY 

The  questions  on  which  there  is  disagreement  are  not  trivialities;  they 
are  the  very  roots  of  the  whole  vast  tree  of  modern  mathematics.  (22) 

E.  T.  BELL 

The  task  of  cleaning  up  mathematics  and  salvaging  whatever  can  be 
saved  from  the  wreckage  of  the  past  twenty  years  will  probably  be  enough 
to  occupy  one  generation.  (22)  E.  T.  bell 

The  intention  of  the  Hilbert  proof  theory  is  to  atone  by  an  act  performed 
once  for  all  for  the  continual  titanic  offences  which  mathematics  and  all 
mathematicians  have  committed  and  will  still  commit  against  mind,  against 
the  principle  of  evidence;  and  this  act  consists  of  gaining  the  insight  that 
mathematics,  if  it  is  not  true,  is  at  least  consistent.  Mathematics,  as  we 
saw,  abounds  in  propositions  that  are  not  really  significant  judgments. 
<549)  #  HERMANN  WEYL 

An  objectiyated  property  is  usually  called  a  set  in  mathematics.  (549) 

HERMANN  WEYL 

If  the  objects  are  indefinite  in  number,  that  is  to  say  if  one  is  constantly 
exposed  to  seeing  new  and  unforseen  objects  arise,  it  may  happen  that  the 
appearance  of  a  new  object  may  require  the  classification  to  be  modified, 
and  thus  it  is  we  are  exposed  to  antinomies.  There  is  no  actual  {given 
complete)  infinity .  <4i7)  h.  poincar£ 

The  structural  notion  of  ‘infinite’,  ‘infinity’,  is  of  great  semantic 
importance  and  lately  has  again  become  a  subject  of  heated  mathematical 
debates.  My  examination  of  this  subject  is  from  the  point  of  view  of  a 
^-system,  general  semantic,  and  a  theory  of  sanity  which  completely 
eliminates  identification.  In  Supplement  III,  I  give  a  more  detailed 
A  analysis  of  the  problem  already  anticipated  by  Brouwer,  Weyl, 
Chwistek,  and  others.  These  problems  are  not  yet  solved,  because 
mathematicians,  in  their  orientations  and  arguments,  still  use  el,  A 
‘logic’,  ‘psychology’,  and  epistemology,  which  involve  and  depend  on 
the  ‘is’  of  identity,  making  agreement  impossible. 

Mathematical  infinity  was  first  put  on  record  by  the  Roman  poet, 
Titus  Lucretius,  who,  as  far  back  as  the  first  century  b.c.,  wrote  very 
beautifully  about  it  in  his  De  Rerum  Natural  As  the  author  was  a  poet, 
and  his  work  poetry,  a  few  privileged  literati  had  great  pleasure  in  read¬ 
ing  it;  but  this  discovery,  not  being  rigorously  formulated,  remained 
inoperative,  and  so  practically  worthless  for  mankind  at  large,  for  2000 
years.  Only  about  fifty  years  ago,  mathematical  infinity  was  rediscovered 
by  mathematicians,  who  formulated  it  rigorously,  without  poetry.  Since 
then,  mathematics  has  progressed  with  all  other  sciences  in  an  unprece- 

ON  THE  NOTION  OF  INFINITY 

dented  way.  That  this  structural  linguistic  discovery  was  made  so  late  is 
probably  due  to  the  usual  blockage,  the  old  s.r,  old  habits  of  ‘thought’, 
and  prejudices. 

In  all  arguments  about  infinity,  from  remote  antiquity  until  Bolzano 
(1781-1848),  Dedekind  (1831-1916),  and  Cantor  (1845-1918),  there 
was  a  peculiar  maxim  involved.  All  arguments  against  infinity  involved 
a  certain  structural  assumption,  which,  at  first  inspection,  seemed  to  be 
true  and  ‘self-evident’,  and  yet,  if  carried  through,  would  be  quite 
destructive  to  all  mathematics  existing  at  that  date.  Arguments  favorable 
to  infinity  did  not  involve  these  tragic  consequences.  Quite  naturally, 
mathematicians,  and  particularly  Cantor,  began  to  investigate  this  peculiar 
maxim  and  the  s.r  which  were  playing  havoc.  The  structural  assumption 
in  question  is  that  ‘if  a  collection  is  part  of  another,  the  one  which  is  a 
part  must  have  fewer  terms  than  the  one  of  which  it  is  a  part’.  This  s.r 
was  deeply  rooted,  and  even  found  a  scholarly  formulation  in  Euclid’s 
wording  in  one  of  his  axioms:  ‘The  whole  is  greater  than  any  of  its 
parts’.  This  axiom,  although  it  is  not  an  exact  equivalent  of  the  maxim 
stated  above,  by  loose  reasoning,  which  was  usual  in  the  older  days,  could 
be  said  to  imply  the  troublesome  maxim.  It  is  not  difficult  to  see  that 
the  E  axiom,  as  well  as  our  troublesome  maxim,  expresses  a  struc¬ 
tural  generalization  taken  from  experience  which  applies  only  to  finite 
processes,  arrays , .  Indeed,  both  can  be  taken  as  a  definition  of  finite 
processes,  arrays , .  It  does  not  follow,  however,  that  the  one  definition 
and  structure  must  be  true  of  infinite  processes,  arrays , .  As  a  matter  of 
fact,  the  break-down  of  this  maxim  gives  us  the  precise  definition  of 
mathematical  infinity.  A  process  of  generating  arrays . ,  is  called  infinite 
when  it  contains,  as  parts,  other  processes,  arrays . ,  which  have  ‘as  many’ 
terms  as  the  first  process,  array , . 

The  term  ‘infinite’  means  a  process  which  does  not  end  or  stop,  and 
it  is  usually  symbolized  by  oo.  The  term  may  be  applied,  also,  to  an 
array  of  terms  or  other  entities,  the  production  of  which  does  not  end 
or  stop.  Thus  we  may  speak  of  the  infinite  process  of  generating  num¬ 
bers  because  every  positive  integer,  no  matter  how  great,  has  a  successor ; 
we  can  also  speak  of  infinite  divisibility  because  the  numerical  technique 
gives  us  means  to  accomplish  that.  The  term  ‘infinite’  is  used  here  as  an 
adjective  describing  the  characteristics  of  a  process ,  but  should  never  be 
used  as  a  noun,  as  this  leads  to  self-contradictions.  The  term  ‘infinity’, 
as  a  noun,  is  used  here  only  as  an  abbreviation  for  the  phrase  ‘infinite 
process  of  generating  numbers’, .  If  used  in  any  other  way  than  as  an 
abbreviation  for  the  full  phrase,  the  term  is  meaningless  in  science  (not 
in  psychopathology)  and  should  never  be  used.  The  above  semantic 

206  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

restrictions  are  not  arbitrary  or  purely  etymological,  but  they  follow  the 
rejection  of  the  ‘is*  of  identity  of  a  ^-system. 

Before  we  can  apply  the  term  ‘infinite*  to  physical  processes,  we 
must  first  theoretically  elucidate  this  term  to  the  utmost,  and  only  then 
find  out  by  experiment  whether  or  not  we  can  discover  physical  pro¬ 
cesses  to  which  such  a  term  can  be  applied.  Fortunately,  we  have  at  our 
disposal  a  semantic  process  of  generating  numbers  which,  by  common 
experience,  by  definition,  and  by  the  numerical  technique,  is  such  that 
every  number  has  a  successor.  Similarly,  our  semantic  processes  are 
capable  by  common  experience,  by  definition,  and  by  the  numerical 
technique  to  divide  a  finite  whole  indefinitely.  Thus,  if  we  do  not  identify 
external  physical  objective  processes  with  internal  semantic  processes, 
but  differentiate  between  them  and  apply  correct  symbolism,  we  can  see 
our  way  clear.  If  we  stop  this  semantic  process  of  generating  numbers 
at  any  stage,  then  we  deal  with  a  finite  number,  no  matter  how  great ; 
yet  the  process  remains,  by  common  experience,  by  definition,  and  by  the 
numerical  technique,  such  that  it  can  proceed  indefinitely.  In  the  A 
sense,  ‘infinite*,  as  applied  to  processes,  means  as  much  as  ‘indefinite*. 
We  should  notice  that  the  semantic  process  of  generating  numbers  should 
not  be  identified  with  a  selection  of  a  definite  number,  which,  by  necessity, 
is  finite,  no  matter  how  great.  The  identification  of  the  semantic  process 
of  generating  numbers  with  a  definite  number ;  the  identification  of  the 
semantic  process  of  infinite  divisibility  of  finites  in  the  direction  of  the 
small  with  the  generating  of  numbers  in  the  direction  of  the  great ;  and 
the  identification  of  semantic  internal  processes  with  external  physical 
processes . ,  are  found  at  the  foundation  of  the  whole  present  mathemati¬ 
cal  scandal,  which  divides  the  mathematical  world  into  two  hostile  camps* 

The  process  of  infinite  divisibility  is  closely  connected  with  the 
process  of  the  infinite  generation  of  numbers.  Thus  we  may  have  an 
array  of  numbers  1,  2,  3,  ...  n,  all  of  which  are  finite.  The  semantic 
process  of  passing  from  n  to  n  + 1  is  not  a.  number,  but  constitutes  a 
characteristic  of  the  semantic  process.  The  result  of  the  semantic  process ; 
namely,  n  +  1,  again  becomes  a  finite  number.  If  we  take  a  fraction,  a/n, 
the  greater  an  n  is  selected,  the  smaller  the  fraction  becomes,  but  with 
each  selection  the  fraction  again  is  finite,  no  matter  how  small. 

Although  the  two  processes  are  closely  connected  on  the  formal 
side,  they  are  very  different  from  the  semantic  point  of  view.  The  process 
of  generating  numbers  may  be  carried  on  indefinitely  or  ‘infinitely*  and 
has  no  upper  limit,  and  we  cannot  assign  such  a  limit  without  becoming 
tangled  up  in  self-contradiction  in  terms.  Not  so  with  the  process  of 
indefinite  or  infinite  divisibility.  In  this  case,  we  start  with  a  finite. 

ON  THE  NOTION  OF  INFINITY 

Existing  mathematical  symbolism  and  formalism  lead  to  identification 
of  both  fundamentally  different  semantic  processes  and  introduce  a  great 
deal  of  avoidable  confusion.  A  A  orientation  will  allow  us  to  retain 
mathematical  symbolism  and  formalism,  but  will  not  allow  the  identifi¬ 
cation  of  the  semantic  process  of  passing  from  number  to  number,  which 
passing  is  not  a  number,  with  the  result  of  this  process  which,  in  each 
case,  becomes  a  definite  and  finite  number. 

It  becomes  obvious  that  the  A  terminology  and  present  standard 
notions  of  ‘number’  identify  the  semantic  process  with  its  result,  an 
identification  which  must  ultimately  be  disastrous.  The  semantic  process 
is  thus  potentially  infinite,  but  the  passing  from  n  to  n  +  1  characterizes 
the  semantic  process,  not  number;  numbers  representing  only  finite 
results  of  the  indefinitely  extended  semantic  process. 

A  A  analysis  without  identification  discloses,  then,  that  only  the 
semantic  process  can  be  indefinitely  extended,  but  that  the  results  of 
this  process,  or  a  number  in  each  case,  must  be  finite.  To  speak  about 
an  ‘infinite*  or,  as  it  is  called,  ‘transfinite*  ‘number*,  is  to  identify  entirely 
different  issues,  and  involves  very  definite  self-contradictions  in  m.o 
terms.  The  existing  mathematical  terminology  has  been  developed  with¬ 
out  the  realization  of  A  issues  and  the  multiordinality  of  terms  and 
leads  automatically  to  such  identifications.  As  long  as  mathematicians 
do  not  consider  A  issues,  the  problems  of  mathematical  infinity  will 
remain  unsolved  and  hopeless;  and  yet,  without  a  scientific  theory  of 
infinity,  all  of  mathematics  and  most  of  science  would  be  entirely 
impossible.  A  A  clarification  of  these  problems  involves  a  new 
semantic  definition  of  numbers  and  mathematics,  given  in  Chapter 
XVIII,  which  eliminates  a  great  many  mysteries  in  connection  with 
mathematics  and  does  not  allow  these  dangerous  and  befogging 
identifications. 
