
From  a  A  point  of  view,  we  must  treat  infinity  in  the  first  can- 
torian  sense;  namely,  as  a  variable  finite,  the  term  variable  pertaining 
to  the  semantic  process  but  not  to  number,  the  term  finite  pertaining  to 
both  the  semantic  arrest  of  the  infinite  semantic  process,  and  so  charac¬ 
terizing  also  its  result ;  namely — a  number. 

In  the  meantime,  the  numerical  technique  is  indefinitely  flexible  in 
the  sense  that  no  matter  how  great  a  number  we  take,  we  always  can,  by 
a  semantic  process,  produce  a  greater  number,  and  no  matter  how  small 
the  difference  between  two  numbers  might  be,  we  always  can  find  a 
third  number  which  will  be  greater  than  the  smaller,  and  smaller  than 
the  given  greater  number.  Thus,  we  see  that  the  numerical  technique  is 
such  as  to  correspond  in  flexibility  exactly  to  the  semantic  processes,  but 

208  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

there  is  nothing  flexible  about  a  definite  number  once  it  is  selected. 
What  has  been  already  said  about  a  variable  applies,  also,  to  a  number ; 
namely,  that  a  ‘variable*  does  not  ‘vary*  in  the  ordinary  sense ;  but  this 
term  applies  only  to  the  semantic  processes  of  the  mathematician.  The 
older  intensional  A  definition  of  ‘number*  must  have  led  to  the  older 
identifications.  The  A,  extensional,  and  non-el  semantic  definition  of 
numbers  does  not  allow  such  identifications.  The  A  term  ‘number* 
applied  to  a  definite  number,  but  also  to  an  intensional  definition  of 
numbers.  The  A ,  or  semantic  definition  of  numbers,  is  different  in 
the  sense  that  it  finds  extensional  characteristics  of  each  number,  applic¬ 
able  to  all  numbers,  and  so  helps  not  to  identify  a  definite  number 
with  the  process  of  generating  numbers,  which  the  use  of  one  term  for 
two  entirely  different  entities  must  involve. 

Cantorian  alephs ,  then,  are  the  result  of  identification  or  confusion 
of  entirely  different  issues  and  must  be  completely  eliminated.  The 
rejection  of  alephs  will  require  a  fundamental  revision  of  those  branches 
of  mathematics  and  physics  which  utilize  them ;  yet,  as  far  as  I  know, 
with  a  very  few  exceptions,  the  alephs  are  not  utilized  or  needed, 
although  the  ‘wiw/  is  used,  which  spell-mark  has  become  fashionable  in 
many  mathematical  and  physical  circles.  In  the  case  of  alephs,  history 
may  repeat  itself  and  the  alephs,  like  the  ‘infinitesimal*,  when  their 
self-contradictory  character  becomes  understood,  will  be  eliminated 
without  affecting  the  great  body  of  mathematics,  but  only  the  small 
portions  which  are  built  on  the  alephs. 

As  to  the  existence  of  infinite  processes,  we  know  positively  only 
about  the  semantic  process  of  generating  numbers  and  the  semantic 
process  of  infinite  divisibility.  These  processes  are  evident  in  our 
common  experience.  We  cannot  a  priori  know  if  such  infinite  processes 
can  be  found  in  the  world  which  must  be  discovered  by  investigation  and 
experimentation. 

The  existing  terminology  is  still  A  and  is  based  on,  and  leads 
to,  identification,  and  so  in  my  A  presentation  I  cannot  use  it  and 
expect  to  clear  up  some  of  the  issues  involved.  The  terms  such  as 
‘class*,  ‘aggregate*,  ‘set’.,  imply  a  definite  static  collection.  The  term 
‘infinite*,  in  the  meantime,  can  only  be  correctly  and  significantly  used 
as  applied  to  a  dynamic  semantic  process.  We  cannot  speak  of  ‘infinite’ 
classes,  aggregates,  sets.,  and  evade  the  issues  of  identification  of 
entirely  different  entities.  The  term  ‘series*  has  a  technical  meaning  in 
connection  with  numbers  and  so,  for  a  general  discussion  of  processes, 
is  a  little  too  specific.  The  term  ‘array*  is  more  general,  yet  extensional, 
of  which  ‘series*  would  be  a  special  case.  The  general  term  ‘number* 

ON  Till-;  NOTION  or  INFINITY 

is  multiordinal  and  intensional  and  so,  in  the  A  extensional  system, 
revalued,  and  must  be  used  in  the  plural;  namely,  ‘numbers’.  The 
term  ‘number’  in  the  singular  will  be  used  to  indicate  a  definite  number. 
The  term  ‘denumerable’  has  been  introduced  by  Cantor  and  means  any 
extensional  array  of  terms,  facts,  states,  observables . ,  which  can  be  put 
in  one-to-one  correspondence  with  the  infinite  array  of  positive  integers. 

Let  me  repeat  once  more :  the  semantic  process  may  be  carried  on 
without  limits,  and  the  infinite  series  of  positive  integers  is  an  exten¬ 
sional,  technical,  and  verbal  expression  of  this  semantic  process  and  the 
only  infinite  array  of  which  existence  we  are  certain. 

We  shall  be  able  to  explain,  and  to  give  a  better  definition  of, 
mathematical  infinity  if  we  introduce  an  extremely  useful  structural 
term,  ‘equivalence’.  Two  processes,  arrays . ,  between  which  it  is  possible 
to  set  up,  by  some  law  of  transformation,  a  one-to-one  correspondence 
are  said  to  be  equivalent .  A  process,  array . ,  which  is  equivalent  to  a 
part  of  itself,  is  said  to  be  infinite.  In  other  words,  a  process,  array. , 
which  can  be  put  into  a  one-to-one  correspondence  with  a  part  of  itself 
is  said  to  be  infinite.  We  can  define  a  finite  process,  array.,  (class, 
aggregate.,)  as  one  which  is  not  infinite.  The  following  is  valid  exclu¬ 
sively  because  of  the  use  of  the  ‘etc-’ 

A  few  examples  will  make  this  definition  clearer.  If  we  take  the 
series  of  positive  integers,  1,  2,  3,  4,  ...  etc.,  we  can  always  double 
every  number  of  this  row  provided  we  retain  the  process-character ,  hut 
not  otherwise.  Let  us  write  the  corresponding  row  of  their  doubles  under 
the  row  of  positive  integers,  thus : 

1,  2,  3,  4,  5,  .  .  .  .etc. 

2,  4,  6,  8,  10,  ...etc. 

or  we  can  treble  them,  or  «-ble  them,  thus : 

1,  2,  3,  4,  5,  ....  etc. 

3,  6,  9,  12,  15,  ..etc* 

there  are  obviously  as  many  numbers  in  each  row  below  as  in  the  row 
above,  provided  we  retain  the  ‘etc./,  so  the  numbers  of  numbers  in 
the  two  rows  compared  must  be  equal.  All  numbers  which  appear  in 
each  bottom  row  also  occur  in  the  corresponding  upper  row,  although 
they  only  represent  a  part  of  the  top  row,  again  provided  that  we  retain 
the  ‘etc.’ 

The  above  examples  show  another  characteristic  of  infinite  pro¬ 
cesses,  arrays , .  In  the  first  example,  we  have  a  one-to-one  correspondence 
between  the  natural  numbers  and  the  even  numbers,  which  are  equal  in 
number  at  each  stage.  Yet,  the  second  row  results  from  the  first  row  by 

210  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

taking  away  all  odd  numbers,  which,  itself,  represents  infinite  numbers 
of  numbers. 

This  example  was  used  by  Leibnitz  to  prove  that  infinite  arrays 
cannot  exist,  a  conclusion  which  is  not  correct,  since  he  did  not  realize 
that  both  finite  and  infinite  arrays  depend  on  definitions.  We  should  be 
careful  not  to  approach  infinite  processes,  arrays . ,  with  prejudices,  or 
silent  doctrines  and  assumptions,  or,  in  general  s.r ,  taken  over  from 
finite  processes,  arrays , . 

Thus  we  see  that  the  process  of  generating  natural  numbers  is 
structurally  an  infinite  process  because  its  results  can  be  put  in  a  one-to- 
one  correspondence  with  the  results  of  the  process  of  generating  even 
numbers . ,  which  is  only  a  part  of  itself.  Similarly,  a  line  AB  has 
infinitely  many  points,  since  its  points  can  be  put  into  a  one-to-one 
correspondence  with  the  points  on  a  segment  CD  of  AB.  Another 
*  see  page  xii  example  can  be  given  in  the  Tristram  Shandy  paradox  of  Russell. 

Tristram  Shandy  was  writing  his  autobiography,  and  was  using  one 
year  to  write  the  history  of  one  day.  The  question  is,  would  Shandy 
ever  complete  his  biography  ?  He  would,  provided  he  never  died,  or  he 
lived  infinite  numbers  of  years.  The  hundredth  day  would  be  written  in 
the  hundredth  year,  the  thousandth  in  the  thousandth  year,  etc.  No 
day  of  his  life  would'  remain  unwritten,  again  provided  his  process  of 
living  and  writing  would  never  stop . 

Such  examples  could  be  given  endlessly.  It  is  desirable  to  give  one 
more  example  which  throws  some  light  on  the  problems  of  ‘probability", 
‘chance*, .  The  theory  of  probability  originated  through  consideration  of 
games  of  chance.  Lately  it  has  become  an  extremely  important  branch 
of  mathematical  knowledge,  with  fundamental  structural  application  in 
physics,  general  semantics,  and  other  branches  of  science.  For  instance. 
Boltzman  based  the  second  law  of  thermodynamics  on  considerations  of 
probability.  Boole*s  ‘laws  of  thought*,  and  the  many-valued  ‘logic*  of 
Lukasiewicz  and  Tarski  are  also  closely  related  to  probability;  and  the 
new  quantum  mechanics  uses  it  constantly , . 

The  term  ‘probability*  may  be  defined  in  the  rough  as  follows :  If 
an  event  can  happen  in  a  different  ways,  and  fails  to  happen  in  b  differ¬ 
ent  ways,  and  all  these  ways  are  equally  likely  to  occur,  the  probability  of 

the  happening  of  the  event  is _ _ _ ,  and  the  probability  of  its  failing 

a  +  b 

is  . 
a  -j-  b 

Let  us  assume  that  in  a  certain  city  a  lecture  is  held  each  day,  and 
that,  though  the  listeners  may  change  each  day,  the  numbers  of  listeners 

ON  THK  NOTION  OF  INFINITY 

are  always  equal.  Suppose  that  one  in  each  twenty  inhabitants  of  this 
town  has  M  as  the  first  letter  of  his  name.  What  is  the  probability  that, 
‘by  chance * ,  all  the  names  of  the  audience  would  begin  with  M  ?  Let  us 
call  such  a  happening  the  M-event.  In  the  simplest  case,  when  the  daily « 
number  of  listeners  is  only  one,  the  probability  of  an  M-event  is  1  in  20, 
or  1/20.  The  probability  of  an  M-event  for  an  audience  of  2  is  1  in 
20  X  20  «  400,  or  1/400.  The  probability  that  an  audience  of  three 
members  should  have  all  three  names  begin  with  M  would  decrease 
twenty  times  further.  Only  once  in  8000  lectures,  on  an  average,  would 
an  M-event  happen.  For  five  people  it  would  amount  to  1  in  20  X  20  X 
20  X  20  X  20  =  3,200,000  days,  or  1/3,200,000,  or  once  in  approxi¬ 
mately  9000  years ;  for  ten  people,  about  once  in  thirty  billion  years; 
for  twenty  people,  about  once  in  a  third  of  a  quadrillion  years.  For  one 
hundred  people,  the  recurrence  period  of  the  M-event  would  be  given 
as  once  in  a  number  of  years  represented  by  more  than  a  hundred  figures. 
If  the  town,  in  this  last  example,  should  be  as  old  as  the  solar  system,  and 
if  the  lectures  had  been  delivered  daily  to  an  audience  of  one  hundred 
people  through  this  inconceivably  long  period,  the  probability  is  ex¬ 
tremely  small  that  the  M-event  would  happen  at  all.2 

From  the  human,  anthropomorphic ,  point  of  view,  we  would  say 
that  such  an  event  is  impossible.  But  it  must  be  remembered  that  this  is 
only  an  anthropomorphic  point  of  view,  and  our  judgements  are  coloured 
by  the  temporal  scale  of  our  own  lives.  Of  course,  to  carry  such  an 
anthropomorphic  viewpoint  into  cosmic  speculations  is  simply  silly,  a 
survival  of  the  primitive  structure  of  language  and  its  progeny — meta¬ 
physics  and  mythologies. 

The  theory  of  infinity  throws  considerable  structural  light  on  such 
primitive  speculations.  In  this  external  world,  we  deal  with  processes, 
and,  as  we  measure  ‘length*  by  comparison  with  freely  selected  conve¬ 
nient  units  of  length*,  let  us  say,  an  inch;  or  we  measure  ‘volume*  by 
freely  selected  convenient  units  of  ‘volume*;  so,  also,  we  compare  pro¬ 
cesses  with  some  freely  selected  and  convenient  unit-process .  The  diurnal 
rotation  of  our  earth  is  such  a  process,  and,  if  we  choose,  we  can  use  it 
as  a  measuring  unit  or  as  a  comparison  standard.  Of  late,  we  have 
become  aware  that  the  rotation  of  the  earth  is  not  quite  regular,  and  so, 
for  accurate  measurements,  the  old  accepted  unit-process  of  a  day,  or  its 
subdivision,  a  second,  is  not  entirely  satisfactory.  For  scientific  purposes, 
we  are  trying  to  find  some  better  unit-process,  but  we  have  difficulty,  as 
the  problem  is  naturally  circular.  When  we  speak  in  terms  of  a  ‘number 
of  years*,  or  of  seconds,  we  speak  about  perfectly  good  observational 
experimental  facts,  about  quite  definite  relations,  the  best  we  know  in 

see  page  xii 

212  IV,  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

1933,  We  do  not  make  any  metaphysical  assertions  about  ‘time'  and  we 
should  not  be  surprised  to  find  that  statements  involving  ‘years'  are 
generally  propositions,  but  that  statements  involving  ‘time'  often  are  not. 
It  is  necessary  not  to  forget  this  to  appreciate  fully  what  follows. 

The  theory  of  infinity  will  clear  away  a  troublesome  stumbling- 
block.  We  will  use  the  expression  ‘infinite  numbers  of  years',  remember¬ 
ing  the  definition  of  ‘infinite  number,?'  and  what  was  said  about  the 
unit-process  which  we  call  a  year.  We  have  seen  in  an  example  above 
that  if  only  a  hundred  individuals  attend  a  lecture,  and  all  ‘by  chance' 
have  their  names  begin  with  M,  such  an  event  happens,  on  an  average, 
only  once  in  an  inconceivably  large  number  of  years,  represented  by  a 
number  with  a  hundred  figures.  If  we  would  ask  how  many  times  an 
occurrence  would  happen,  we  would  have  to  state  the  period  in  years  for 
which  we  ask  the  how  many .  It  is  easy  to  see  that  in  infinite  numbers 
of  years,  this  humanly  extremely  rare  occurrence  would  happen  precisely 
infinite  numbers  of  times ,  or,  in  other  words,  ‘just  as  often',  this  last 
statement  being  from  a  non-anthropomorphic  point  of  view.  An  event 
that  appears,  from  our  human,  limited,  anthropomorphic  point  of  view, 
as  ‘rare',  or  as  ‘chance',  when  transposed  from  the  level  of  finite  process, 
arrays . ,  to  that  of  infinite  processes,  arrays . ,  is  as  ‘regular',  as  much  a 
‘law',  involving  ‘order',  as  anything  else.  It  is  the  old  primitive  s.r  to 
suppose  that  man  is  the  only  measure  of  things. 

Here  the  reader  might  say  that  infinite  number?  of  years  is  a  rather 
large  assumption  to  be  accepted  so  easily.  This  objection  is  indeed 
serious,  but  a  method  which  can  dispose  of  it  is  given  later  on.  At  this 
stage,  it  is  sufficient  to  say  that,  on  the  one  hand,  this  problem  is  con¬ 
nected  with  the  semantic  disturbance,  called  identification  (objectifica¬ 
tion  of  ‘time'),  which  afflicts  the  majority  of  us,  excepting  a  few 
younger  einsteinists ;  and  that,  on  the  other  hand,  it  involves  the  struc¬ 
turally  reformulated  law  of  the  ‘conservation  of  energy',  ‘entropy', . 

Before  parting  with  the  problem  of  infinity,  let  me  say  a  word  about 
the  notion  of  ‘continuity',  which  is  fundamental  in  mathematics.  Mathe¬ 
matical  continuity  is  a  structural  characteristic  connected  with  ordered 
series.  The  difficulties  originated  in  the  fact  that  a  ‘continuous'  series 
must  have  infinite  number,?  of  terms  between  any  two  terms.  Accord¬ 
ingly,  these  difficulties  are  concerned  with  infinity.  That  mathematicians 
need  some  kind  of  continuity  is  evident  from  the  example  of  two  inter¬ 
secting  lines.  If  the  lines  have  gaps,  as,  for  instance, - , 

there  would  be  the  possibility  that  two  gaps  would  coincide,  and  the  two 
lines  not  intersect ;  although  in  a  plane  the  first  line  would  pass  to  the 
other  side  of  the  second  line.  At  present,  we  have  two  kinds  of  ‘con- 

ON  T1IK  NOTION  OK  INFINITY 

tinuity’  used  in  mathematics.  One  is  a  supposedly  ‘high-grade’  continuity ; 
the  other,  supposedly,  is  a  ‘low-grade’  continuity,  which  is  called  ‘com¬ 
pactness’  or  ‘density’,  with  the  eventual  possibility  of  gaps.  I  am  pur¬ 
posely  using  rather  vague  language,  since  these  fundamental  notions  are 
now  being  revised,  with  the  probability  that  we  shall  have  to  be  satisfied 
with  ‘dense*  or  ‘compact’  series  and  abandon  the  older,  perhaps  delu¬ 
sional,  ‘high-grade’  continuity.  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  the  differ¬ 
ential  and  integral  calculus  is  supposedly  based  on  the  ‘high-grade 
continuity,  but  the  calculus  will  not  be  altered. if  we  accept  the  ‘low- 
grade’  compactness,  all  of  which  is  a  question  of  an  A  or  A  orientation. 

Vague  feelings  of  ‘infinity’  have  pervaded  human  s.r  as  far  back  as 
records  go.  Structurally,  this  is  quite  natural  because  the  term  infinity 
expresses  primarily  a  most  important  semantic  process.  The  majority  of 
our  statements  can  also  be  reformulated  in  a  language  which  explicitly 
involves  the  term  ‘infinity’.  An  example  has  been  already  given  when  we 
were  speaking  about  the  universal  propositions  which  were  supposed  to 
be  of  permanent  validity,  in  other  language ,  valid  for  ‘infinite  numbers 
of  years*.  We  see  how  the  trick  is  done — a  vague  quasi-qualitative 
expression  like  ‘permanent’  or  ‘universal’  is  translated  into  a  quantitative 
language  in  terms  of  ‘numbers  of  years’.  Such  translation  of  qualitative 
language  into  quantitative  language  is  very  useful,  since  it  allows  us  to 
make  more  precise  and  definite  the  vague,  primitive  structural  assump¬ 
tions,  which  present  enormous  semantic  difficulties.  This  brings  to  our 
attention  more  clearly  the  structural  facts  they  supposedly  state,  and  aids 
analysis  and  revision.  In  many  instances,  such  translations  make  obvious 
the  illegitimacy  of  the  assumptions  of  ‘infinite  velocities’  and  so  clear 
away  befogging  misunderstandings,  and  beneficially  affect  our  s.r . 

CHAPTER  XV 

THE  ‘INFINITESIMAL*  AND  ‘CAUSE  AND  EFFECT’ 

But  we  are  not  likely  to  find  science  returning  to  the  crude  form  of 
causality  believed  in  by  Fijians  and  philosophers,  of  which  the  type  is 
hghtnmg  causes  thunder.”  <457>  bertrand  russell 

The  notion  of  causality  has  been  greatly  modified  by  the  substitution  of 
space-time  for  space  and  time.  .  .  .  Thus  geometry  and  causation  becomes 
inextricably  intertwined.  (457)  bertrand  russell 

In  classical  mechanics,  and  no  less  in  the  special  theory  of  relativity, 
there  is  an  inherent  epistemological  defect  which  was,  perhaps  for  the  first 
time,  clearly  pointed  out  by  Ernst  Mach.  .  .  .  No  answer  can  be  admitted 
as  epistemologically  satisfactory,  unless  the  reason  given  is  an  observable 
fact  of  experience.  The  law  of  causality  has  not  the  significance  of  a  state¬ 
ment  as  to  the  world  of  experience,  except  when  observable  facts  ultimately 
appear  as  causes  and  effects,  (iss)  a.  einstein 

The  chain  of  cause  and  effect  could  be  quantitatively  verified  only  if 
the  whole  universe  were  considered  as  a  single  system — but  then  physics 
has  vanished,  and  only  a  mathematical  scheme  remains.  The  partition  of 
the  world  into  observing  and  observed  system  prevents  a  sharp  formula¬ 
tion  of  the  law  of  cause  and  effect.  (2i5>  w.  Heisenberg 

Of  late,  another  perplexing  semantic  problem  concerning  ‘causality* 
or  ‘non-causality*  has  arisen  in  connection  with  the  newer  quantum 
mechanics.  It  is  possible  to  examine  this  question  by  different  methods. 
The  simpler  one  is  connected  with  vague  feelings  of  ‘infinity*  and  its 
supposed  opposite,  the  ‘infinitesimal* ;  the  more  fundamental  method  is 
based  on  the  orders  of  abstractions  leading  toward  the  oo-valued 
semantics  of  probability. 

Because  of  man*s  natural  tendency  to  speak  in  terms  of  ‘infinity*, 
and  his  further  marked  tendency  of  having  opposites,  such  as  ‘yes*,  ‘no*, 
‘right*,  ‘left*,  ‘positive*,  ‘negative*,  ‘love*,  hate’,  ‘honesty*,  ‘dishonesty*. , 
quite  naturally  the  notion  of  ‘infinity*  carried  with  it  the  tendency  to 
invent  the  ‘infinitesimal*.  Even  mathematicians  have  had  great  semantic 
difficulties  in  breaking  away  from  this  habit.  Analysis  persistently  reveals 
that  structurally  no  matter  how  far  we  go  in  dividing  something,  let  us 
say  an  inch,  whatever  is  left  may  be  extremely  small,  but  yet  it  is  a  per¬ 
fectly  good  finite  quantity.  Thus,  structural  difficulties  were  encountered 
with  the  postulated  infinitesimal*.  The  none  implies  that  they  are  not 
finite,  yet  analysis  shows  only  finites.  Mathematicians  supposed  that  an 
‘infinitesimal*  was  necessary  for  mathematics,  and  so  they  were  reluctant 
to  abandon  it. 

The  ‘infinitesimal*,  like  so  many  other  baffling  suppositions,  was 
invented  by  the  Greeks,  who  regarded  a  circle  as  differing  ‘infinitesimally* 

‘INFINITESIMAL*,  ‘CAUSE*  AND  ‘EFFECT* 

from  a  polygon  with  a  very  large  number  of  very  small  equal  sides.  With 
the  invention  of  the  differential  and  integral  calculus,  ‘infinitesimal  cal¬ 
culus*,  as  it  was  called,  the  importance  of  the  ‘infinitesimal*  increased, 
and  even  mathematicians  used  it  as  a  fundamental  notion.  Finally, 
Weierstrass  succeeded  in  showing  the  meaningless  character  of  the 
‘infinitesimal*,  and  also  that  the  ‘infinitesimal*  was  not  structurally  neces¬ 
sary  for  the  calculus.  Up  to  that  date,  the  problem  was  baffling;  we 
knew  that  the  calculus  required  ‘continuity*,  which,  in  turn,  seemed  to 
require  ‘the  infinitely  little*,  and  yet  no  one  could  tell  what  this  ‘infinitely 
little*  might  represent.  It  was  quite  obviously  not  zero,  because  a  suffi¬ 
cient  number  of  them  was  able  to  make  up  a  finite  whole ;  and  we  knew 
no  fraction  which  was  not  zero  and  yet  not  finite.  The  discovery  by 
Weierstrass  that  the  calculus  does  not  require  the  ‘infinitesimal*,  and 
that  all  deductions  could  be  made  without  it,  abolished  a  very  serious 
structural,  verbal,  metaphysical,  and  semantic  bugaboo.  Common  sense, 
of  course,  is  much  simpler,  although  unreliable  in  such  matters,  and 
was  satisfied  also. 

The  elimination  of  the  ‘infinitesimal*  is  a  great  semantic  step  for¬ 
ward,  and  helps  to  clarify  structurally  some  deeply  rooted,  vague,  falla¬ 
cious  notions,  which  are  overloaded  with  affective  components  and  are 
extremely  vicious  in  their  effects. 

If  there  is  no  ‘infinitesimal*,  there  is  no  ‘next  moment*;  for  the 
interval  between  any  two  moments  must  be  finite,  and  so  there  are 
always  other  moments  in  the  interval  between  them.  Also,  two  moments 
cannot  be  consecutive,  for  between  any  two  there  are  always  other 
moments,  no  matter  how  far  we  go;  similarly,  the  ‘present*  becomes  a 
very  vague  notion. 

For  our  purpose,  the  most  fundamental  semantic  application  of 
what  has  been  said  above  is  in  the  vast  field  embraced  by  the  old  struc¬ 
tural  notions  of  ‘cause*  and  ‘effect*.  These  terms  are  of  great  antiquity, 
of  a  distinctly  pre-scientific  one-,  two-valued  semantic  epoch.  They 
originated  in  the  rough  experience  of  our  race,  and  are  firmly  rooted 
in  the  habits  of  ‘thought*  and  the  structure  of  our  old  two-valued  ‘logic* 
and  language,  and  because  of  that  are  even  now  unduly  baffling.  These 
terms,  in  the  two-valued  sense,  were  and  are  the  structural  assumptions 
of  our  ‘private*  and  ‘official*  ‘philosophies’.  The  unenlightened  use  of 
these  terms  has  done  much  to  prevent  the  formulation  of  a  science  of 
man  and  to  build  up  vicious  anti-scientific  metaphysics  of  various  sorts 
involving  pathological  s.r.  With  the  new  quantum  mechanics,  a  better 
understanding  of  these  notions,  based  on  the  oo-valued  semantics  of 
probability,  becomes  a  paramount  issue  for  all  science.  In  daily  life,  the 

216  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

indiscriminate  use  of  two-valued  'cause'  and  'effect'  leads  structurally  to 
a  great  deal  of  absolutism,  dogmatism,  and  other  harmful  semantic 
disturbances,  which  I  call  confusion  of  orders  of  abstraction. 

We  usually  follow  the  'philosophers*  and  ascribe — or,  rather  feel, 
as  conscious  ascribing  would  not  stand  criticism — some  mysterious  struc¬ 
tural  continuity,  some  mysterious  overlapping  of  'cause*  and  'effect*.  We 
'feel',  and  try  to  ‘think*,  about  'cause  and  effect*  as  contiguous  in  'time*. 
But  'contiguous  in  time*  involves  the  impossible  'infinitesimal*  of  some 
unit  of  'time*.  But,  since  we  have  seen  that  there  is  no  such  thing,  we 
must  accept  that  the  interval  between  ‘cause*  and  'effect*  is  finite.  This 
structural  fact  changes  the  whole  situation.  If  the  interval  between 
'cause*  and  'effect'  is  finite,  then  always  something  might  happen  between, 
no  matter  how  small  the  interval  may  be.  The  'same  cause*  would  not 
produce  the  'same  effect*.  The  expected  result  would  not  follow.  This 
means  only  that  in  this  world,  to  be  sure  of  some  expected  effect,  requires 
that  there  must  be  nothing  in  the  environment  which  can  interfere  with 
the  process  of  passing  from  the  conditions  labelled  'cause*  to  the  condi¬ 
tions  labelled  'effect*.  In  this  world,  with  the  structure  which  it  has,  we 
can  never  suppose  that  a  'cause*,  as  we  know  it,  is  alone  sufficient  to 
produce  the  supposed  'effect*.  When  we  consider  the  ever-changing 
environment,  the  number  of  possibilities  increases  enormously.  If  it  were 
possible  to  take  into  account  the  whole  of  the  environment,  the  probabil¬ 
ity  that  some  event  would  be  repeated,  in  all  details,  thus  exhibiting 
the  assumed  two-valued  relation  of  'cause*  and  'effect',  which  we  took 
for  granted  in  the  old  days,  would  practically  be  nil.  The  principle  of 
non-elementalism,  as  we  see,  requires  an  oo -valued  semantics  of 
probability. 

The  reader  should  not  take  what  is  said  here  as  a  denial  that  in  this 
external  world  some  regularities  of  sequence  occur ;  but  the  above  analy¬ 
sis,  which  is  mainly  due  to  Russell,1  shows  clearly  that  the  verbal  prin¬ 
ciple  of  'same  cause,  same  effect*  is  structurally  untenable.  We  can 
never  manage  to  observe  the  'same  cause*  in  detail.  As  soon  as  the  ante¬ 
cedents  have  been  sufficiently  ascertained,  so  as  to  calculate  the  conse¬ 
quences  with  some  plausible  accuracy  as  to  details,  the  relations  of  these 
antecedents  have  become  so  complex  that  there  is  very  little  probability 
that  they  will  ever  occur  again. 

The  clearing  up  of  the  problems  of  'cause*  and  ‘effect*  is  of  serious 
importance,  because  powerful  semantic  reactions  are  connected  with  it. 
To  begin  with,  we  must  differentiate  between  the  terms  'cause*  and 
'effect',  which,  linked  together,  imply  a  two-term  relation  nowhere  to  be 
found  in  this  world,  and  thus  represent  a  language  and  a  two-valued 

MNKINITKS1MA1/,  ‘CAUSM’  AND  ■KKFKCT* 

‘logic’  of  a  structure  not  similar  to  the  structure  of  the  world,  and  the 
general  oo-valued  notion  of  causality.  This  last  notion  is  the  psycho¬ 
logical  foundation  of  all  explanations  leading  toward  oo-valued  determin¬ 
ism,  and  is  an  exclusive  test  for  structure ;  and  so  of  extreme  semantic 
importance. 

Besides  the  analysis  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  impossible 
‘infinitesimal’,  the  term  ‘cause-effect’  represents  a  two-term  relation, 
and,  as  such,  is  a  primitive  generalization  never  to  be  found  in  this  world, 
as  all  events  are  serially  related  in  a  most  complex  way,  independent  of 
our  way  of  speaking  about  them.  If  we  expand  our  two-term  relation 
‘cause-effect’  into  a  series,  we  pass  from  the  inferential  level  to  the 
descriptive  level,  and  so  can  apply  a  behaviouristic,  functional,  actional 
language  of  order.  In  such  series,  we  could  only  use  the  language  of 
‘cause’  and  ‘effect’  if  we  could  select  neighbouring  factors,  a  selection 
which  is  often  impossible.  Also,  if  we  pass  from  macroscopic  to  micro¬ 
scopic  or  sub-microscopic  levels,  we  could  use  such  language,  but  then 
the  terms  would  have  different  meanings,  supplied  by  the  theory  of 
probability. 

The  semantic  side  of  this  problem  is  of  importance,  because,  in  the 
old  el  way,  it  was  neglected.  General  speculations  about  such  m.o  terms 
as  ‘cause’  and  ‘effect’  are  useless.  Such  statements  are  not  propositions, 
but  involve  variable  meanings  and,  therefore,  generate  propositional 
functions  which  are  neither  true  nor  false.  Our  expanding  of  the  too 
simple,  two-term  relation  ‘cause-effect’  into  a  complex  series  is  closer  to 
the  structure  of  this  world,  as  far  as  we  know  it. 

The  understanding  and  habitual  application  of  what  has  just  been 
said  would  not  only  save  us  from  silly  dogmatizing  and  inappropriate  s.r, 
but  would  teach  us  not  to  disregard  any  regularity,  and  to  investigate 
any  relation  which  might  appear.  Then,  in  a  specific  case ,  we  could  again 
use  the  restricted  principle  of  causality,  based  on  probability  and  aver¬ 
ages.  The  old  absolute  and  objectified  semantic  attitude  toward  ‘cause- 
effect’  was  and  often  is  a  serious  hindrance  in  observing  impartially  the 
sequence  of  events  (order)  and  relations.  Preconceived  notions  and 
old  s.r  played  havoc,  for  it  is  well  known  that  we  usually  find  what  we 
want  to  find.  If  we  approach  a  problem  with  definite  unconscious 
' emotional ’  wants,  and  cannot  satisfy  these  s.r ,  we  become  bewildered, 
down-hearted,  and  perhaps  utter  some  such  non-sense  as  the  ‘finite  mind’, 
or  the  like.  Under  such  semantic  pressure,  our  power  of  observation  and 
analysis  is  reduced  by  a  kind  of  ‘emotional  stupor’.  Such  an  occurrence 
is  harmful  in  science  and  in  life.  ‘Human  knowledge’  depends  on  human 
ingenuity,  power  of  observation,  power  of  abstraction , .  It  is  an  activity 

218  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

of  the  human  nervous  system  inside  of  our  skin  and  can  never  be  the 
events  themselves. 

We  see  that  the  old  two-valued  verbal  structure  of  ‘cause*  and 
‘effect*  is  not  similar  to  the  structure  of  the  world,  but  a  rash  limiting 
generalization  from  probability.  Since  these  expressions  belong  to  the 
class  of  statistical  averages  and  depend  on  the  scale  of  the  events  and 
intervals  dealt  with,  we  must  not  expect  that  such  terms  as  two- valued 
‘causality*,  which  is  a  term  of  statistical  macroscopic  averages,  will  apply 
in  that  sense  to  small-scale  events  when  the  intervals  are  much  smaller 
and  when  entirely  different  conditions  and  ‘causes’  prevail.  Today  we 
