have  structural  evidence  that  even  ‘space*  and  ‘time*  represent  statistical 
averages  and  do  not  apply  to  the  smallest  scale  events.  It  is  natural  that 
cause  and  effect  should  join  their  company.  The  above  involves  epis¬ 
temologically  the  passing  from  the  A  two-valued  system  to  a  i 
oo-valued  system.  Psychophysiologically,  it  involves  new  s.r. 

In  mathematics,  the  old  religious  attitude  toward  the  ‘infinitesimal* 
is  rapidly  vanishing.  Many  mathematicians  deliberately,  and  justly,  avoid 
the  use  of  the  word.  A  term  like  ‘indefinitely  small*  or  ‘indefinitesimal* 
is  a  better  descriptive  term,  truer  in  its  implications.  We  even  see  scien¬ 
tists  like  Eddington,  who  had  the  pluck — it  is  still  pluck,  unfortunately — 
to  treat  enormous  stellar  distances  as  ‘infinitesimals  of  second  order*. 
(‘Infinitesimal*  is  used  here  in  a  mathematical  sense  of  indefinitesimal.) 

It  has  been  already  mentioned  that  most  of  the  important  discov¬ 
eries  of  mathematics  were  due  to  a  special  semantic  attitude  on  the  part 
of  those  who  made  them.  This  attitude  was  an  unconscious  or  conscious 
treatment  of  mathematics  as  a  form  of  human  behaviour.  We  see  an 
example  in  the  work  of  Weierstrass  and  his  analysis  of  the  ‘infinitesimal*. 
He  did  not  take  the  ‘infinitesimal*  as  some  objectified  metaphysical  struc¬ 
ture  and  remain  content ;  he  analysed  the  genetic  process  by  which  the 
‘infinitesimal*  was  made  by  Smith  and  Brown,  and  so  treated  mathematics 
structurally  as  a  form  of  human  behaviour.  Any  deepening  of  the  foun¬ 
dations,  or  clarification  of  fundamental  notions,  or  investigation  of 
underlying  assumptions  . ,  must,  by  necessity,  have  this  characteristic.  The 
man  who  does  it  must  take  into  account  how  the  given  process  was  pro¬ 
duced — analyse  its  structure,  and  so  start  with  the  ways  and  methods  of 
production.  In  other  words,  he  must  treat  the  given  problem  as  a  form 
of  human  behaviour.  The  fact  that  this  simple  and  quite  obvious  method 
has  been  formulated  and  structurally  explained  as  desirable  is  helpful. 
It  shows  the  method  and  structure  of  the  path  by  which  advances  can  be 
reached.  We  can  train  the  semantic  reactions  of  students  to  it  and  make 
progress  inevitable;  but  now,  instead,  it  takes  a  genius  to  break,  by  him- 

‘INFINITESIMAL’,  ‘CAUSE’  AND  ‘EFFECT’ 

self,  through  the  old  semantic  habits  which  have  been  produced  by  the 
lack  of  scientific  psycho-logics  and  training. 

The  term  ‘correct  symbolism’  has  already  been  used.  In  this  world 
of  structurally  absolute  individuals,  the  minimum  of  structurally  desir¬ 
able  correct  symbolism  must  provide  for  the  possibility  of  labelling  these 
absolute  individuals  by  separate  names.  For  scientific  purposes,  we  must 
use  terms  built  on  the  pattern  of  mathematical  symbolism;  i.e.,  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  extensional  methods.  We  must  adopt  a  behaviouristic  attitude 
and  habits  in  our  term-making.  As  we  proceed,  we  must  emphasize 
order,  considering  what  comes  first  and  what  next.  This  is  semantically 
important,  for  the  usual  procedure  is  entirely  different:  first,  we  have 
our  structurally  ‘preconceived’  doctrines  and  languages ;  next,  we  observe 
the  structure  of  the  world;  and  then  we  try  to  force  the  observed 
facts  into  the  linguistic  structural  patterns.  But,  in  the  new  way,  we 
start  with  silent  observations,  and  search  empirically  for  structure ;  next, 
we  invent  verbal  structures  similar  to  tjiem;  and,  finally,  we  see  what 
can  be  said  about  the  situation,  and  so  test  the  language.  Experience 
shows  that  the  old  habits  of  labels  first,  objects  next,  instead  of  the 
structurally  natural  order  of  objects  first,  labels  next,  is  semantically 
pernicious  and  harmful.  In  Part  VII,  it  is  shown  that  the  semantic 
structural  reversal  of  the  unnatural  reversed  order  is  crucial  for  sanity. 

From  the  days  of  the  Greeks  an  acute  difficulty  has  made  itself 
felt;  namely,  how  to  reconcile  the  world  of  physics  with  the  world  of 
mathematics.  For  mathematics,  we  need  ‘extensionless*  points;  for 
physics,  we  need  finite-sized  elements.  Whitehead  and  Russell  have 
suggested  different  structures  by  which  this  may  be  accomplished.  It 
seems  possible  to  demand  that  none  of  the  material  dealt  with  shall  be 
smaller  than  an  assigned  finite  size.  That  this  condition  can  be  recon¬ 
ciled  with  mathematical  continuity  seems  to  be  novel.  Whether  this 
device  is  valid  or  not,  it  is  yet  too  early  to  decide.  This  problem  of 
reconciliation  will  become  important  further  on  when  we  come  to  speak 
of  events  as  made  up  from  point-events.* 

CHAPTER  XVI 

ON  THE  EXISTENCE  OF  RELATIONS 

We  cannot  choose  to  do  without  them,  without  seeking  to  choose,  since 
choice  is  action,  and  involves,  for  instance,  the  aforesaid  difference  between 
affirming  and  denying  that  we  mean  to  do  thus  and  thus.  (449) 

JOSIAH  ROYCE 

In  concluding  the  foregoing  remarks,  I  must  explain  one  more 
general  consideration.  This  concerns  an  extremely  profound  structural 
psycho-logical  discovery,  made  by  Prof.  Royce,1  which  underlies  any  and 
all  semantic  problems  of  human  ‘mentality'.  Royce,  although  a  ‘philoso¬ 
pher',  was  a  lover  of  mathematics  and  was  much  interested  in  the  prob¬ 
lems  of  order.  He  was  trying  to  reformulate  ‘logic*  in  terms  of  order. 
We  had  already  encountered  the  inherent  circularity  in  the  structure  of 
human  knowledge,  which  admittedly  is  semantically  disconcerting  if  not 
faced  boldly.  But,  when  recognized,  this  circularity  is  not  only  not 
vicious,  but  even  adds  to  the  interest  and  beauty  of  life  and  makes 
science  more  interesting.  Besides,  the  structure  of  human  knowledge  is 
such  that  there  are  activities  of  man  which  are  not  only  circular  but  also 
‘absolute*,  or  ‘necessary*.  Whatever  we  do,  we  cannot  get  away  from 
them — a  fact  of  serious  semantic  importance.  Except  from  Royce  and  a 
few  of  his  students,  these  problems  have  as  yet  received  little  attention. 

Royce  shows  that  there  are  certain  activities  which  we  reinstate  and 
verify  through  the  very  fact  of  attempting  to  assume  that  these  forms  of 
activity  do  not  exist,  or  that  these  laws  are  not  valid.  If  any  one  attempts 
to  say  that  there  are  no  classes  whatsoever  in  his  world,  he  thereby 
inevitably  classifies.  If  any  one  denies  the  existence  of  relations,  and, 
in  particular,  a  semantic  relation  between  affirmation  and  denial,  or 
affirms  that  ‘yes*  and  ‘no*  have  one  meaning,  in  that  breath  he  affirms  and 
denies.  He  makes  a  difference  between  ‘yes*  and  ‘no*,  and  emphatically 
asserts  relational  equivalence  even  in  denying  the  difference  between 
‘yes*  and  ‘no*.  To  use  Royce*s  own  remarkable  words :  ‘In  brief,  what¬ 
ever  actions  are  such,  whatever  types  of  action  are  such,  whatever 
results  of  activity,  whatever  conceptual  constructions  are  such,  that  the 
very  act  of  getting  rid  of  them,  or  of  thinking  them  away,  logically  im¬ 
plies  their  presence,  are  known  to  us  indeed  both  empirically  and  prag¬ 
matically  (since  we  note  their  presence  and  learn  of  them  through 
action)  ;  but  they  are  also  absolute.  And  any  account  which  succeeds  in 
telling  what  they  are  has  absolute  truth.  Such  truth  is  a  “construction'* 

ON  TilM  KXiSTENCK  OK  RELATIONS 

or  “creation”,  for  activity  determines  its  nature.  It  is  “found”,  for  we 
observe  it  when  we  act.’ 

We  see  that  we  have  definite  semantic  guides  in  this  enquiry.  One 
guide  to  follow  is  these  unescapable  characteristics  of  the  structure  of 
human  knowledge,  which  Royce  called  ‘absolute’,  but  which  I  prefer  to 
call  ‘necessary’.  The  other  guide  leads  us  to  avoid  ‘impossible’  or  absurd 
statements,  or  statements  which  have  no  ‘logical  existence’ ;  which,  in  the 
rough,  means  statements  which  abuse  symbolism  and  produce  noises . , 
instead  of  symbols.  As  we  have  already  seen,  both  guides  have  sound 
neurological  justification,  to  be  expressed  in  terms  of  order  and  circu¬ 
larity ,  terms  uniquely  fit  structurally  to  spe£k  about  processes,  stages  of 
processes,  orders  of  abstractions  , .  Obviously,  our  task  of  formulating  a 
theory  of  sanity  can  proceed  along  these  structural  and  semantic  lines. 
It  should  be  noticed  that  mathematics,  considered  as  a  form  of  human 
behaviour,  and  ‘mental’  illnesses,  also  considered  as  definitely  human 
behaviour,  have  yielded  their  share  for  our  structural  guidance. 

Although  many  a  scientist  has  instinctively  proceeded  in  the  way 
indicated,  yet  the  instinctive  successful  procedure  of  an  isolated  scien¬ 
tist  is  usually  not  capable  of  being  transmitted  to  others.  It  is  his  personal 
benefit.  Only  a  methodological  structural  formulation  of  such  private 
routes  to  semantic  success  can  become  a  public  fact,  to  be  analysed, 
criticized,  improved,  and  transmitted  or  rejected. 

It  must  be  noticed  that  terms  like  ‘chance’  or  ‘law’  are  fundamentally 
connected  with  discussions  of  determinism  versus  indeterminism,  and  so 
involve  problems  in  connection  with  ‘necessary’  semantic  processes.  In 
the  example  about  the  probability  of  the  M-event,  it  was  shown  how 
a  ‘chance’  event  on  one  level  may  become  a  ‘law’  on  another.  The  struc¬ 
tural  possibility  of  such  transformations  is  very  interesting  and  of  basic 
semantic  importance.  For  scientific  purposes,  we  must  accept  oo-valued 
determinism  on  the  scientific  level  as  it  is  the  test  of  structure;  but  this 
has  nothing  to  do  with  the  apparent ,  mostly  two- valued  indeterminism  in 
our  daily  lives.  To  solve  a  number  of  equations,  we  must  have  as  many 
equations  as  we  have  unknowns.  If  we  have  fewer  equations  than 
unknowns,  we  do  not  get  definite  values ;  our  unknowns  are  still  undeter¬ 
mined.  The  origin  of  ‘indeterminism’  is  similar ;  we  lack  knowledge ;  the 
number  of  equations  is  less  than  the  number  of  unknowns.  Hence,  it  is 
impossible  to  discover  determined  values  in  all  cases.  This  gives  an 
appearance  of  two-valued  indeterminism,  but  with  the  increase  of  our 
knowledge,  or  with  additional  equations,  the  unknown  may  be  deter¬ 
mined.  Determinism  is  a  more  fundamental  point  of  view  than  indeter¬ 
minism  ;  in  it  we  find  a  test  for  structure .  It  is  also  a  more  general  point 

222  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

of  view,  in  which  indeterminism  is  only  a  particular  case  and  does  not 
allow  of  the  structural  test.  In  a  science  of  man,  in  a  ^-system,  we 
must  start  with  the  more  fundamental  and  general.  Accordingly,  we 
have  to  accept  oo-valued  determinism,  which,  in  1933,  becomes  the  broad 
scientific  point  of  view.  The  unnecessary  semantic  war  between  the 
advocates  of  the  different  points  of  view  has  been  unduly  bitter  and 
necessarily  futile. 

As  words  are  not  the  things  we  speak  about,  and  the  only  link  is 
structural,  the  ‘human  mind*  must  require  linguistic  structural  oo-valued 
determinism  as  a  condition  of  rationality.  As  soon  as  we  find  that  any 
linguistic  issues  are  not  deterministic,  it  is  an  unmistakable  sign  that 
the  language  or  the  ‘logic*  we  are  using  is  not  similar  in  structure  to  the 
empirical  world  and  so  should  be  changed. 

This  statement  seems  to  be  general.  In  application  to  the  new 
quantum  mechanics’  special  problem,  it  would  appear  that  the  old  macro¬ 
scopic  language  of  ‘space’,  ‘time*. ,  is  not  similar  to  the  sub-microscopic 
structure  and  should,  therefore,  be  changed.  Perhaps  the  electrodynamic 
language,  instead  of  the  macro-mechanistic,  would  fare  better. 

CHAPTER  XVII 

ON  THE  NOTIONS  OF  4 MATTER* t  ‘SPACE’,  ‘TIME’ 

Common  sense  starts  with  the  notion  that  there  is  matter  where  we  can 
get  sensations  of  touch,  but  not  elsewhere.  Then  it  gets  puzzled  by  wind, 
breath,  clouds,  etc.,  whence  it  is  led  to  the  conception  of  “spirit” — I  speak 
etymologically.  After  “spirit”  has  been  replaced  by  “gas,”  there  is  a 
further  stage,  that  of  the  aether.  (457)  bertrand  russell 

The  supposition  of  common  sense  and  naive  realism,  that  we  see  the 
actual  physical  object,  is  very  hard  to  reconcile  with  the  scientific  view 
that  our  perception  occurs  somewhat  later  than  the  emission  of  light  by  the 
object;  and  this  difficulty  is  not  overcome  by  the  fact  that  the  time  in¬ 
volved,  like  the  notorious  baby,  is  a  very  little  one.  (457) 

BERTRAND  RUSSELL 

We  have  certain  preconceived  ideas  about  location  in  space  which  have 
come  down  to  us  from  ape-like  ancestors.  (149)  A.  s.  Eddington 

But  it  does  not  seem  a  profitable  procedure  to  make  odd  noises  on  the 
off-chance  that  posterity  will  find  a  significance  to  attribute  to  them. 

(149)  A.  S.  EDDINGTON 

There  is  a  blessed  phrase  “hidden  reserves”;  and  generally  speaking  the 
more  respectable  the  company  the  more  widely  does  its  balance-sheet 
deviate  from  reality.  This  is  called  sound  finance.  .  .  . 

Thanks  to  Minkowski  a  way  of  keeping  accounts  has  been  found  which 
exhibits  realities  (absolute  things)  and  balances .  (i49>  a.  s.  eddington 

The  quest  of  the  absolute  leads  into  the  four-dimensional  world.  (149> 

A.  S.  EDDINGTON 

The  views  of  space  and  time  which  I  wish  to  lay  before  you  have  sprung 
from  the  soil  of  experimental  physics,  and  therein  lies  their  strength.  They 
are  radical.  Henceforth  space  by  itself,  and  time  by  itself,  are  doomed 
to  fade  away  into  mere  shadows,  and  only  a  kind  of  union  of  the  two  will 
preserve  an  independent  reality.  (352)  h.  minkowski 

It  is  a  thing;  not  like  space,  which  is  a  mere  negation;  nor  like  time, 
which  is — Heaven  knows  what!  (149>  A.  s.  eddington 

Newton  objectivises  space.  Since  he  classes  his  absolute  space  together 
with  real  things,  for  him  rotation  relative  to  an  absolute  space  is  also  some¬ 
thing  real,  usu  a.  einstein 

Space  is  only  a  word  that  we  have  believed  a  thing.  (417)  h.  poincar£ 

In  fact,  our  ordinary  description  of  nature,  and  the  idea  of  exact  laws, 
rests  on  the  assumption  that  it  is  possible  to  observe  the  phenomena  with¬ 
out  appreciably  influencing  them.  (215)  w.  Heisenberg 

Even  when  this  arbitrariness  is  taken  into  account  the  concept  “obser¬ 
vation”  belongs,  strictly  speaking,  to  the  class  of  ideas  borrowed  from  the 
experiences  of  everyday  life.  It  can  only  be  carried  over  to  atomic  phenom¬ 
ena  when  due  regard  is  paid  to  the  limitations  placed  on  all  space-time 
descriptions  by  the  uncertainty  principle.  (2i5>  w.  Heisenberg 

224  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

Section  A.  Structural  considerations . 

The  facts  at  hand  in  1933  show  that  the  language  we  use  for  the 
purpose  of  describing  events  is  not  the  events ;  the  representation  sym¬ 
bolizes  what  is  going  on  inside  our  skins;  the  events  are  outside  our 
skins  and  structural  similarity  is  the  only  link  between  them.  Historically, 
as  a  race,  we  learned  sooner  and  more  about  the  events  outside  our 
skins  than  about  the  events  inside  our  skins;  just  as  a  fish  or  a  dog 
‘knows’  a  lot  about  his  world,  lives  sometimes  happily  and  abundantly, 
and  yet  ‘knows*  nothing  about  biology,  or  physiology,  or  psycho-logics. 
Only  recently  did  we  begin  to  study  ourselves  scientifically.  At  some 
stage  of  our  development,  we  introduced  structurally  simple  forms  of 
representation,  such  as  a  language  of  subject-predicate,  of  additivity, . 
We  are  still  perplexed  when  we  find  that  the  events  outside  our  skins 
cannot  be  pressed  into  schemes  which  are  manufactured  inside  our  skins. 
Our  nervous  system,  with  its  ordered  and  cyclic  structure  and  function, 
manufactures  abstractions  of  different  orders,  which  have  quite  distinct 
structure  and  different  characteristics.  On  different  levels,  we  manu¬ 
facture  different  abstractions,  dynamic  and  static,  continuous  and  discon¬ 
tinuous  . ,  which  have  to  take  care  of  our  needs.  If  the  verbal  schemes  we 
invent  do  not  fit  structurally  the  world  around  us,  we  can  always  invent 
new  schemes  of  new  structure  which  will  be  more  satisfactory.  It  is 
not  a  problem  of  the  world  around  us,  for  our  words  cannot  change  that, 
but  of  our  ingenuity.  In  the  meantime,  we  learn  something  very  impor¬ 
tant;  namely,  about  the  world’s  structure ,  which  is  the  only  content 
of  knowledge. 

There  are  good  structural  reasons  why  the  world  should,  or  should 
not,  be  accounted  for  in  terms  of  differential  equations,  or  in  terms  and 
language  of  ‘causality*, .  The  term  order  is  structurally  fundamental  and 
will  help  us  in  a  radical  and  constructive  way,  in  our  quest. 

First,  however,  we  will  investigate  some  further  semantic  problems, 
remembering  that  a  theory  of  sanity,  which  means  a  theory  of  adjust¬ 
ment,  should  emphasize  the  methodological  and  structural  means  for 
such  semantic  adjustment.  The  dynamic-static  translations  are  funda¬ 
mentally  connected  with  different  orders  of  abstractions  and  involve 
psycho-logical  issues  connected  with  ‘emotions’  and  ‘intellect’,  linearity 
versus  non-linearity,  ‘straight’  versus  ‘curved*. ,  explained  in  Parts  VII 
and  VIII. 

In  life,  as  well  as  in  science,  we  deal  with  different  happenings, 
objects,  and  larger  or  smaller  bits  of  materials.  We  have  a  habit  of 
speaking  about  them  in  terms  of  ‘matter’.  Through  a  semantic  disturb - 

‘MATTKR’,  ‘SMACK’,  TIMM* 

ance,  called  identification,  we  fancy  that  such  a  thing  as  ‘matter’  has 
separate  physical  existence.  It  would  probably  be  a  shock  to  be  invited 
seriously  to  give  a  piece  of  ‘matter’  (give  and  not  burst  into  speech)  .  I 
have  had  the  most  amusing  experiences  in  this  field.  Most  people,  scien¬ 
tists  included,  hand  over  a  pencil  or  something  of  this  sort.  But  did  they 
actually  give  ‘matter’  ?  What  they  gave  is  not  to  be  symbolised  simply 
‘matter’.  The  object,  ‘pencil’,  which  they  handed ,  requires  linguistically 
‘space’ ;  otherwise,  there  would  be  no  pencil  but  a  mathematical  point,  a 
fiction.  It  also  requires  verbally  ‘time’;  otherwise,  there  would  be  no 
pencil  but  a  ‘flash’. 

Similarly,  if  any  one  is  invited  to  give  a  piece  of  ‘space’  (again  give 
it,  and  not  burst  into  speech),  the  best  he  could  do  would  be  to  wave 
his  hand  and  try  to  show  ‘space’.  But  the  waving  of  the  hand  referred 
to  what  we  call  air,  dust,  microbes,  gravitational  and  electromagnetic 
fields , .  In  other  words,  structurally,  the  supposed  ‘space’  was  fulness  of 
some  materials  already  ‘in  space’  and  ‘in  time*. 

In  the  case  of  giving  ‘time’,  one  could  show  his  watch.  A  similar 
objection  holds,  also;  namely,  that  he  has  shown  us  so-called  ‘matter’ 
which  is  ‘moving’  in  ‘space’.  It  is  very  important  to  acquire  the  s.r  that 
when  we  use  the  term  ‘matter’  we  refer  to  something,  let  us  say,  the 
pencil,  which,  according  to  the  accepted  el  language ,  also  involves  ‘space’ 
and  ‘time’,  which  we  disregard.  When  we  use  the  term  ‘space*,  we 
refer  to  a  fulness  of  some  materials,  which  exists  in  ‘time’.  But  because 
these  materials  are  usually  invisible  to  the  ‘senses’,  we  again  disregard 
them.  In  using  the  term  ‘time’,  we  refer  to  ‘matter’  moving  in  ‘space’, 
which  again  we  disregard. 

What  is  said  here  and  what  will  follow  is  structurally  uncondi¬ 
tionally  fundamental  for  a  theory  of  sanity,  because  in  most  cases  of 
‘insanity’  and  un-sanity,  there  is  a  disorientation  as  to  ‘space’  and  ‘time’. 
In  identification,  the  semantic  disturbance  which  affects  nearly  all  of  us, 
and  is  at  the  foundation  of  the  majority  of  human  difficulties,  private  or 
public,  there  invariably  appears  a  special  semantic  disorientation  in  our 
feelings  toward  ‘matter’,  ‘space’,  and  ‘time’.  This  is  only  natural,  for 
the  ‘insane*  and  un-sane  are  the  unadjusted ;  the  ‘sane’  are  the  supposedly 
adjusted. 

Adjusted  to  what?  To  the  world  around  us  and  ourselves.  Our 
human  world  differs  from  the  world  of  animals.  It  is  more  complex  and 
the  problems  of  human  adjustment  become  also  more  subtle.  In  animal 
life,  attitudes  toward  the  world  do  not  matter  in  a  similar  sense;  with 
us,  they  become  important ;  hence  the  need  of  analysis  of  the  new  human 
‘semantic  universe’,  which  involves  the  ‘universe  of  discourse’.  This 

226  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

‘universe  of  discourse’  is  strictly  connected  with  the  terms  of  ‘matter’, 
‘space’,  and  ‘time’,  structure,  and  our  semantic  attitude  toward  these 
terms. 

Let  us  return  to  the  analysis  of  our  object  which  we  call  the  ‘pencil1. 
We  have  seen  that  the  object  pencil  is  not  ‘matter’,  nor  ‘space’,  nor 
‘time’.  A  question  arises,  which  has  been  asked  very  often  and  has  never, 
to  my  knowledge,  been  answered  satisfactorily:  what  ‘is’  the  object 
pencil,  and  what  ‘are’  the  terms  ‘matter’,  ‘space’,  and  ‘time’  ?  Here  and 
there  some  one  has  given  fragments  of  answers  or  some  satisfactory 
detached  statements.  But  in  every  case  I  know,  the  semantic  disturb¬ 
ance  called  identification  appears,  and  so  even  the  casual  correct  answer 
is  not  applied  but  remains  enmeshed  in  some  other  identifications.  I  have 
spent  much  ‘time’  and  labour  in  overcoming  my  own  identifications,  and 
now  confront  the  situation  that  nearly  every  work  I  read  from  this  point 
of  view  cannot  be  criticized,  but  requires  rewriting.  This  task  is  impos¬ 
sible  for  me,  technically  and  otherwise.  So,  finally,  I  decided  to  formu¬ 
late  the  present  ^-system,  and  then  see  what  kind  of  reconstruction 
can  be  accomplished  with  the  new  evaluation. 

The  answer  to  the  questions  set  above  is  childishly  simple,  yet  I 
will  carry  it  all  through  and  let  the  semantic  consequences  speak  for 
themselves.  The  chunk  of  nature,  the  specially  shaped  accumulation  of 
materials . ,  which  we  call  a  pencil,  ‘is’  fundamentally  and  absolutely 
un-speakable ,  simply  because  whatever  we  may  say  about  it,  is  not  it .  We 
may  write  with  this  something,  but  we  cannot  write  with  its  name  or  the 
descriptions  of  this  something.  So  the  object  is  not  words .  It  is  impor¬ 
tant  that  the  reader  be  entirely  convinced  at  this  point,  and  it  requires 
some  training,  performed  repeatedly,  before  we  get  our  s.r  adjusted  to 
this  simple  fact.  Our  statement  had  two  parts.  One  was  rather  unprom¬ 
ising;  namely,  that  the  object  was  absolutely  un-speakable,  because  no 
amount  of  words  will  make  the  object.  The  other  was  more  promising, 
for  we  learned  an  extremely  important,  perhaps  crucial,  semantic  fact ; 
namely,  what  the  object  pencil  is  not;  namely,  that  the  object  is  not 
words .  We  must  face  here  an  important  semantic  fact.  If  we  are  told 
that  we  cannot  get  the  moon,  we  stop  worrying  about  it,  and  we  regard 
any  dream  about  getting  the  moon  as  an  infantile  phantasy.  In  this 
example,  we  could  not  even  say  that  such  news  as  the  impossibility  of 
getting  the  moon  was  sad,  or  unpleasant,  news.  We  might  say  so, 
jokingly,  to  an  infant,  but  the  majority  of  the  grown-ups  would  not 
have  their  s.r  perturbed  by  it.  A  similar  situation  arises  with  the  object 
called  pencil.  The  object  is  not  words.  There  is  nothing  sad  or  depress¬ 
ing  about  this  fact.  We  accept  it  as  a  fact  and  stop  worrying  about  it,  as 

‘MATTER’,  ‘SPACE’,  ‘TIME’ 

an  infant  would.  The  majority  of  the  old  ‘philosophical’  speculations 
about  this  subject  belong  to  the  semantic  period  of  our  infancy,  when 
we  live  in  phantasies  and  structurally  gamble  on  words  to  which  we 
affectively  ascribe  objective  existence , .  This  represents  full-fledged 
un-sanity  due  to  identification.  The  answer  to  the  question,  what  ‘are’ 
the  terms  ‘matter’,  ‘space’,  and  ‘time’,  is,  as  usual,  given  in  the  properly 
formulated  question.  They  ‘are’  terms, — ‘ Modi  considerandi* ,  as  Leibnitz 
called  them  without  fully  realizing  the  semantic  importance  of  his  own 
statement.  Incidentally,  it  must  be  noticed  that  it  was  the  psycho-logical 
characteristic  of  Leibnitz  who  was  capable  of  such  a  statement,  that 
was  probably  responsible  for  his  whole  work,  as  will  become  more 
apparent  later  on.  When  we  abandon  primitive  standards  of  evaluation, 
geniuses  will  be  made  by  a  semantic  education  which  relieves  the  race 
from  the  older  blockages. 

So  we  see  clearly  that  outside  of  our  skins  there  is  something  going 
on,  which  we  call  the  world,  or  a  pencil,  or  anything,  which  is  indepen¬ 
dent  of  our  words  and  which  is  not  words.  Here  we  come  across  a  very 
fundamental  irreversible  process.  We  can  say  that  in  this  world  a  man 
and  his  words  have  happened.  There  is  a  ‘causal’  eventual  complex 
series  between  the  world,  us,  and  our  words,  but  in  unaided  nature  this 
process  is,  in  the  main,  irreversible,  a  fact  unknown  to  primitives  who 
believe  in  the  magic  of  words.  Through  our  ingenuity  we  can  make  this 
process  partially  reversible ;  namely,  we  can  produce  gramophones,  tele¬ 
phones  in  all  their  developments,  electromechanical  men  who  obey 
orders , . 

We  know  in  1933  that  in  the  semantic  world  this  process  is  dra¬ 
matically  effective.  Words  are  the  result  of  the  activity  of  one  organism, 
and  they,  in  turn,  activate  other  organisms.  On  the  macroscopic  level  of 
ordinary  behaviour,  this  last  was  known  long  ago,  but  only  in  the  last 
few  years  has  psychiatry  discovered  what  kind  of  semantic  and  psycho- 
physiological  disasters  words  and  their  consequences  may  produce  in  the 
human  organism.  These  last  are  already  on  sub-microscopic  levels,  not 
obvious  and,  therefore,  only  recently  discovered. 

The  structure  of  the  language  of  ‘matter’,  ‘space’,  and  ‘time’  is 
ancient.  The  primitive  saw  something,  ate  something,  was  hurt  by  some¬ 
thing  , .  Here  was  an  occasion  for  a  grunt  of  satisfaction,  or  of  pain. 
The  equivalents  of  words  like  ‘matter’,  ‘substance’. ,  originated.  Neither 
he,  nor  the  majority  of  us,  realized  that  the  small  or  large  bits  of  mate¬ 
rials  we  deal  with  appear  as  extremely  complex  processes  (explained  in 
Part  X).  For  him,  as  for  most  of  us,  these  bits  of  materials  ‘are’  ‘con¬ 
crete’,  whatever  that  means,  and  he  might  know  ‘all  about  them’,  which 

228  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

must  have  led  to  identification . ,  and  other  delusional  evaluations.  Of 
course,  these  were  phantasies  of  human  infancy,  and,  in  lives  lived  in  a 
world  of  phantasies,  adjustment,  and,  therefore,  sanity,  is  impossible. 
Since  he  did  not  see  or  feel,  or  know  about  the  material  he  was  im¬ 
mersed  in,  the  fulness  he  was  living  in,  he  invented  the  term  ‘space’,  or 
its  equivalent,  for  the  invisible  materials  which  were  present.  Knowing 
nothing  of  fulness,  he  objectified  what  appeared  to  him  to  be  empty 
‘space’  into  ‘absolute  emptiness’,  which  later  became  ‘absolute  space’, 
‘absolute  nothingness’,  by  ‘definition’. 

There  are  several  important  remarks  which  can  be  made  about 
this  ‘absolute  emptiness’  and  ‘absolute  nothingness’.  First  of  all,  we  now 
know,  theoretically  and  empirically,  that  such  a  thing  does  not  exist. 
There  may  be  more  or  less  of  something,  but  never  an  unlimited  ‘perfect 
vacuum’.  In  the  second  place,  our  nervous  make-up,  being  in  accord 
with  experience,  is  such  that  ‘absolute  emptiness’  requires  ‘outside  walls’. 
The  question  at  once  arises,  is  the  world  ‘finite’  or  ‘infinite’?  If  we  say 
‘finite’,  it  has  to  have  outside  walls,  and  then  the  question  arises :  What 
is  ‘behind  the  walls’?  If  we  say  it  is  ‘infinite’,  the  problem  of  the  psycho¬ 
logical  ‘walls’  is  not  eliminated,  and  we  still  have  the  semantic  need  foi 
walls,  and  then  ask  what  is  beyond  the  walls.  So  we  see  that  such  a 
world  suspended  in  some  sort  of  an  ‘absolute  void’  represents  a  nature 
against  human  nature ,  and  so  we  had  to  invent  something  supernatural 
to  account  for  such  assumed  nature  against  human  nature.  In  the  third 
place,  and  this  remark  is  the  most  fundamental  of  all,  because  a  symbol 
must  stand  for  something  to  be  a  symbol  at  all,  ‘ absolute  nothingness 9 
cannot  be  objective  and  cannot  be  symbolised  at  all .  This  ends  the  argu¬ 
ment,  as  all  we  may  say  about  it  is  neither  true  nor  false,  but  non-sense . 
We  can  make  noises,  but  say  nothing  about  the  external  world.  It  is  easy 
to  see  that  ‘absolute  nothingness’  is  a  label  for  a  semantic  disturbance, 
for  verbal  objectification,  for  a  pathological  state  inside  our  skin,  for  a 
fancy,  but  not  a  symbol,  for  a  something  which  has  objective  existence 
outside  our  skin. 

Some  other  imaginary  consequences  of  this  semantic  disturbance 
are  far-fetched  and  very  gloomy.  If  our  world  and  all  other  worlds 
(island  universes)  were  somehow  suspended  in  such  an  ‘absolute  void’, 
these  universes  would  radiate  their  energy  into  this  ‘infinite  void’,  what¬ 
ever  that  means,  and  so  sooner  or  later  would  come  to  an  end,  their 
energy  being  exhausted.  But,  fortunately,  when  we  eliminate  this 
pathological  semantic  state  by  proper  education  all  these  gloomy  symp¬ 
toms  vanish  as  mere  fancies.  It  must  be  noticed  that  this  ‘absolute  space’, 
‘absolute  void’,  ‘absolute  nothingness’  with  its  difficulties,  which  are  due 

‘MATT ICR’,  ‘SrAtTi’,  ‘T1MK' 

to  very  primitive  structural  speculations  on  words,  and  to  some  un-sane 
ascribing  of  objectivity  to  words,  can  be  abolished  quite  simply  if  we 
decide  to  investigate  and  re-educate  our  s.r. 

What  we  know  positively  about  ‘space’  is  that  it  is  not  ‘emptiness*, 
but  ‘fulness’,  or  a  ‘plenum*.  Now  ‘fulness’  or  a  ‘plenum’,  first  of  all,  is 
a  term  of  entirely  different  non-el  structure.  When  we  have  a  plenum 
or  fulness,  it  must  be  a  plenum  of  ‘something’,  ‘somewhere*,  at  ‘some 
time’,  and  so  the  term  implies,  at  least,  all  three  of  our  former  elemen- 
talistic  terms .  Furthermore,  fulness  by  some  psycho-logical  process  does 
not  require  ‘outside  walls’.  If  we  ask  if  such  a  universe  of  fulness  is 
‘finite’  or  ‘infinite*,  without  any  psycho-logical  difficulties,  we  may  reply 
that  we  do  not  know,  but  if  we  study  enough  of  the  materials  of  this 
universe  we  may  know,  A  universe  of  fulness  may  be  assumed  to  have 
boundaries,  and  then  we  may  ask  again  the  annoying  question :  What  is 
beyond?  With  the  proper  use  of  language,  this  difficulty  is  again 
eliminated. 
