
Without  going  into  unnecessary  details,  we  see  that  a  boundary, 
or  a  limit,  or  a  wall,  is  something  by  definition,  beyond  which  we  cannot 
go.  If  there  is  nothing  to  restrict  our  progress,  there  are  no  boundaries . 
Let  us  fancy  some  cosmic  traveller  with  some  extraordinary  flying 
machine,  and  let  us  assume  that  he  flies  without  stopping  in  a  ‘definite 
direction*.  If  he  never  encounters  any  boundary,  he  is  surely  entitled  to 
say  that  his  universe  is  unbounded.  The  question  may  arise:  Is  such 
an  unbounded  universe  finite  or  infinite  in  size?  Again  let  us  apply 
correct  language  and  a  little  analogy.  A  traveller  on  a  sphere,  like  our 
own  earth,  could  travel  endlessly  without  ever  coming  to  a  boundary, 
and  yet  we  know  that  the  sphere,  our  earth,  is  of  finite  size.  Mathema¬ 
ticians  have  worked  out  this  point,  and  it  is  embodied  in  the  Einstein 
theory.  The  universe  is  unbounded,  an  answer  which  satisfies  our  feel¬ 
ings  ;  yet  it  is  finite  in  size,  although  very  large,  an  answer  which  satisfies 
our  rationality  *  The  visualization  of  such  a  universe  is  quite  difficult. 
It  should  not  be  visualized  as  a  sphere,  but,  at  a  later  stage,  we  will  see 
that  it  can  be  visualized  satisfactorily.  The  condition  for  visualization 
is  to  eliminate  identification,  that  semantic  disturbance  which  is  strictly 
connected  with  primitive  ways  of  ‘thinking*. 

The  problems  of  ‘time*  are  similar,  although  they  have  a  different 
neurological  background.  The  rough  materials  we  deal  with  mostly 
affect  our  sight,  touch , .  Invisible  materials,  like  air . ,  affect  these  ‘senses* 

*1  do  not  introduce  here  the  latest  speculations  in  this  field,  because,  from  a 
non^ ari stole lian  point  of  view,  they  appear  meaningless. 

230  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

less,  but  more  the  kinesthetic  ‘senses’  by  which  muscular  movements  are 
appreciated,  and  so  ‘space’  and  ‘time’  have  different  neurological  back¬ 
grounds.  ‘Time’  seemingly  represents  a  general  characteristic  of  all 
nervous  tissue  (and,  perhaps,  living  tissue  in  general)  connected  with 
summarizing  or  integrating.  What  we  have  to  deal  with  in  this  world 
and  in  ourselves  appears  as  periods  and  periodicity,  pulsations , .  We  are 
made  up  of  very  long  chains  of  atomic  pulsating  clocks,  on  the  sub- 
microscopic  level.  On  the  macroscopic  level,  we  have  also  to  deal  with 
periodic  occurrences,  of  hunger,  sleep,  breathing,  heart-beats,.  We 
know  already  that,  beyond  some  limits,  discontinuous  ti mes,  when  rapid 
enough,  are  blended  into  continuous  feelings  of  pressure,  or  warmth, 
or  light , .  On  objective  levels  we  deal  with  timer,  and  we  feel  ‘time’, 
when  the  timer  are  rapid  enough. 

Again,  the  moving  pictures  are  a  good  illustration.  The  normal 
moving-picture  film  shows  sixteen  pictures  a  second.  The  film  gives  us 
static  pictures  with  finite  differences.  When  we  put  it  on  the  projector, 
the  differences  vanish.  Our  nervous  system  has  summarized  and  inte¬ 
grated  them,  and  we  see  ‘continuous  motion’.  If  pictures  are  taken  at  the 
rate  of  eight  a  second  and  theQ  run  on  the  normal  projector  for  the 
speed  of  sixteen  a  second,  we  summarize  and  integrate  again,  but  we 
see  a  fast  moving  picture,  If  the  pictures  are  taken  at  the  rate  of  128 
exposures  a  second  and  run  on  the  normal  projector  of  sixteen  pictures 
to  a  second,  we  have  what  is  called  a  slow  moving  picture.  It  should  be 
noticed  that  the  order  of  the  semantic  rhythmic  processes  is  fourfold ; 
it  involves  order  not  only  in  ‘space’  (three  dimensions)  but  in  ‘time’ 
also.  Periods  of  contraction  alternate  with  periods  of  rest,  and  this 
occurs  at  nearly  regular  intervals. 

This  rhythmic  tendency  is,  indeed,  so  fundamental  and  so  inherent 
in  living  tissue  that  we  can,  at  pleasure,  make  voluntary  muscles;  for 
example,  exhibit  artificially  induced  rhythmic  contractions  by  immers- 
ing  them  in  special  saline  solutions,  as,  for  instance,  a  solution  of  sodium 
chloride.  We  should  also  not  wonder  why  modern  science  assumes  that 
life  may  have  originated  in  the  sea.  The  physico-chemical  conditions  of 
saline  solutions  are  such  that  they  favour  rhythmic  processes ;  they  not 
only  may  originate  them,  but  may  also  keep  them  up,  and  life  seemingly 
is  very  closely  connected  with  autonomous  rhythmic  processes. 

Such  rhythmic  processes  are  felt  on  lower  orders  of  abstraction  as 
continuous  time ,  probably  because  of  the  rapidity  and  overlapping  of 
periods.  On  higher  order  abstractions,  when  structurally  proper  lin¬ 
guistic  and  extra-neural  means  are  developed,  they  appear  as  timer. 

‘MATTER*,  ‘SPACE*,  ‘TIME’ 

Perhaps,  neurologically,  animals  feel  similarly  as  we  do  about 
‘time’,  but  they  have  no  neurological  means  to  elaborate  linguistic  and 
extra-neural  means  which  alone  allow  us  to  extend  and  summarize  the 
manifold  experience  of  many  generations  (time-binding).  They  can¬ 
not  pass  from  ‘time’  to  ‘times’.  Obviously,  if  we  do  not,  we  then  re¬ 
nounce  our  human  characteristics,  and  copy  animals  in  our  evaluating 
processes,  a  practice  which  must  be  harmful. 

In  nature  the  visible  and  invisible  materials  seemingly  consist  of 
recurring  pulsations  of  extremely  minute  and  rapid  periods,  which,  in 
some  instances,  become  macroscopic  periods.  In  the  first  case,  we  cannot 
see  them  or  feel  them,  so  we  talk  about  ‘concreteness*, .  In  the  second 
case,  we  see  the  periodic  movements,  as  of  the  earth  around  the  sun . ,  or 
we  feel  our  heart-beats , .  We  see  that  the  visible  or  invisible  materials  in 
nature  are  compounded  of  periodic  pulsations  and  are  simply  two  aspects 
of  one  process.  The  splitting  of  these  processes  into  ‘matter’,  ‘space’, 
and  ‘time’  is  a  characteristic  function  of  our  nervous  system.  These 
abstractions  are  inside  our  skins,  and  are  methods  of  representation  for 
ourselves  to  ourselves,  and  are  not  the  objective  world  around  us. 

It  must  be  realized  that  under  such  circumstances  we  cannot  speak 
about  ‘finiteness’  or  ‘infiniteness’  of  ‘matter’,  ‘space’,  and  ‘time’,  as  all 
the  old  ‘philosophers*  have  done,  Leibnitz  included,  because  these  terms 
‘finite’  and  ‘infinite’,  though  they  may  be  conceivably  applied  to  numbers 
of  aspects  of  objective  entities,  have  no  meaning  if  applied  to  linguistic 
issues,  that  is,  to  forms  of  representation  outside  of  numbers.  Of  course, 
if,  through  a  semantic  pathological  disturbance  (objectification),  we  do 
ascribe  some  delusional  objective  existence  to  verbal  terms,  we  can  then 
talk  about  anything,  but  such  conversations  have  no  more  value  than  the 
deliria  of  the  ‘mentally’  ill.  The  terms  ‘finite’  or  ‘infinite’  are  only  legiti¬ 
mately  applied  to  numerical  problems,  and  so  we  can  speak  legitimately 
of  a  finite  or  infinite  numbers  of  inches,  or  pounds,  or  hours,  or  similar 
entities,  but  statements  about  the  ‘finite  mind’  or  the  ‘understanding  of 
the  infinite’. ,  have  no  meanings  and  only  reveal  the  pathological  semantic 
disturbance  of  the  patient. 

The  objectification  of  our  feeling  of  ‘time’  has  had,  and  has  at  pres¬ 
ent,  very  tragic  consequences  strictly  connected  with  our  un-sanity.  It 
must  be  remembered  that  particularly  in  ‘mental*  and  nervous  difficulties 
the  patient  seldom  realizes  the  character  of  his  illness.  He  may  feel 
pains,  he  may  feel  very  unhappy,  and  what  not,  but  he  usually  does  not 
understand  their  origin.  This  is  particularly  true  with  semantic  disturb¬ 
ances.  One  may  explain  endlessly,  but,  in  most  cases,  it  is  perfectly 
hopeless  to  try  to  help.  Only  a  very  few  benefit.  Here  lies,  also,  the 

232  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

main  difficulty  in  writing  this  book.  Readers  who  identify,  that  is,  who 
believe  unconsciously  with  all  their  affective  impulses  in  the  objectivity 
of  matter*,  ‘space*,  and  ‘time*,  will  have  difficulty  in  modifying  their  s.r 
in  this  field. 

Let  us  see  now  what  consequences  the  objectification  of  ‘time*  will 
have  for  us.  If  we  do  not  objectify,  and  feel  instinctively  and  perma¬ 
nently  that  words  are  not  the  things  spoken  about,  then  we  could  not 
speak  about  such  meaningless  subjects  as  the  ‘beginning*  or  the  ‘end* 
of  ‘time*.  But,  if  we  are  semantically  disturbed  and  objectify,  then,  of 
course,  since  objects  have  a  beginning  and  an  end,  so  also  would  ‘time* 
have  a  beginning*  and  an  ‘end*.  In  such  pathological  fancies  the  universe 
must  have  a  ‘beginning  in  time*  and  so  must  have  been  made . ,  and  all 
of  our  old  anthropomorphic  and  objectified  mythologies  follow,  including 
the  older  theories  of  entropy  in  physics.  But,  if  ‘time*  is  only  a  human 
form  of  representation  and  not  an  object,  the  universe  has  no  ‘beginning 
in  time’  and  no  ‘end  in  time’ ;  in  other  words,  the  universe  is  ‘time*-less. 
It  was  not  made,  it  just  ‘was,  is,  and  will  be*.  The  moment  we  realize,  feel 
permanently,  and  utilize  these  realizations  and  feelings  that  words  are 
not  things,  then  only  do  we  acquire  the  semantic  freedom  to  use  different 
forms  of  representation.  We  can  fit  better  their  structure  to  the  facts 
at  hand,  become  better  adjusted  to  these  facts  which  are  not  words,  and 
so  evaluate  properly  m.o  realities,  which  evaluation  is  important  for 
sanity. 

According  to  what  we  know  in  1933,  the  universe  is  ‘time’-less; 
in  other  words,  there  is  no  such  object  as  ‘time*.  In  terms  of  periods, 
or  years,  or  minutes,  or  seconds,  which  is  a  different  language,  we  may 
have  infinite  numbers  of  such  times.  This  statement  is  another  form  of 
stating  the  principle  of  conservation  of  energy,  or  whatever  other  fun¬ 
damental  higher  abstraction  physicists  will  discover. 

Because  ‘time*  is  a  feeling,  produced  by  conditions  of  this  world 
outside  and  inside  our  skins,  which  can  be  said  to  represent  times,  the 
problem  of  ‘time*  becomes  a  neuro-mathematical  issue.  It  must  also  be 
noticed  that  times,  as  a  term,  implies  times  of  something,  somewhere, 
and  so,  as  with  plenum  or  fulness,  it  is  structurally  a  non-ely  A  term. 

Times  has  also  many  other  most  important  implications.  It  implies 
numbers  of  times,  it  implies  periods,  waves,  vibrations,  frequencies, 
units,  quanta,  discontinuities,  and,  indeed,  the  whole  structural  appa¬ 
ratus  of  modern  science. 

Euclidean  ‘space’  had  the  semantic  background  of  ‘emptiness*.  In 
it  we  moved  our  figures  from  place  to  place  and  always  assumed  that 
this  could  be  done  quite  safely  and  accurately.  Newtonian  mechanics 

'MATTER*,  ‘SPACE’,  'TIME’ 

also  followed  this  path  and  even  postulated  an  'absolute  space’  (empti¬ 
ness).  All  of  which  harks  back  to  the  old  aristotelianism. 

N,  and  A  systems  have  the  semantic  background  of  fulness  or 
plenum,  although,  unfortunately,  this  background  is,  as  yet,  mainly 
unrealized,  not  fully  utilized ;  it  has  not,  as  yet,  generally  affected  our  s.r . 

A  simple  illustration  will  make  the  difference  clear.  Imagine  that 
in  one  part  of  a  large  room  we  have  an  open  umbrella  which  we  would 
like  to  compare  with  another  'unit’  open  umbrella.  Let  us  imagine  that 
the  room  has  the  air  pumped  out  and  also  that  all  other  eventual  dis¬ 
turbing  factors  are  eliminated.  We  can  move  our  open  'unit’  umbrella 
from  one  part  of  the  room  to  another,  and  this  movement  will  not  con¬ 
siderably  distort  our  'unit*  umbrella.  Now  let  us  perform  a  similar 
experiment  in  two  houses,  separated  some  distance,  during  a  storm,  a 
storm  implying,  of  course,  fulness.  Can  we  transport  our  'unit*  umbrella 
through  the  storm  and  preserve  its  shape . ,  in  a  fulness,  without  taking 
the  fulness  into  account?  Of  course  not.  We  see  what  serious  differ¬ 
ence  it  makes  if  our  theories  presuppose  'emptiness*  or  'fulness*. 

This  shows  also  why  the  non-euclidean  geometries  which  deal  with 
a  plenum  are  structurally  preferable  and  semantically  sounder  and  more 
in  accord  with  the  structure  of  the  world,  than  the  language  of  euclidean 
'emptiness*,  to  which  there  is  nothing  in  nature  to  correspond.  Should 
we  wonder  that  modern  linguists  (mathematicians)  work  in  the  direction 
of  fulness  and  of  fusing  geometry  with  physics.  It  is  obviously  the  only 
thing  to  do.  Differential  geometry  is  the  foundation  of  this  new  outlook, 
but,  even  in  this  geometry,  lines  could  legitimately  be  transported  over 
great  distances.  Weyl  introduced  a  semantic  improvement  of  this  point 
of  view  by  assuming  that  for  a  differential  geometry  it  is  illegitimate 
to  use  comparisons  at  large  distances,  but  that  all  operations  should  be 
between  indefinitely  near  points.1 

It  should  be  noticed  that  scientists,  in  general,  disregard  almost 
completely  the  verbal  and  semantic  problems  explained  here,  a  fact  which 
leads  to  great  and  unnecessary  confusion,  and  makes  modern  works  inac¬ 
cessible  to  the  layman.  Take,  for  instance,  the  case  of  the  'curvature  of 
space-time*.  Mathematicians  use  this  expression  very  often  and,  inside 
their  skins,  they  know  mostly  what  they  are  talking  about.  Millions 
upon  millions  of  even  intelligent  readers  hear  such  an  expression  as  the 
'curvature  of  space-time’.  Owing  to  nursery  mythology  and  primitive 
s.r ,  'space’  for  them  is  'emptiness’,  and  so  they  try  to  understand  the 
'curvature  of  emptiness*.  After  severe  pains,  they  come  to  a  very  true , 
yet,  for  them,  hopeless,  conclusion ;  namely,  that  'curvature  of  emptiness’ 
is  either  non-sense  or  ‘beyond  them*,  with  the  semantic  result  that  either 

234  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

they  have  contempt  for  the  mathematicians  who  deal  with  non-sense  or 
feel  hopeless  about  their  own  capacities— both  undesirable  semantic 
results. 

The  truth  is  that  ‘curvature  of  emptiness'  has  no  meanings,  no  mat¬ 
ter  who  might  say  it,  but  curvature  of  fulness  is  entirely  different.  Let 
the  reader  look  at  the  cloud  of  smoke  from  his  cigarette  or  cigar,  and 
he  will  at  once  understand  what  ‘curvature  of  fulness*  means.  Of  course, 
he  will  realize,  as  well  as  the  mathematicians  do,  that  the  problem  may 
be  difficult,  but,  at  least,  it  has  sense  and  represents  a  problem.  It  is  not 
non-sense. 

Similar  remarks  apply  to  higher  dimensions  in  ‘space*.  Higher 
dimensions  in  ‘emptiness*  is  also  non-sense;  and  the  layman  is  right  in 
refusing  to  accept  it.  But  higher  dimensions  in  fulness  is  entirely  a 
different  problem.  A  look  at  the  cloud  of  smoke  from  our  cigarette  will 
again  make  it  completely  plain  to  everybody  that  to  give  an  account  of 
fulness,  we  may  need  an  enormous  number  of  data  or,  as  we  say 
roughly,  of  dimensions.  This  applies,  also,  to  the  new  four-dimensional 
world  of  Minkowski.  It  is  a  fulness  made  up  of  world  lines,  a  network 
of  events  or  intervals . ,  and  it  is  not  non-sense. 

Lately,  there  has  appeared  an  excellent  book  by  Bertrand  Russell, 
published  by  the  International  Library  of  Psychology,  Philosophy  and 
Scientific  Method ;  and  yet  the  title  is  The  Analysis  of  Matter,  without 
any  quotation  marks. 

This  book  is  really  an  unusually  fine  and  fundamental  work  which 
has  no  defects  which  could  be  implied  by  the  title.  This  title  simply  dis¬ 
regards  the  issues  explained  here ;  it  should  be  The  Analysis  of  ‘ Matter \ 

It  is  with  some  pleasure  that  one  sees  such  an  authority  as  Edding¬ 
ton,  in  his  The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Relativity,  on  p.  158,  making 
the  statement :  ‘In  using  the  word  “space**  it  is  difficult  to  repress  irrele¬ 
vant  ideas ;  therefore  let  us  abandon  the  word  and  state  explicitly  that 
we  are  considering  a  network  of  intervals’ . 

For  the  reasons  already  given,  I  do  not  use  the  terms  ‘matter*, 
‘space*,  or  ‘time*  without  quotation  marks;  and,  wherever  possible,  shall 
use,  instead,  the  terms  ‘materials*,  ‘plenum*,  ‘fulness*,  ‘spread’,  and 
‘ times’ ,  (say  seconds).  Indeed,  these  semantic  problems  are  so  serious 
that  they  should  be  brought  to  the  attention  of  International  Mathemati¬ 
cal  and  Physical  Congresses,  so  that  a  new  and  structurally  correct 
terminology  could  be  established.  It  is  not  desirable  that  science  should 
structurally  mislead  the  layman  and  disturb  his  s.r.  It  is  easier  for 
trained  specialists  to  change  their  terminology  than  to  re-educate  seman¬ 
tically  the  rest  of  the  race.  I  would  suggest  that  terms  ‘matter’,  ‘sub- 

‘MATTER’,  ‘SPACE’,  ‘TIME’ 

stance’,  ‘space’,  and  ‘time’  should  be  completely  eliminated  from  science, 
because  of  their  extremely  wide-spread  and  vicious  structural  and  so 
semantic  implications,  and  that  the  terms  ‘events’,  ‘space-time’,  ‘material’, 
‘plenum’,  ‘fulness*,  ‘spreads’,  ‘time/. ,  be  used  instead.  These  terms  not 
only  do  not  have  the  old  structural  and  semantic  implications,  but,  on 
the  contrary,  they  convey  the  modern  structural  notions  and  involve  new 
s.r.  The  use  of  the  old  terms  drags  in,  unconsciously  and  automatically, 
the  old  primitive  metaphysical  structure  and  s.r  which  are  entirely  con¬ 
tradicted  by  experience  and  modern  science.  I  venture  to  suggest  that 
such  a  change  in  terminology  would  do  more  to  render  the  newer  works 
intelligible  than  scores  of  volumes  of  explanations  using  the  old  ter¬ 
minology. 

Before  summarizing  in  Parts  IX  and  X  what  modern  science 
has  to  tell  about  the  structure  of  the  world  around  us,  it  will  be  profitable 
to  enquire  what  are  the  means  by  which  we  can  recognize  this  structure. 

Section  B.  The  neurological  function  of  abstracting . 

Protoplasm,  even  in  its  simplest  form,  is  sensitive  to  different 
mechanical  and  chemical  stimulations ;  and,  indeed,  undifferentiated  pro¬ 
toplasm  has  already  all  the  potentialities  of  the  future  nervous  system. 
If  we  take  an  undifferentiated  bit  of  protoplasm,  and  some  stimulation 
is  applied  to  some  point,  the  stimulus  does  not  spread  somehow  ‘all  over 
at  once’,  with  some  mysterious  ‘infinite’  velocity,  but  propagates  itself 
with  finite  velocity  and  a  diminishing  gradient  from  one  end  of  our  bit 
of  protoplasm  to  the  opposite  end. 

Because  of  the  finite  velocity  of  propagation  and  the  fact  that  the 
action  is  by  contact  in  a  plenum ,  the  impulse  has  a  definite  direction  and 
diminishing  intensity,  or,  as  we  say,  the  bit  of  protoplasm  acquires  a 
temporal  polarity  (head-end).  Such  polarity  conditions  produce  a  di¬ 
rected  wave  of  excitement  of  diminishing  intensity,  which  Child  calls  a 
dynamic  gradient.  If  such  a  stimulation  were  applied  to  one  spot  for  a 
considerable  length  of  ‘time*,  some  kind  of  polarization  may  become  last¬ 
ing.  In  some  such  way  those  dynamic  gradients  have  become  structural - 
ised  in  the  forms  of  our  nervous  system,  which  represent  the  preferred 
paths  by  which  the  nervous  impulses  travel. 

The  bodies  of  most  organisms  are  protected  from  outside  stimula¬ 
tion  by  some  kind  of  membrane  or  cuticle  and  the  parts  of  the  surface 
have  developed  so  as  to  be  sensitive  to  one  form  of  stimulation  and  not 
to  others.  For  instance,  the  eye  registers  the  stimulations  of  light  waves, 
while  it  is  insensitive  to  sound . ,  and,  even  if  hit,  it  gives  only  the  feeling 
of  light.  Each  ‘sense-organ’  has  also  the  nervous  means  of  concentrating 

236  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

stimuli,  intensifying  them . ,  and  so  of  effecting  the  most  efficient  response 
of  the  corresponding  end-organ. 

In  our  school  days  we  were  taught  that  we  have  five  ‘senses’.  Mod¬ 
ern  researches  show  that  there  are  more  than  twenty  different  ‘senses’. 
Besides,  as  far  as  ‘Smith’  is  concerned,  we  know  that  ‘senses’  and  ‘mind’ 
cannot  be  divided. 

The  main  stimulations  which  we  find  in  the  outside  world  may  be 
divided  into  three  groups.  The  first  are  connected  with  the  roughest 
macroscopic  manifestations  of  the  outside  world ;  they  are  mechanical 
impacts  which  we  abstract  as  ‘tactile  sensations’,  which  range  from  a 
single  mechanical  contact  to  rhythmically  repeated  contacts  with  our  skin 
as  frequently  as  1552  vibrations  per  second.  Above  this  limit  ‘time?’ 
begin  to  be  registered  as  a  ‘duration* ;  that  is,  the  individuality  of  ‘time/ 
is  lost,  and  we  feel  pressure.  At  this  level  we  deal  with  gross  macro 
scopic  manifestations,  which  are  not  only  felt  but  can  also  be  seen. 

The  second  group  of  manifestations  is,  in  the  main,  no  more  on  the 
gross  level.  Here  belong  the  vibratory  manifestations  which  are  no  more 
visible  to  the  unaided  eye.  We  may  speak  of  them  as  on  the  microscopic 
level.  They  are  mechanical  vibrations  of  the  air . ,  and  we  become 
acquainted  with  them  in  the  form  of  sound.  The  vibrations  which  the 
average  ear  is  able  to  register  range  from  about  30  (sometimes  even  12) 
to  about  30,000  or  even  50,000  vibrations  a  second.  The  ear  does  not 
register  any  other  vibrations.* 

The  third  group  of  vibratory  manifestations  belongs  to  a  still  subtler 
level.  They  are  electromagnetic  waves  of  an  enormous  variety  of  wave¬ 
lengths  and  number  of  vibrations  per  second.  The  lower  members  of 
this  series  are  the  Hertzian  electric  waves,  the  higher  members  are  the 
X-,  or  Rontgen-rays.  Our  nervous  systems  are  capable  of  registering 
only  a  very  limited  range  of  these  vibrations ;  namely,  the  waves  called 
radiant  heat,  the  light  waves,  and  the  ultra-violet  rays,  these  last  only  on 
a  chemical  level.  It  seems  that  we  have  no  organ  which  responds  directly 
to  electric  waves,  ultra-violet  rays,  X-rays,  and  the  many  other  rays 
which  we  know  from  laboratory  work. 

Similarly,  the  chemical  ‘senses’  of  taste  and  smell  register  only  a 
very  small  number  of  actual  excitations  to  which  they  are  exposed. 

Animals  have  different  limits  of  nervous  susceptibility,  but  we  can 
have  no  idea  how  the  world  looks  to  them  unless  their  nervous  system 
is  quite  similar  to  our  own.  The  above  statements  will  become  clearer 
if  we  tabulate  some  of  them.  The  following  table  is  taken  from  An 
Introduction  to  Neurology  by  Professor  C.  Judson  Herrick,  p.  85  (Fifth 
Edition)  : 

♦Latest  researches  seem  to  modify  these  data. 

MATTER',  'SPACE',  ‘TIME’ 

Table  of  Physical  Vibrations* 

Physical 

process. 

Wave 

length. 

Number  of  vibrations 
per  second. 

Recep¬ 

tor. 

Sensa¬ 

tion. 

Mechanical 

contact. 

From  very  slow 
to 

1552  per  second. 

Skin. 

Touch 

and 

pressure. 

Above  12,280  mm. 

Below  30  per  second. 

None. 

None. 

Waves  in 

material 

media. 

12,280  mm. 
to 

13  mm. 

30  per  second 
to 

30,000  per  second. 

Internal 

ear. 

Tone. 

Below  13  mm. 

Above  30,000  per  second. 

None. 

None. 

oo  to  .2  mm. 
(electric  waves) . 

0  to  1500  billion 
(1.5  X  1018). 

None. 

None. 

.1  mm. 
to 

.0004  mm. 

3000  billion  (3  X  10”) 
to 

800,000  billion  (8  X  1014). 

Skin. 

Radiant 

heat 

.0008  mm. 
to 

.0004  mm. 

400,000  billion 
(4  X  1014) 
to 

800,000  billion 
(8  X  1014). 

Retina. 

Light 

and 

color. 

Ether 

waves. 

.0004  mm. 
to 

.000008  mm. 
