(ultra-violet 
rays). 

800,000  billion 
(8  X  W*) 
to 

40,000,000  billion 
(4X101*). 

None. 

None. 

.00002  mm. 
to 

.00000001  mm. 
(jr-rays). 

15,000,000  billion 
(1.5  X  10”) 
to 

30,000,000,000  billion 
(30  X  10”). 

None. 

None. 

.00000014  mm. 
to 

.0000000005  mm. 
(7-rays). 

2  billion  billion 
(2  X  10”) 
to 

600  billion  billion 
(6  X  10"). 

None. 

None. 

.00000000005  mm. 
to 

.000000000008  mm. 
(cosmic  rays). 

6,000  billion  billion 
(6  X  10”) 
to 

40,000  billion  billion 
(4  X  10”). 

None. 

None. 

*The  use  of  names  for  large  numbers  is  not  uniform  in  different  countries,  and 
so  I  give,  in  brackets,  the  United  States  and  French  equivalents  to  the  English 
names. 

Million  1,000,000  =  10*;  (million). 

Milliard  1,000,000,000  =  10*;  (billion  or  milliard). 

Billion  10*  X  10*  =  10“ ;  (trillion). 

In  this  table  1  billion  =  10*. 

238  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

As  a  further  illustration  of  the  mechanism  of  abstracting,  we  may 
suggest  the  observation  of  Weber  that  if,  for  instance,  a  room  is  lighted 
with  100  candles,  and  if  one  more  candle  is  brought  in,  the  increased 
illumination  will  be  appreciated  very  slightly.  But  not  so  if  we  had  a 
room  illuminated  with  1000  candles.  In  this  case,  we  should  not  appre¬ 
ciate  the  addition  of  one  candle  at  all.  Ten  candles  should  be  introduced 
to  make  an  appreciable  difference  in  our  perceptions.  The  Weber  law, 
as  it  is  called,  stated  that  in  the  above  case  1/100  of  the  original  strength 
of  the  stimulus  is  needed  to  make  a  change  appreciable.  For  light,  the 
fraction  is  about  1/100;  for  noise,  about  1/3;  for  pressure,  it  varies 
between  1/30  and  1/10;  for  weight,  between  1/70  and  1/40  in  various 
parts  of  the  body. 

If  we  use  compasses  and  experiment  with  pricks,  we  find  that  in 
different  parts  of  the  body  the  limit  of  the  distance  apart  of  the  points 

when  we  feel  one  prick  and  yet  have  two,  is  different. 

On  the  tip  of  the  tongue  this  limit  is .  1  mm. 

On  the  palmar  surface  of  third  phalanx  of  forefinger . 2  mm. 

On  the  palmar  surface  of  second  phalanges  of  fingers .  4  mm. 

On  the  palm  of  the  hand . 10  mm. 

On  the  dorsal  surface  of  first  phalanges  of  fingers . 14  mm. 

On  the  back  of  hand . 25  mm. 

On  the  upper  and  lower  parts  of  forearm . 37  mm. 

On  the  middle  thigh  and  back . 62  mm.2 

A  ‘sensation’  requires  appreciable  ‘time’  (timer  by  a  clock)  for  its 
development.  Part  of  the  ‘time’  is  spent  at  the  end-organ,  part  in  con¬ 
veying  the  nervous  impulse  along  the  nerves  to  the  brain  and  part  in  the 
brain.  A  ‘sensation’  usually  outlasts  the  stimulus,  and  often  a  single 
stimulus  produces  a  whole  series  of  ‘after-sensations*. 

As  compared  with  the  ‘sensations’  obtained  from  pain  spots,  touch 
is  quicker  in  its  development  and  persistence.  With  a  vibrating  string, 
1500  vibrations  a  second  are  recognizable  by  touch  as  vibrations.  At, 
over  1552  vibrations  a  second,  the  vibratory  character  is  lost,  and  we 
feel  only  continuous  pressure.  A  toothed  revolving  wheel  gives  the 
feeling  of  smoothness  (and  ‘continuity’)  when  the  teeth  meet  the  skin 
at  the  rate  of  from  480  to  680  per  second.3 

The  above  given  tables  and  facts  are  deeply  significant.  We  see, 
first  of  all,  that  structurally  we  are  immersed  in  a  world  full  of  energy 
manifestations,  out  of  which  we  abstract  directly  only  a  very  small  por¬ 
tion,  these  abstractions  being  already  coloured  by  the  specific  functioning 
and  structure  of  the  nervous  system — the  abstractors.  Very  probably, 
there  are  many  more  energy  manifestations  which,  as  yet,  we  have  not 

‘MATTER’,  ‘SPACE’,  ‘TIME’ 

discovered.  Every  few  years  we  discover  some  new  form  of  energy 
manifestation,  and,  at  present,  our  knowledge  is  already  so  advanced 
that  it  is  highly  probable  that  the  list  is  much  longer.  Finally,  and  here 
the  whole  ‘structure  of  human  knowledge’  begins  to  play  its  role;  for 
sanity  we  have  to  know  and  evaluate  this  world  around  us,  if  we  want 
to  adjust  ourselves  satisfactorily  to  it. 

Section  C.  Problems  of  adjustment . 

Is  the  problem  of  adjustment  in  the  animal  world  similar  to  that  in 
the  human  world?  No,  it  is  entirely  different.  Animals  do  not  alter 
their  environment  so  rapidly,  nor  to  such  an  extent  as  humans  do.  Ani¬ 
mals  are  not  time-binders;  they  have  not  the  capacity  by  which  each 
generation  can  start  where  the  former  left  off.  Neurologically,  animals 
have  no  means  for  extra-neural  extensions,  which  extensions  involve 
the  complex  mechanism  with  which  we  are  dealing  throughout  this  work. 

The  example  of  the  caterpillar,  already  cited,  shows  clearly  how 
organisms  not  adapted  to  their  environment  perish  and  do  not  propagate 
their  special,  non-survival  characteristics.  Similar  remarks  apply  to 
hens,  their  eggs,  and  chicks  which  are  kept  in  buildings  without  sunlight 
or  with  ordinary  glass  windows ;  these,  also,  do  not  survive,  and  so  pass 
out  of  the  picture. 

With  humans,  the  situation  is  entirely  different.  We  are  able  to 
produce  conditions  which  do  not  exist  in  unaided  nature.  We  produce 
artificial  conditions  and  so  our  numbers  and  distribution  are  not  regu¬ 
lated  by  unaided  nature  alone.  Animals  cannot  over-populate  the  globe, 
as  they  do  not  produce  artificially.  We  do  over-populate  this  globe  be¬ 
cause  we  produce  artificially.  With  animals ,  selfishness  comes  before 
altruism,  and  the  non- selfish  perish .  An  animal  has  to  live  first,  then  act . 
With  man,  the  reverse  is  true.  The  selfish  may  produce  such  conditions 
that  they  are  destroyed  by  them.  We  can  over-populate  the  globe  because 
of  artificial  production,  and  so  we  are  actually  born  nowadays  into  a 
world  where  we  must  act  first  before  we  can  live .  As  I  have  already 
shown  in  my  Manhood  of  Humanity  (p.  72),  the  old  animalistic,  falla¬ 
cious  generalizations  have  been,  and  are,  the  foundation  of  our  ‘philoso¬ 
phies*,  ‘ethics’,  systems . ,  and  naturally  such  animalistic  doctrines  must 
be  disastrous  to  us.  Neurologically,  we  build  up  conditions  which  our 
nervous  systems  cannot  stand;  and  so  we  break  down,  and,  perhaps, 
shall  not  even  survive. 

Animals  have  no  ‘doctrines*  in  our  meaning  of  the  term ;  thus,  doc¬ 
trines  are  no  part  of  their  environment,  and,  accordingly,  animals  can¬ 
not  perish  through  false  doctrines.  We  do  have  them,  however,  and, 

240  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

since  they  are  the  most  vital  environmental  semantic  conditions  regu¬ 
lating  our  lives,  if  they  are  fallacious,  they  make  oyr  lives  unadjusted 
and  so,  ultimately,  lead  to  non-survival. 

So  we  see  that  ‘human  adjustment'  is  quite  a  different  and  much 
more  complex  affair  than  ‘animal  adjustment’.  The  ‘world’  of  ‘man’  is 
also  a  different  and  much  more  complex  ‘world’  than  that  of  the  animal. 
There  seems  to  be  no  escape  from  this  conclusion.  We  see,  also,  that 
what  we  used  to  call  ‘senses’  supply  us  with  information  about  the 
world  that  is  very  limited  in  quantity,  specific  in  quality,  an  abstraction 
of  low  order,  never  being  ‘it’.  Being  often  unaffected,  our  ‘senses’  are 
not  able  to  abstract,  obviously,  some  of  the  most  fundamental  manifesta¬ 
tions  of  energy  to  be  found  in  the  external  world.  If  we  speak  of  the 
older  so-called  ‘sense  perceptions’  as  lower  order  abstractions,  then  we 
find  that  we  learn  about  the  other  subtler  manifestations  of  energy 
through  science,  higher  neural  and  extra-neural  means,  which  we  may 
call  higher  order  abstractions.  In  the  older  days,  we  called  this  kind  of 
knowledge  ‘inferential  knowledge’.  The  animals  do  not  have  these 
higher  order  abstractions  in  that  sense,  and  so  their  world  is  for  them 
devoid  of  these  extra-sensible  manifestations  of  energy. 

It  must  be  remembered  that  these  higher  order  abstractions  and  the 
‘inferential  knowledge’  of  the  old  theories  (they  are  not  equivalent  by 
definition)  have  a  very  similar  status.  Organisms  work  as-a- whole,  and 
to  separate  completely  higher  and  lower  order  abstractions  is  impossible. 
All  that  is  said  here  justifies  the  new  terminology.  Our  nervous  system 
does  abstract,  does  summarize,  does  integrate  on  different  levels  and  in 
different  orders,  and  the  result  of  a  stimulus  is  not  the  stimulus  itself. 
The  stone  is  not  the  pain  produced  by  the  stone  dropping  on  our  foot ; 
neither  is  the  flame  we  see,  nor  the  burn  we  feel.  The  actual  process 
goes  on  outside  of  our  skin,  as  represented  by  the  ‘realities’  of  modem 
science. 

We  have  already  spoken  frequently  of  the  different  order  abstrac¬ 
tions,  their  special  characteristics,  dynamic  versus  static . ,  and  the  means 
of  translation  of  lower  orders  into  higher,  and  vice  versa.  Events  which 
are  going  on  and  for  which  we  have  no  direct  ‘senses’  of  abstraction,  as, 
for  instance,  electric  waves,  Rontgen-rays,  wireless  waves . ,  we  know 
only  through  extra-neural  extensions  of  our  nervous  system  given  by 
science  and  scientific  instruments.  Naturally,  we  should  expect  that  the 
structure  of  our  abstracting  mechanism  would  be  also  reflected  in  these 
higher  order  abstractions.  Facts  show  this  to  be  true;  and  practically 
all  modern  science  proves  it  directly  or  indirectly.  This  is  why,  for 
instance,  we  have  the  mathematical  methods  for  passing  from  dynamic 

•MATTER’,  ‘SPACE’,  ‘TIME’ 

to  static,  and  vice  versa ;  why  we  have  quantum  theories  and  conditions ; 
and  why  we  have  problems  of  continuity  versus  discontinuity,  atomic 
theories , . 

The  above  is  not  a  plea  for  certain  old-fashioned  ‘idealistic  phil¬ 
osophies'  and  still  less  for  ‘solipsism’.  Far  from  it.  The  object  of  this 
present  work  is  to  face  hard  structural  experimental  m.o  facts,  analyse 
these  facts  in  a  language  of  a  similar  structure  (A),  and  so  to  reach 
tentatively  new  conclusions  which  again  can  be  verified  by  experiments. 
Once  more  the  reader  must  be  warned  against  carelessly  translating  the 
structurally  new  terms  into  the  old  terms.  The  complete  structural, 
psycho-logical,  semantic,  and  neurological  analysis  of  one  single  such 
new  term  would  afford  material  for  several  volumes  and  so  is  impossible 
in  this  work.  The  usefulness  of  the  old  terms  has  been  exhausted.  The 
structural  consequences  of  the  old  terms  have  been  practically  all  worked 
out,  and,  as  a  rule,  we  cannot  have  much  quarrel  with  the  older  con¬ 
clusions  in  the  old  language .  If  we  reach  different  conclusions,  or  get 
some  new  emphasis,  it  will  be  due  to  the  use  of  the  structurally  new 
language.  If  we  translate  the  new  into  the  old,  the  old  conclusions  are 
usually  truer  than  the  new  ones.  The  reverse  is  also  true ;  the  old  con¬ 
clusions  become  false  or,  at  best,  only  gain  emphasis  because  of  the 
structure  of  the  new  language.  The  problem  of  all  theories,  old  or  new, 
is  to  give  a  structural  account  of  the  facts  known,  to  account  for  excep¬ 
tions,  and  to  predict  new  experimental  structural  facts  which  again  may 
be  verified  empirically. 

Section  D.  Semantic  considerations. 

We  speak  much  and  vaguely  about  the  ‘structure’  of  language,  but 
extremely  little  work  has  been  done  in  this  field.  In  the  present  work, 
we  not  only  tackle  this  problem  as  best  we  can,  theoretically,  but  we 
also  use  a  language  of  a  new  non-el ,  functional  structure,  and  the  results, 
whatever  their  value,  are  actually  the  results  of  such  procedure. 

A  short  while  ago  we  did  not  even  know  that  such  problems  existed. 
Dreams,  alone,  about  such  problems  did  not  help,  for,  before  the  struc¬ 
tures  of  two  different  entities  can  be  compared,  these  entities  must  first 
be  produced.  Then,  and  only  then,  can  we  compare  and  evaluate  them. 
Before  we  could  compare  the  A,  the  E,  and  the  N  systems  with  A,  E, 
and  $  systems  the  last  had  to  be  produced,  no  matter  how  imperfect  they 
might  be  at  the  beginning. 

Something  similar  can  be  said  about  languages.  Before  we  can 
speak  of  them  in  the  plural  and  compare  them,  we  must  have  more  than 
one  for  comparison.  Mathematics  has  pointed  out  this  problem  for  us  in 

242  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

geometry.  For  instance,  we  have  to  deal  with  different  frames  or  refer¬ 
ences,  or  different  systems  of  co-ordinates.  We  find  that  they  represent 
different  languages  and  that  they  may  introduce  purely  verbal  statements 
which  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  subject  of  our  analysis  (extrinsic 
characteristics).  We  have  also  found  that  some  characteristics  may 
appear  m  one  form  of  representation  and  not  appear  so  readily  in  an¬ 
other.  For  instance,  we  know  that  every  line,  except  the  X  axis  through 
a  point  0  which  is  the  intersection  of  a  parabola  with  its  X  axis,  cuts 
the  curve  a  second  time.  This  fact,  important  for  us  to  know,  appears 
c  early  m  the  polar  co-ordinate  form  of  representation,  but  does  not 
appear  in  the  rectangular  form  of  equations,  although,  when  once  a 
characteristic  of  a  curve  is  discovered,  it  can  be  usually  translated  into 
the  other  co-ordinate  languages.  In  such  cases  as  this,  a  language  of 
new  structure  has  a  kind  of  creative  character,  in  that  it  makes  some 
structural  discoveries  easier. 

But  the  co-ordinate  methods  were  not  quite  satisfactory.  They 
introduced,  too  easily,  too  many  extraneous,  extrinsic  characteristics, 
belonging  to  the  language  and  not  to  the  subject.  Mathematicians  de¬ 
cided  to  get  away  from  these  metaphysical  ‘outside’  references  by  refer¬ 
ring  the  entity  to  itself  to  become  more  experimental.  They  invented  the 
internal  theory  of  surfaces,  a  vector  language  where  they  refer  the 
entity  to  itself,  its  curvature,  its  length  and  direction.  Finally,  in  the 
extension  of  the  vector  language  which  is  called  the  tensor  calculus, 
they  achieved  a  still  larger  kind  of  independence.  Having  invented  three 
languages  in  which  we  can  speak  about  one  issue,  we  are  now  able  to 
meet  the  problem  of  comparison  of  these  languages.  At  once,  most  im- 
portant  structural  and  methodological  problems  arise. 

The  newer  quantum  mechanics  are  also  an  epoch-making  linguistic 
structural  innovation,  not  only  in  physics,  but  also  in  methodology.  We 
have,  at  present,  three,  or,  perhaps,  more,  quantum  mechanics  which 
speak  about  one  subject,  but  in  entirely  different  languages.  I  say  ‘three 
or  more ,  because,  from  a  methodological  point  of  view,  it  is  very  hard, 
at  present,  to  be  precise,  as  the  problems  are  too  new  and,  as  yet,  too 
little  analysed.  Similar  remarks  apply  to  systems.  Before  two  systems 
can  be  compared,  a  second  system  must  be  produced.  Then  we  can 
compare  them. 

In  our  brief  verbal  analysis  of  ‘space*,  and  ‘time*,  and  ‘matter*,  we 
have  seen  that  these  represent  terms ,  or  linguistic  means ,  not  objects . 
We  have  seen,  also,  that  these  antique  forms  of  representation  have 
very  unsatisfactory  structural  implications.  They  introduce  a  verbal 
elementalism  structurally  absent  in  nature,  and  by  a  process  of  objecti- 

‘MATTER’,  ‘SPACE’,  ‘TIME* 

lication  lead  to  many  kinds  of  fanciful  semantically  harmful  meta¬ 
physics.  Since  Einstein  and  Minkowski,  the  excellent  term  ‘event’  has 
keen  introduced  into  scientific  literature.  It  is  a  term  of  such  epoch- 
making  semantic  importance  that  it  should  become  a  term  of  daily  use 
and  should  be  introduced  into  elementary  schools.  Teachers  do  not  per¬ 
form  their  duties  honestly  or  intelligently  if  they  disregard  such  struc¬ 
tural,  linguistic,  and  semantic  issues,  which,  as  we  have  seen,  are  the 
central  problem  of  all  possible  education. 

Likewise,  we  have  already  seen  that  the  chunk  of  nature  which  we 
call  a  ‘pencil’  is  not  ‘matter’  nor  ’space’  nor  ‘time’,  the  terms  being  only 
terms.  Is  such  el  language  structurally  appropriate  for  the  purpose  of 
speaking  about  the  world  around  us?  It  seems  undeniable  that  such 
language  is  quite  out-dated  and  very  unsatisfactory.  It  introduces  struc¬ 
turally  an  artificial  elementalism  of  a  verbal  character,  in  spite  of  the 
fact  that  even  the  most  elementary  consideration  shows  that  structurally 
the  opposite  is  true ;  namely,  that  ‘matter’,  ‘space’,  and  ‘time’  can  never 
be  experimentally  divided.  The  term  ‘event’  is  precisely  the  term  which 
does  away  with  this  old  and  vicious  elementalism. 

All  that  we  deal  with  in  the  outside  world  involves  indivisibly  ‘mat¬ 
ter’,  ‘space’,  and  ‘time’.  Using  the  old  language,  there  cannot  be  some¬ 
thing  somewhere  at  ‘no  time’,  or  something  at  some  ‘time’  and  ‘no 
where’  or  ‘nothing’  ‘somewhere’  at  ‘some  time’.  Everything  which  hap¬ 
pens  must  be  structurally  represented  as  something,  somewhere,  at'  some 
‘time’.  If  the  structure  of  the  world  happened  to  be  such  that  ‘nothing’ 
would  happen  ‘nowhere’  at  ‘no  time’,  then  we  should  have  nothing  to 
talk  about,  and  all  we  would  or  could  say  would  deal  with  our  fancies. 
The  four-dimensional  language,  which  describes  happenings  structurally 
more  nearly  as  we  experience  them,  is  precisely  the  language  of  ‘events’. 
It  should  be  remembered  that  in  daily  life  we  live  by  four-dimensional 
event-conditions.  That  is,  the  events  which  interest  us  are  something, 
somewhere,  and  some  ‘time’.  If  we  want  two  of  our  friends  to  become 
acquainted  with  each  other,  we  invite  them  to  our  home.  The  appoint¬ 
ment  is  in  three  dimensions  in  ‘space’  (to  the  left  or  to  the  right,  for¬ 
ward  or  backward,  up  or  down),  and  at  a  given  hour.  So  we  see  that 
our  daily  life  is  lived  in  a  four-dimensional  space-time  manifold,  and 
we  begin  to  appreciate  the  fact  that  science  has  lately  caught  up  with 
such  fundamental  structural  ‘realities’.  It  must  be  noticed  that  the  new 
four-dimensional  space-time  language  does  not,  or  should  not,  use  the 
term  ‘matter’  as  we  used  it  in  the  old  way.  In  the  new  language,  the  bits 
of  materials  we  deal  with  are  connected  analytically  with  the  ‘curvature'' 
of  this  space-time  manifold. 

244  IV.  STRUCTURAL  FACTORS  IN  A  LANGUAGES 

The  reader  should  realize  that  the  structurally  new  language  is  simi¬ 
lar  to  the  structure  of  our  experience,  and  involves  profound  methodo¬ 
logical  and,  therefore,  psycho-logical,  semantic  factors.  It  has  entirely 
different  semantic  values;  and,  perhaps,  because  of  this  fact,  it  is  an 
irreversible  advance,  no  matter  how  details  may  be  altered. 

The  newtonians,  for  the  most  part,  overlook  the  fact  that  all 
theories,  their  own  included,  are  a  semantic  product  of  the  functioning 
of  the  nervous  system,  and  so  involve  some  ‘logic*  and  ‘psychology*.  In 
the  new  theories,  a  kind  of  physical  subjectivity  always  appears  which 
ought  to  be  taken  care  of.  We  know,  for  instance,  that  if  we  immerse  a 
part  of  a  straight  stick  in  water,  the  stick  appears  to  be  broken,  although 
actually  it  has  not  been  broken.  A  photographic  camera  gives  a  similar 
record.  So  we  see  that,  besides  the  psycho-logical  subjectivity,  there  is 
a  most  important  physical  subjectivity,  which  is  introduced  by  the  use 
of  instruments.  The  main  difficulties  in  modern  science  are  precisely  in 
the  elimination  of  this  physical  subjectivity,  particularly  when  we  deal 
with  such  minute  entities  that  the  light  waves  miss  them.  In  the  case  of 
an  hypothetical  gamma-ray  microscope,  for  instance,  the  rays  would 
produce  what  is  called  a  Compton  effect,*  and  so  the  results  of  the 
experiment  would  be  altered  by  the  instrument  and  procedure. 

We  ought  not  to  be  surprised  that  the  old  systems  of  ‘motion’  and 
‘emotion*  in  science  (Newton)  and  ‘philosophy*  (Bergson)  should 
result  from  speculations  on  the  old  A  el  language  and  the  introduction  of 
fanciful  and  fallacious  assumptions  of  an  ‘infinity*  somewhere,  and  other 
fancies.  The  realization  of  this  marks  a  new  semantic  epoch  in  our 
lives.  It  is  to  the  credit  of  these  two  men  that  they  have  summarized 
these  old  tendencies  in  such  a  masterly  way  that  we  are  enabled  to  go 
beyond  them.  We  shall  return  to  this  subject  when  we  analyse  the  four¬ 
dimensional  ‘world*  of  Minkowski,  and,  then,  we  shall  summarize  briefly 
what  we  now  know  about  ‘space*,  ‘time*,  and  ‘matter*  (see  Parts  IX 
and  X). 

♦Compton  discovered,  in  1923,  that  the  generation  of  secondary  continuous 
Rontgen  radiation  by  a  primary  radiation  is  accomplished  by  an  increase  in  the 
wave-length. 

PART  V 

ON  THE  NON-ARISTOTELIAN  LANGUAGE 
CALLED  MATHEMATICS 

Once  a  statement  is  cast  into  mathematical  form  it  may  be  manipulated 
in  accordance  with  these  rules  and  every  configuration  of  the  symbols  will 
represent  facts  in  harmony  with  and  dependent  on  those  contained  in  the 
original  statement.  Now  this  comes  very  close  to  what  we  conceive  the 
action  of  the  brain  structures  to  be  in  performing  intellectual  acts  with  the 
symbols  of  ordinary  language.  In  a  sense,  therefore,  the  mathematician 
has  been  able  to  perfect  a  device  through  which  a  part  of  the  labor  of  logical 
thought  is  carried  on  outside  the  central  nervous  system  with  only  that 
supervision  which  is  requisite  to  manipulate  the  symbols  in  accordance 
with  the  rules.  <583)  horatio  b.  williams 

The  toughminded  suggest  that  the  theory  of  the  infinite  elaborated  by 
the  great  mathematicians  of  the  Nineteenth  and  Twentieth  Centuries, 
without  which  mathematical  analysis  as  it  is  actually  used  today  is  im¬ 
possible,  has  been  committing  suicide  in  an  unnecessarily  prolonged  and 
complicated  manner  for  the  past  half  century.  (22)  e.  t.  bell 

The  solution  goes  on  famously;  but  just  as  we  have  got  rid  of  the  other 
unknowns,  behold!  V  disappears  as  well,  and  we  are  left  with  the  indis¬ 
putable  but  irritating  conclusion — 

This  is  a  favourite  device  that  mathematical  equations  resort  to,  when 
we  propound  stupid  questions.  (149)  A.  s.  eddington 

Who  shall  criticize  the  builders?  Certainly  not  those  who  have  stood 
idly  by  without  lifting  a  stone.  (23)  E*  T.  bell 

...  let  me  remind  any  non-mathematicians  .  .  .  that  when  a  mathema¬ 
tician  lays  down  the  elaborate  tools  by  which  he  achieves  precision  in  his 
own  domain,  he  is  unprepared  and  awkward  in  handling  the  ordinary  tools 
of  language.  This  is  why  mathematicians  always  disappoint  the  expecta¬ 
tion  that  they  will  be  precise  and  reasonable  and  clear-cut  in  their  state¬ 
ments  about  everyday  affairs,  and  why  they  are,  in  fact,  more  fallible  than 
ordinary  mortals.  (529)  OSWALD  veblen 

CHAPTER  XVIII 

MATHEMATICS  AS  A  LANGUAGE  OF  A  STRUCTURE  SIMILAR 
TO  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  THE  WORLD 

To-day  there  are  not  a  few  physicists  who,  like  Kirchhof?  and  Mach, 
regard  the  task  of  physical  theory  as  being  merely  a  mathematical  descrip¬ 
tion  (a.5  economical  as  possible)  of  the  empirical  connections  between  ob¬ 
servable  quantities,  i.  e.  a  description  which  reproduces  the  connection, 
as  far  as  possible,  without  the  intervention  of  unobservable  elements. 
(466)  E.  SCHrOdINGER 

But  in  the  prevalent  discussion  of  classes,  there  are  illegitimate  transi¬ 
tions  to  the  notions  of  a  ‘nexus’  and  of  a  ‘proposition.*  The  appeal  to  a 
class  to  perform  the  services  of  a  proper  entity  is  exactly  analogous  to  an 
appeal  to  an  imaginary  terrier  to  kill  a  real  rat.  (578)  A.  N.  whitehead 

Roughly  it  amounts  to  this:  mathematical  analysis  as  it  works  today 
must  make  use  of  irrational  numbers  (such  as  the  square  root  of  two) ;  the 
sense  if  any  in  which  such  numbers  exist  is  hazy.  Their  reputed  mathe¬ 
matical  existence  implies  the  disputed  theories  of  the  infinite.  The  para¬ 
doxes  remain.  Without  a  satisfactory  theory  of  irrational  numbers,  among 
other  things,  Achilles  does  not  catch  up  with  the  tortoise,  and  the  earth 
cannot  turn  on  its  axis.  But,  as  Galileo  remarked,  it  does.  It  .would  seem 
to  follow  that  something  is  wrong  with  our  attempts  to  compass  the  in¬ 
finite.  (22)  E.  T.  BELL 

The  map  is  not  the  thing  mapped .  When  the  map  is  identified  with  the  thing 
mapped  we  have  one  of  the  vast  melting  pots  of  numerology.  <604)  e.  t.  bell 
Tne  theory  of  numbers  is  the  last  great  uncivilized  continent  of  mathe¬ 
matics.  It  is  split  up  into  innumerable  countries,  fertile  enough  in  them¬ 
selves,  but  all  more  or  less  indifferent  to  one  another’s  welfare  and  without 
a  vestige  of  a  central,  intelligent  government.  If  any  young  Alexander  is 
weeping  for  a  new  world  to  conquer,  it  lies  before  him.  (23)  e.  t.  bell 

The  present  work — namely,  the  building  of  a  non-aristotelian  sys¬ 
tem,  and  an  introduction  to  a  theory  of  sanity  and  general  semantics — 
depends,  fundamentally,  for  its  success  on  the  recognition  of  mathematics 
as  a  language  similar  in  structure  to  the  world  in  which  we  live. 

The  maze  of  often  unconnected  knowledge  we  have  gathered  in 
the  fields  with  which  this  part  is  dealing  is  so  tremendous  that  it  would 
require  several  volumes  to  cover  the  field  even  partially.  Under  such 
conditions,  it  is  impossible  to  deal  with  the  subject  in  any  other  way 
than  by  very  careful  selection,  and  so  I  shall,  therefore,  say  only  as 
much  as  is  necessary  for  my  present  semantic  purpose. 

It  is  a  common  experience  of  our  race  that  with  a  happy  generaliza¬ 
tion  many  unconnected  parts  of  our  knowledge  become  connected ;  many 
'mysteries*  of  science  become  simply  a  linguistic  issue,  and  then  the 
