mysteries  vanish.  New  generalizations  introduce  new  attitudes  (evalua¬ 
tion)  which,  as  usual,  seriously  simplify  the  problems  for  a  new  generation. 
In  the  present  work,  we  are  treating  problems  from  the  point  of  view  of 
such  a  generalization,  of  wide  application;  namely,  structure,  which  is 
forced  upon  us  by  the  denial  of  the  ‘is’  of  identity. ;  so  that  structure  be¬ 
comes  the  only  link  between  the  objective  and  verbal  levels.  The  next  con¬ 
sequence  is  that  structure  alone  is  the  only  possible  content  of  knowledge. 

V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANGUAGE 

Investigating  structure,  we  have  found  that  structure  can  be  defined 
in  terms  of  relations ;  and  the  latter,  for  special  purposes,  in  terms  of 
multi-dimensional  order.  Obviously,  to  investigate  structure,  we  must 
look  for  relations,  and  so  for  multi-dimensional  order.  The  full  applica¬ 
tion  of  the  above  principles  becomes  our  guide  for  future  enquiry. 

In  the  recent  past,  we  have  become  accustomed  to  such  arguments 
as,  for  instance,  that  the  theory  of  Einstein  has  to  be  accepted  on 
'epistemological'  grounds.  Naturally,  the  scientist  or  the  layman  who 
has  heard  the  last  term,  but  never  bothered  to  ascertain  that  it  means 
'according  to  the  structure  of  human  knowledge',  would  recognize  no  neces¬ 
sity  to  accept  something  which  violates  all  his  habitual  s,r ,  for  reasons 
about  which  he  does  not  know  or  care.  But  if  we  say  that  the  Einstein 
theory  has  to  be  accepted,  for  the  'time'  being,  at  least,  as  an  irreversible 
structural  linguistic  progress ,  this  statement  carries  for  many  quite  a 
different  verbal  and  semantic  implication,  and  one  worth  considering. 

Mathematics  has,  of  late,  become  so  extremely  elaborate  and  com¬ 
plex  that  it  takes  practically  a  lifetime  to  specialize  in  even  one  of  its 
many  fields.  Here  and  there  notions  of  extreme  creative  generality 
appear,  which  help  us  to  see  relations  and  dependence  between  formerly 
non-connected  fields.  For  instance,  the  arithmetization  of  mathematics, 
or  the  theory  of  groups,  or  the  theory  of  aggregates,  has  each  become 
such  a  supreme  generalization.  At  present,  there  is  a  general  tendency 
among  all  of  us,  scientists  included,  to  confuse  orders  of  abstractions. 
This  results  in  a  psycho-logical  semantic  blockage  and  in  the  impossi¬ 
bility  of  seeing  broader  issues  clearly. 

Some  of  the  structural  issues  are  still  but  little  understood,  and,  in 
writing  this  chapter,  I  lay  myself  open  to  a  reproach  from  the  layman 
that  I  have  given  too  much  attention  to  mathematics,  and  from  the  pro¬ 
fessional  mathematician  that  I  have  given  too  little.  My  reply  is  that 
what  is  said  here  is  necessary  for  rounding  up  the  semantic  foundations 
of  the  system,  and  that  I  explain  only  enough  to  carry  the  main  points 
of  structure  and  as  semantic  suggestions  for  further  semantic  researches. 

I  have  found  that  among  some  physicists  and  some  mathematicians 
the  thesis  that  mathematics  is  the  only  language  which,  in  1933,  is  simi¬ 
lar  in  structure  to  the  world,  is  not  always  acceptable.  As  to  the  second 
thesis,  the  similarity  of  its  structure  to  our  nervous  system,  some  even 
seem  to  feel  that  this  statement  borders  on  the  sacrilegious!  These 
objectors,  apparently,  believe  that  I  ascribe  more  to  mathematics  than 
is  just.  Some  physicists  point  out  to  me  the  non-satisfactory  develop¬ 
ment  of  mathematics,  and  they  seem  to  confuse  the  inadequacy  of  a 
given  mathematical  theory  with  the  general  m.o  structure  of  mathematics. 
Thus,  if  some  physical  experimental  investigation  is  conducted — for 

MATHEMATICS  AND  THE  WORLD 

instance,  on  high  pressure — and  the  older  theories  predict  a  behaviour 
exemplified  by  the  curve  (A),  while 
the  experimental  new  data  show  that 
the  actual  curve  is  (B),  such  a  result 
would  show  unmistakably  that  the  first 
theory  is  not  structurally  correct.  But, 
in  itself,  this  result  does  not  affect  the 
correctness  of  a  statement  about  the  general  structure  of  mathematics 
which  can  account  for  both  curves . 

Until  very  lately,  we  had  a  very  genuine  problem  in  physics  with 
the  quantum  phenomena  which  seem  to  proceed  by  discrete  steps,  while 
our  mathematics  is  fundamentally  based  on  assumptions  of  continuity. 
Here  we  had  seemingly  a  serious  structural  discrepancy,  which,  however, 
has  been  satisfactorily  overcome  by  the  wave  theory  of  the  newer 
quantum  mechanics,  explained  in  Part  X,  where  the  discontinuities  are 
accounted  for,  in  spite  of  the  use  of  differential  equations  and,  therefore, 
of  continuous  mathematics. 

But,  if  we  start  with  fundamental  assumptions  of  continuity,  we 
always  can  account  for  discontinuities  by  introducing  wave  theories  or 
some  similar  devices.  Therefore,  it  is  impossible,  in  our  case,  to  argue 
from  the  wave  theory  (for  instance)  to  the  structure  of  mathematics,  or 
vice  versa,  without  a  fundamental  and  independent  general  structural 
analysis,  which  alone  can  elucidate  the  problem  at  hand. 

Mathematicians  may  object  on  the  ground  that  the  new  revision  of 
the  foundation  of  mathematics,  originated  by  Brouwer  and  Weyl,  chal¬ 
lenges  the  ‘existence*  of  irrational  numbers . ,  and,  therefore,  destroys  the 
very  foundations  of  continuity  and  the  legitimacy  of  existing  mathe¬ 
matics. 

In  answer  to  such  a  criticism,  we  should  notice,  first,  that  the  cur¬ 
rent  ‘continuity*  is  of  two  kinds.  One  is  of  a  higher  grade,  and  is  usually 
called  by  this  name;  the  other  continuity  is  of  a  lower  grade  and  is 
usually  called  ‘compactness*.  The  new  revision  challenges  the  higher 
continuity,  but  does  not  affect  compactness,  which,  as  a  result,  will,  per¬ 
haps,  have  to  suffice  in  the  future  for  all  mathematics,  since  compactness 
is  sufficient  to  meet  all  psycho-logical  requirements,  once  the  problems 
of  ‘infinity*  are  properly  understood. 

A  structural  independent  analysis  of  mathematics,  treated  as  a 
language  and  a  form  of  human  behaviour,  establishes  the  similarity  of 
this  language  to  the  undeniable  structural  characteristics  of  this  world 
and  of  the  human  nervous  system.  These  few  and  simple  structural 
foundations  are  arrived  at  by  inspection  of  known  data  and  may  be 
considered  as  well  established. 

B 

Fig.  1. 

V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANGUAGE 

The  existing  definitions  of  mathematics  are  not  entirely  satisfactory. 
They  are  either  too  broad,  or  too  narrow,  or  do  not  emphasize  enough 
the  main  characteristics  of  mathematics.  A  semantic  definition  of  mathe¬ 
matics  should  be  broad  enough  to  cover  all  existing  branches  of  mathe¬ 
matics  ;  should  be  narrow  enough  to  exclude  linguistic  disciplines  which 
are  not  considered  mathematical  by  the  best  judgement  of  specialists,  and 
should  also  be  flexible  enough  to  remain  valid,  no  matter  what  the  future 
developments  of  mathematics  may  be. 

I  have  said  that  mathematics  is  the  only  language,  at  present,  which 
in  structure,  is  similar  to  the  structure  of  the  world  and  the  nervous  sys¬ 
tem.  For  purposes  of  exposition,  we  shall  have  to  divide  our  analysis 
accordingly,  remembering,  in  the  meantime,  that  this  division  is,  in  a 
way,  artificial  and  optional,  as  the  issues  overlap.  In  some  instances,  it 
is  really  difficult  to  decide  under  which  division  a  given  aspect  should  be 
analysed.  The  problems  are  very  large,  and  for  full  discussion  would 
require  volumes ;  so  we  have  to  limit  ourselves  to  a  suggestive  sketch  of 
the  most  important  aspects  necessary  for  the  present  investigations 

From  the  point  of  view  of  general  semantics,  mathematics,  having 
symbols  and  propositions,  must  be  considered  as  a  language.  From  the 
psychophysiological  point  of  view,  it  must  be  treated  as  an  activity  of 
the  human  nervous  system  and  as  a  form  of  the  behaviour  of  the  organ¬ 
isms  called  humans. 

All  languages  are  composed  of  two  kinds  of  words :  ( 1 )  Of  names 
for  the  somethings  on  the  un-speakable  level,  be  they  external  objects . , 
or  internal  feelings ,  which  admittedly  are  not  words,  and  (2)  of  rela¬ 
tional  terms ,  which  express  the  actual,  or  desired,  or  any  other  relations 
between  the  un-speakable  entities  of  the  objective  level. 

When  a  ‘quality’  is  treated  physiologically  as  a  reaction  of  an  organ¬ 
ism  to  a  stimulus,  it  also  becomes  a  relation.  It  should  be  noticed  that 
often  some  words  can  be,  and  actually  are,  used  in  both  senses ;  but,  in 
a  given  context,  we  can  always,  by  further  analysis,  separate  the  words 
used  into  these  two  categories.  Numbers  are  not  exceptions;  we  can 
use  the  labels  ‘one’,  ‘two’. ,  as  numbers  (of  which  the  character  will  be 
explained  presently)  but  also  as  names  for  anything  we  want,  as,  for 
instance,  Second  or  Third  Avenue,  or  John  Smith  I  or  John  Smith  II. 
When  we  use  numbers  as  names,  or  labels  for  anything,  we  call  them 
numerals ;  and  this  is  not  a  mathematical  use  of  ‘one’,  ‘two’. ,  as  these 
names  do  not  follow  mathematical  rules.  Thus,  Second  Avenue  and  Third 
Avenue  cannot  be  added  together,  and  do  not  give  us  Fifth  Avenue  in 
any  sense  whatever. 

Names  alone  do  not  produce  propositions  and  so,  by  themselves, 
say  nothing.  Before  we  can  have  a  proposition  and,  therefore,  meanings, 

MATHEMATICS  AND  THE  WORLD 

the  names  must  be  related  by  some  relation-word,  which,  however,  may 
be  explicit  or  implied  by  the  context,  the  situation,  by  established  habits 
of  speech , .  The  division  of  words  into  the  above  two  classes  may  seem 
arbitrary,  or  to  introduce  an  unnecessary  complication  through  its  sim¬ 
plicity  ;  yet,  if  we  take  modern  knowledge  into  account,  we  cannot  fol¬ 
low  the  grammatical  divisions  of  a  primitive-made  language,  and  such  a 
division  as  I  have  suggested  above  seems  structurally  correct  in  1933. 

Traditionally,  mathematics  was  divided  into  two  branches:  one  was 
called  arithmetic,  dealing  with  numbers ;  the  other  was  called  geometry, 
and  dealt  with  such  entities  as  ‘line',  ‘surface’,  ‘volume’, .  Once  Descartes, 
lying  in  bed  ill,  watched  the  branches  of  a  tree  swaying  under  the  in¬ 
fluence  of  a  breeze.  It  occurred  to  him  that  the  varying  distances  of  the 
branches  from  the  horizontal  and  vertical  window  frames  could  be 
expressed  by  numbers  representing  measurements  of  the  distances.  An 
epoch-making  step  was  taken:  geometrical  relations  were  expressed  by 
numerical  relations ;  it  meant  the  beginning  of  analytical  geometry  and 
the  unification  and  arithmetization  of  mathematics. 

Further  investigation  by  the  pioneers  Frege,  Peano,  Whitehead, 
Russell,  Keyser,  and  others  has  revealed  that  ‘number’  can  be  expressed 
in  ‘logical  terms’ — a  quite  important  discovery,  provided  we  have  a  valid 
‘logic’  and  structurally  correct  non-el  terms. 

Traditionally,  too,  since  Aristotle,  and,  in  the  opinion  of  the  major¬ 
ity,  even  today,  mathematics  is  considered  as  uniquely  connected  with 
quantity  and  measurement.  Such  a  view  is  only  partial,  because  there 
are  many  most  important  and  fundamental  branches  of  mathematics 
which  have  nothing  to  do  with  quantity  or  measurement — as,  for  in¬ 
stance,  the  theory  of  groups,  analysis  situs,  projective  geometry,  the 
theory  of  numbers,  the  algebra  of  ‘logic’, . 

Sometimes  mathematics  is  spoken  about  as  the  science  of  relations, 
but  obviously  such  a  definition  is  too  broad.  If  the  only  content  of 
knowledge  is  structural,  then  relations,  obvious,  or  to  be  discovered, 
are  the  foundation  of  all  knowledge  and  of  all  language,  as  stated  in  the 
division  of  words  given  above.  Such  a  definition  as  suggested  would 
make  mathematics  co-extensive  with  all  language,  and  this,  obviously, 
is  not  the  case. 

Before  offering  a  semantic  definition  of  mathematics,  I  introduce 
a  synoptical  table  taken  from  Professor  Shaw’s  The  Philosophy  of 
Mathematics ,  which  he  calls  only  suggestive  and  ‘doubtless  incomplete 
in  many  ways*.  I  use  this  table  because  it  gives  a  modern  list  of  the 
most  important  mathematical  terms  and  disciplines  necessary  for  the 
purpose  of  this  work,  indicating,  also,  in  a  way,  their  evolution  and 
structural  interrelations. 

QUALITATIVE  STUDY  OF  STRUCTURE 

V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANGUAGE 

Central  Principles  of  Mathematics* 

f 

WORLDS  g 

MORPHOLOGY 

INVARIANCY 

FUNCTION¬ 

ALITY 

IDEALITY 

Rhythm  Patterns — 
Arithmetic 

Integers 
Rationals 
Irrationals  « 
Ensembles  jg 

Atomicity 

Integers 

Ensemble  theory 
Literal  arithmetic 
Complexes 

Point  geometries 
Functional  spaces 

Congruences 
Arithmetic  invari¬ 
ants 

Modular  geometry 

Arithmetic  func¬ 
tions 

Algebraic  functions 

Functions  of  real 
variable 

Infinitesimal  cal¬ 
culus 

General  analysis 

Arithmetic  ideals 
Galois  ideals 

Higher  number 
theory 

Picard-Vessiot 

theory 

Space  Patterns — 
Geometry 

Points 

Lines 

Surfaces  g 

Varieties  s 

Higher  .& 

elements  ^ 

Continuity 

Point  space  of  two 
or  more  dimen¬ 
sions 

Line  geometry 
Surface  geometry 
Absolute  geometry 
Higher  elements 
Expansions 

Geometric  invari¬ 
ants 

Algebraic  invari¬ 
ants 

Symmetric  and  al¬ 
ternating  forms 

Modular  systems 

Real  functions  of 
N  variables 
Vector  fields 
Functions  of  lines 
Partial  derivatives 
Differential 
geometry 

Systems  of  differ¬ 
ential  equations 
Mathematical 
physics 

Relativity  Theory 

Design  Pat¬ 
terns — Tactic 

Arrange¬ 

ments 

Configura-  « 
tions  | 

Conatella-  5 
tions  w 

Design 

Combinatory 
analysis 
Stereochemistry 
Theory  of  symbols 
Poincare's  theory 
of  differential 
equations 

Stable  systems 
Irreducibles 

Functions  of  ar¬ 
rangements, 
configurations, 
constellations, 
and  structures 

Ideal  elements  of 
construction 
Mathematical 
ohemistry 

\ 

Idea  Patterns 
— Logistic 

Concepts  g 

Relatives  .o 

CONSISTBNCTft 

Foundations 

Postutational 

systems 

Calculus  of  classes, 
or  of  relatives 

Equivalent  sys¬ 
tems 

Logical  invariants 

Classes  functions 
of  classes 
Functions  of  rela¬ 
tives 

Implications 

Ideal  classes  or 
relatives 
Clasdficatory 
schemes 

Mutation  Motridties— 
Operators 

Substitu¬ 

tions 

Transforma¬ 

tions 

Groups  J 

Mutation 

Theory  of  finite  or 
infinite  groups 
Calculus  of  opera¬ 
tions 

Projective  geome- 
„  try  . 

Inversion  geometry 
Differential  and  in¬ 
tegral  invariants 
Analysis  situs 

Geometric  trans¬ 
formations 
Homomorphuma 
Transmutations 

Automorphic  func¬ 
tions 

Functional  equa¬ 
tions 

Calculus  of  varia¬ 
tions 

Functional  analysis 

Integral  equations 

Difference  equa¬ 
tions 

Differential  equa¬ 
tions 

n 

.JL  B 

If 

sj 

.81 

Negatives 
Imaginaries 
Hyper-  « 

numbers  -2 
>. 

Quality 

linear  algebras 
Functional  trans¬ 
formations 

Invariant  equa¬ 
tions 

Invariants  of  ex¬ 
pressions 

Functions  of  com¬ 
plex  and  hyper- 
complex  vari¬ 
ables 

General  function 
theory 

Hyperideals 

Routes 

Displace-  « 
