
menta  f 

Combina-  8 

tions  £ 

Action 

Composite  actions 
Actional  structures 

Equivalents  of 
actions 
Invariants  of 
processes 

Processes  depen¬ 
dent  on  processes 
Functions  of 
action 

Ideal  processes 

Transpoai- 
tions  j| 

Syllogisms  g 
Implications  ^ 

Deduction 

Syllogisms 

Calculus  of  de¬ 
duction 

Laws  of  inference 
Equivalent  de¬ 
ductions 
Invariants 

Functions  of  in¬ 
ferences 

Ideal  entities  that 
satisfy  inferences 
Scientific  theories 

♦This  table  differs  slightly  from  the  one  printed  in  The  Philosophy  of  Mathe¬ 
matics .  The  corrections  have  been  made  by  Professor  Shaw  and  kindly  communi¬ 
cated  to  me  by  letter. 

MATHEMATICS  AND  THE  WORLD 

A  semantic  definition  of  mathematics  may  run  somehow  as  follows : 
Mathematics  consists  of  limited  linguistic  schemes  of  multiordinal  rela¬ 
tions  capable  of  exact  treatment  at  a  given  date. 

After  I  have  given  a  semantic  definition  of  number,  it  will  be 
obvious  that  the  above  definition  covers  all  existing  disciplines  consid¬ 
ered  mathematical.  However,  these  developments  are  not  fixed  affairs. 
Does  that  definition  provide  for  their  future  growth?  By  inserting  as  a 
fundamental  part  of  the  definition  ‘exact  treatment  at  a  given  date’,  it 
obviously  does.  Whenever  we  discover  any  relations  in  any  fields  which 
will  allow  exact  ‘logical’  treatment,  such  a  discipline  will  be  included  in 
the  body  of  linguistic  schemes  called  mathematics,  and,  at  present,  there 
are  no  indications  that  these  developments  can  ever  come  to  an  end.  When 
‘logic’  becomes  an  oo -valued  ‘structural  calculus’,  then  mathematics  and 
‘logic*  will  merge  completely  and  become  a  general  science  of  m.o  rela¬ 
tions  and  multi-dimensional  order,  and  all  sciences  may  become  exact. 

It  is  necessary  to  show  that  this  definition  is  not  too  broad,  and 
that  it  eliminates  notions  which  are  admittedly  non-mathematical,  with¬ 
out  invalidating  the  statement  that  the  content  of  all  knowledge  is 
structural,  and  so  ultimately  relational.  The  word  ‘exact’  eliminates  non- 
mathematical  relations.  If  we  enquire  into  the  meaning  of  the  word 
‘exact’,  we  find  from  experience  that  this  meaning  is  not  constant,  but 
that  it  varies  with  the  date,  and  so  only  a  statement  ‘exact  at  a  given 
date’  can  have  a  definite  meaning. 

We  can  analyse  a  simple  statement,  ‘grass  is  green’  (the  ‘is’  here  is 
the  ‘is’  of  predication,  not  of  identity),  which,  perhaps,  represents  an  ex¬ 
treme  example  of  a  non-mathematical  statement ;  but  a  similar  reasoning 
can  be  applied  to  other  examples.  Sometimes  we  have  a  feeling  which 
we  express  by  saying,  ‘grass  is  green*.  Usually,  such  a  feeling  is  called 
a  ‘perception*.  But  is  such  a  process  to  be  dismissed  so  simply,  by  just 
calling  it  a  name,  ‘perception’  ?  It  is  easy  to  ‘call  names  under  provoca¬ 
tion’,  as  Santayana  says  somewhere ;  but  does  that  exhaust  the  question  ? 

If  we  analyse  such  a  statement  further,  we  find  that  it  involves 
comparison,  evaluation  in  certain  respects  with  other  characters  of 
experience . ,  and  the  statement  thus  assumes  relational  characteristics. 
These,  in  the  meantime,  are  non-exact  and,  therefore,  non-mathematical. 
If  we  carry  this  analysis  still  further,  involving  data  taken  from  chem¬ 
istry,  physics,  physiology,  neurology . ,  we  involve  relations  which  become 
more  and  more  exact,  and,  finally,  in  such  terms  as  ‘wave-length*,  ‘fre¬ 
quency*.  ,  we  reach  structural  terms  which  allow  of  exact  1933  treatment. 
It  is  true  that  a  language  of  ‘quality’  conceals  relations,  sometimes  very 
effectively ;  but  once  ‘quality’  is  taken  as  the  reaction  of  a  given  organism 

V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANGUAGE 

to  a  stimulus,  the  term  used  for  that  ‘quality’  becomes  a  name  for  a  very 
complex  relation.  This  procedure  can  be  always  employed,  thus  estab¬ 
lishing  once  more  the  fundamental  character  of  relations. 

These  last  statements  are  of  serious  structural  and  semantic  im¬ 
portance,  being  closely  connected  with  the  A ,  fundamental,  and  unde¬ 
niable  negative  premises.  These  results  can  be  taught  to  children  very 
simply;  yet  this  automatically  involves  an  entirely  new  and  modern 
method  of  evaluation  and  attitude  toward  language,  which  will  affect 
beneficially  the,  as  yet  entirely  disregarded,  s.r. 

We  must  consider,  briefly,  the  terms  ‘kind’  and  ‘degree*,  as  we  shall 
need  them  later.  Words,  symbols . ,  serve  as  forms  of  representation  and 
belong  to  a  different  universe — the  ‘universe  of  discourse* — since  they 
are  not  the  un-speakable  levels  we  are  speaking  about.  They  belong  to 
a  world  of  higher  abstractions  and  not  to  the  world  of  lower  abstractions 
given  to  us  by  the  lower  nerve  centres. 

Common  experience  and  scientific  investigations  (more  refined 
experience)  show  us  that  the  world  around  us  is  made  up  of  absolute 
individuals,  each  different  and  unique,  although  interconnected.  Under 
such  conditions  it  is  obviously  optional  what  language  we  use.  The  more 
we  use  the  language  of  diverse  ‘kind*,  the  sharper  our  definitions  must 
be.  Psychologically,  the  emphasis  is  on  difference.  Such  procedure  may 
be  a  tax  on  our  ingenuity,  but  by  it  we  are  closer  to  the  structural  facts 
of  life,  where,  in  the  limit,  we  should  have  to  establish  a  ‘kind*  for  every 
individual. 

In  using  the  term  ‘degree*,  we  may  be  more  vague.  We  proceed 
by  similarities,  but  such  a  treatment  implies  a  fundamental  intercon¬ 
nection  between  different  individuals  of  a  special  kind.  It  implies  a 
definite  kind  of  metaphysics  or  structural  assumptions— as,  for  instance, 
a  theory  of  evolution.  As  our  ‘knowledge’  is  the  result  of  nervous 
abstracting,  it  seems,  in  accordance  with  the  structure  of  our  nervous 
system,  to  give  preference  to  the  term  ‘degree*  first,  and  only  when  we 
have  attained  a  certain  order  of  verbal  sharpness  to  pass  to  a  language 
of  ‘kind*,  if  need  arises. 

The  study  of  primitive  languages  shows  that,  historically,  we  had 
a  tendency  for  the  ‘kind*  language,  resulting  in  over-abundance  of  names 
and  few  relation-words,  which  makes  higher  analysis  impossible.  Science, 
on  the  other  hand,  has  a  preference  for  the  ‘degree’  language,  which, 
ultimately,  leads  to  mathematical  languages,  enormous  simplicity  and 
economy  of  words,  and  so  to  better  efficiency,  more  intelligence,  and  to 
the  unification  of  science.  Thus,  chemistry  became  a  branch  of  physics ; 
physics,  a  branch  of  geometry;  geometry  merges  with  analysis,  and 

MATHEMATICS  AND  THE  WORLD 

analysis  merges  with  general  semantics ;  and  life  itself  becomes  a  physico¬ 
chemical  colloidal  occurrence.  The  language  of  ‘degree’  has  very  im¬ 
portant  relational,  quantitative ,  and  order  implications,  while  that  of 
‘kind’  has,  in  the  main,  qualitative  implications,  often,  if  not  always, 
concealing  relations,  instead  of  expressing  them. 

The  current  definition  of  ‘number’,  as  formulated  by  Frege  and 
Russell,  reads :  ‘The  number  of  a  class  is  the  class  of  all  those  classes 
that  are  similar  to  it’.1  This  definition  is  not  entirely  satisfactory :  first, 
because  the  multiordinality  of  the  term  ‘class’  is  not  stated ;  second,  it 
is  At  as  it  involves  the  ambiguous  (as  to  the  order  of  abstractions)  term 
‘class’.  What  do  we  mean  by  the  term  ‘class’  ?  Do  we  mean  an  extensive 
array  of  absolute  individuals,  un-speakable  by  its  very  character,  such  as 
some  seen  aggregate,  or  do  we  mean  the  spoken  definition  or  description 
of  such  un-speakable  objective  entities?  The  term  implies,  then,  a  fun¬ 
damental  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions,  to  start  with— the  very 
issue  which  we  must  avoid  most  carefully,  as  positively  demanded  by  the 
non-identity  principle.  Besides,  if  we  explore  the  world  with  a  ‘class  of 
classes’.,  and  obtain  results  also  of  ‘class  of  classes’,  such  procedure 
throws  no  light  on  mathematics,  their  applications  and  their  importance 
as  a  tool  of  research.  Perhaps,  it  even  increases  the  mysteries  surround¬ 
ing  mathematics  and  conceals  the  relations  between  mathematics  and 
human  knowledge  in  general. 

We  should  expect  of  a  satisfactory  definition  of  ‘number’  that  it 
would  make  the  semantic  character  of  numbers  clear.  Somehow, 
through  long  experience,  we  have  learned  that  numbers  and  measure¬ 
ment  have  some  mysterious,  sometimes  an  uncanny,  importance.  This 
is  exemplified  by  mathematical  predictions,  which  are  verified  later  em¬ 
pirically.  Let  me  recall  only  the  discovery  of  the  planet  Neptune  through 
mathematical  investigations,  based  on  its  action  upon  Uranus,  long 
before  the  astronomer  actually  verified  this  prediction  with  his  telescope. 
Many,  a  great  many,  such  examples  could  be  given,  scientific  literature 
being  full  of  them.  Why  should  mathematics  and  measurement  be  so 
extremely  important?  Why  should  mathematical  operations  of  a  given 
Smith,  which  often  seem  innocent  (and  sometimes  silly  enough)  give 
such  an  unusual  security  and  such  undeniably  practical  results  ? 

Is  it  true  that  the  majority  of  us  are  born  mathematical  imbeciles  r 
Why  is  there  this  general  fear  of,  and  dislike  for,  mathematics?  Is 
mathematics  really  so  difficult  and  repelling,  or  is  it  the  way  mathematics 
is  treated  and  taught  by  mathematicians  that  is  at  fault?  If  some  light 
can  be  thrown  on  these  perplexing  semantic  problems,  perhaps  we  shall 
face  a  scientific  revolution  which  might  deeply  affect  our  educational 

V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANGUAGE 

system  and  may  even  mark  the  beginning  of  a  new  period  in  standards 
of  evaluation,  in  which  mathematics  will  take  the  place  which  it  ought  to 
have.  Certainly,  there  must  be  something  the  matter  with  our  epis¬ 
temologies  and  'psychologies’  if  they  cannot  cope  with  these  problems. 

A  simple  explanation  is  given  by  a  new  A  analysis  and  a  semantic 
definition  of  numbers.  What  follows  is  written,  in  the  main,  for  non¬ 
mathematicians,  as  the  word  'semantic’  indicates,  but  it  is  hoped  that 
professional  mathematicians  (or  some,  at  least)  may  be  interested  in 
the  meanings  of  the  term  ‘number’,  and  that  they  will  not  entirely  dis¬ 
regard  it.  As  semantic,  the  definition  seems  satisfactory ;  but,  perhaps, 
it  is  not  entirely  satisfactory  for  technical  purposes,  and  the  definition 
would  have  to  be  slightly  re-worded  to  satisfy  the  technical  needs  of  the 
mathematicians.  In  the  meantime,  the  gains  are  so  important  that  we 
should  not  begrudge  any  amount  of  labour  in  order  to  produce  finally  a 
mathematical  and,  this  time,  A  semantic  definition  of  numbers. 

As  has  already  been  mentioned,  the  importance  of  notation  is  para¬ 
mount.  Thus  the  Roman  notation  for  number — I,  II,  III,  IV,  V,  VI . , — 
was  not  satisfactory  and  could  not  have  led  to  modern  developments  in 
mathematics,  because  it  did  not  possess  enough  positional  and  structural 
characteristics.  Modem  mathematics  began  when  it  was  made  possible 
by  the  invention  or  discovery  of  positional  notation.  We  use  the  symbol 
T  in  1,  10,  100,  1000. ,  in  which,  because  of  its  place,  it  had  different 
values.  In  the  expression  T,  the  symbol  means  'one  unit*;  in  10,  the 
symbol  T  means  ten  units;  in  100,  the  symbol  T  means  one  hundred 
units , . 

To  have  a  positional  notation,  we  need  a  symbol  'O’,  called  zero, 
to  indicate  an  empty  column  and,  at  least,  one  symbol  T.  The  number 
of  special  symbols  for  'number*  depends  on  what  base  we  accept.  Thus, 
in  a  binary  system,  with  the  base  2,  our  1  is  represented  by  1 ;  our  2, 
by  a  unity  in  the  second  place  and  a  zero  in  the  first  place,  thus  by  10 ; 
our  3,  by  11 ;  our  4,  by  a  unity  in  the  third  place  and  two  zeros  in  the 
first  and  second  places ;  namely,  100;  our  5,  by  101 ;  our  6,  by  110;  7,  by 
111 ;  8,  by  1000;  9,  by  1001 ;..  .  15,  by  1111 ;  16,  by  10000, .  In  a  binary 
system,  we  needed  only  the  two  symbols,  1  and  0.  For  a  system  with  the 
base  3,  we  would  need  three  symbols,  1,  2,  0:  our  1  would  be  represented 
by  1 ;  our  2,  by  2 ;  3,  by  10 ;  4,  by  1 1 ;  5,  by  12 ;  6,  by  20 , .  In  our  decimal 
system,  obviously,  we  need  10  symbols,  1,  2,  3,  4,  5,  6,  7,  8?  9,  0. 

For  more  details  on  notation,  the  interested  reader  is  referred  to 
the  fascinating  and  elementary  book  of  Professor  Danzig,  Number  the 
Language  of  Science .  Here  we  only  emphasize  what  is  necessary  for 
our  purpose.  Every  system  has  its  advantages  and  drawbacks.  Thus,  in 

MATHEMATICS  AND  THE  WORLD 

the  binary  system,  still  used  by  some  savage  tribes,  of  which  we  retain 
traces  when  we  speak  of  couples,  or  pairs,  or  braces,  we  get  an  enor¬ 
mous  simplicity  in  operations  by  using  only  two  symbols,  1  and  0.  It 
should  be  remembered  that,  in  every  system,  the  tables  of  addition  and 
multiplication  must  be  memorized.  In  the  binary  system,  these  tables 
are  reduced  to  1  +  1  10  and  1  X  1  —  1,  while  in  our  decimal  system, 

each  table  has  100  entries.  But  what  we  gain  in  simplicity  by  a  low  base- 
number  is  offset  very  seriously  by  the  cumbersomeness  of  the  notation. 

As  Danzig  tells  us,  our  number  4096  is  represented  in  a  binary  system 
by  1,000,000,000.  That  we  adopted  the  decimal  system  is  probably  a  *  see  page  xii 
physiological  accident,  because  we  have  ten  fingers.  The  savage,  with 
his  binary  system,  did  not  reach  even  the  finger  stage ;  he  is  still  in  the 
fist  stage. 

For  practical  purposes,  it  is  simpler  to  have  a  base  which  has  many 
divisors,  as,  for  instance,  12.  We  still  use  this  duodecimal  system  when 
we  divide  a  foot  into  twelve  inches,  or  a  shilling  into  twelve  pennies,  or 
count  by  dozens  or  gross.  It  seems  that  mathematicians  would  probably 
select  a  prime  number  for  a  base,  but  the  gain  would  be  so  slight  and 
the  difficulty  of  offsetting  a  physiological  habit  so  tremendous,  that  this 
will  probably  never  happen.2 

From  what  was  said  already,  it  is,  perhaps,  clear  that  mathematics 
requires  a  positional  notation  in  which  we  must  have  a  symbol  for  ‘1’ 
and  zero,  at  least.  For  these  and  other  reasons,  the  two  numbers  1  and 
0  are  somehow  unusually  important.  Even  in  our  decimal  system  we 
generate  numbers  by  adding  1  to  its  predecessor.  Thus  1  +  1—2, 

2  +  1  3 . ,  and  we  must  enquire  into  the  semantic  character  of  these 

numbers. 

The  notions  of  matching,  comparing,  measuring,  quantity,  equality. , 
are  all  interwoven  and,  by  necessity,  involve  a  circularity  in  definitions 
and  implications  if  the  analysis  is  carried  far  enough.  The  interested 
reader  may  be  referred  to  the  chapter  on  equality  in  Whitehead’s  The 
Principle  of  Relativity  to  learn  more  on  this  subject. 

In  the  evolution  of  mathematics,  we  find  that  the  notions  of 
'greater’,  'equal’,  and  ‘less’  precede  the  notion  of  numbers.  Comparison 
is  the  simplest  form  of  evaluation ;  the  first  being  a  search  for  relations ; 
the  second,  a  discovery  of  exact  relations.  This  process  of  search  for 
relations  and  structure  is  inherent  and  natural  in  man,  and  has  led  not 
only  to  the  discovery  of  numbers,  but  also  has  shaped  their  two  aspects ; 
namely,  the  cardinal  and  the  ordinal  aspects.  For  instance,  to  ascertain 
whether  the  number  of  persons  in  a  hall  is  equal  to,  greater  than,  or 
less  than  the  number  of  seats,  it  is  enough  to  ascertain  if  all  seats  are 

V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANGUAGE 

occupied  and  there  are  no  empty  seats  and  no  persons  standing;  then 
we  would  say  that  the  number  of  persons  is  equal  to  the  number  of  seats, 
and  a  symmetrical  relation  of  equality  would  be  established.  If  all  seats 
were  occupied  and  there  were  some  persons  standing  in  the  hall,  or  if  we 
found  that  no  one  was  standing,  yet  not  all  seats  were  occupied,  we 
would  establish  the  asymmetrical  relation  of  greater  or  less. 

In  the  above  processes,  we  were  using  an  important  principle; 
namely,  that  of  one-to-one  correspondence.  In  our  search  for  relations, 
we  assigned  to  each  seat  one  person,  and  reached  our  conclusions  with¬ 
out  any  counting.  This  process,  based  on  the  one-to-one  correspondence, 
establishes  what  is  called  the  cardinal  number.  It  gives  us  specific  rela¬ 
tional  data  about  this  world ;  yet  it  is  not  enough  for  counting  and  for 
mathematics.  To  produce  the  latter,  we  must,  first  of  all,  establish  a 
definite  system  of  symbolism,  based  on  a  definite  relation  for  generating 
numbers;  for  instance,  1  +  1  —  2,  2+1  —  3.,  which  establishes  a 
definite  order .  Without  this  ordinal  notion,  neither  counting  nor  tnathe- 
matics  would  be  possible;  and,  as  we  have  already  seen,  order  can  be 
used  for  defining  relations,  as  the  notions  of  relation  and  order  are 
interdependent.  Order,  also,  involves  asymmetrical  relations. 

If  we  consider  the  two  most  important  numbers,  0  and  1,  we  find 
that  in  the  accepted  symbolism,  if  a  —  b,  a — =  0;  and  if  a  =  6, 
a/b  —  b/b  =  1 ;  so  that  both  fundamental  numbers  express,  or  can  be 
interpreted  as  expressing,  a  symmetrical  relation  of  equality. 

If  we  consider  any  other  number — and  this  applies  to  all  kinds  of 
numbers,  not  only  to  natural  numbers — we  find  that  any  number  is  not 
altered  by  dividing  it  by  one,  thus,  2/1—2,  3/1  —  3.,  in  general, 
N/\  —  N ;  establishing  the  asymmetrical  relation,  unique  and  specific 
in  a  given  case  that  N  is  N  times  more  than  one. 

If  we  consider,  further,  that  2/1  —  2,  3/1  —  3,  and  so  on,  are  all 
different ,  specific ,  and  unique,  we  come  to  an  obvious  and  A  semantic 
definition  of  number  in  terms  of  relations,  in  which  0  and  1  represent 
unique  and  specific  symmetrical  relations  and  all  other  numbers  also 
unique  and  specific  asymmetrical  relations.  Thus,  if  we  have  a  result  ‘5’, 
we  can  always  say  that  the  number  ‘5  is  five  times  as  many  as  one. 
Similarly,  if  we  introduce  apples.  Five  apples  are  five*. times  as  many 
as  one  apple.  Thus,  a  number  in  any  form,  ‘pure’  or  ‘applied’,  can  always 
be  represented  as  a  relation,  unique  and  specific  in  a  given  case ;  and  this 
is  the  foundation  of  the  exactness  of  dealing  with  numbers.  For  in¬ 
stance,  to  say  that  a  is  greater  than  b  also  establishes  an  asymmetrical 
relation,  but  it  is  not  unique  and  specific;  but  when  we  say  that  a  is  five 

MATHEMATICS  AND  THE  WORLD 

times  greater  than  b,  this  relation  is  asymmetrical ,  exact,  unique,  and 
specific , 

The  above  simple  remarks  are  not  entirely  orthodox.  That  5/1  =  5 
is  very  orthodox,  indeed ;  but  that  numbers,  in  general,  represent  indefi¬ 
nitely  many  exact,  specific,  and  unique,  and,  in  the  main,  asymmetrical 
relations  is  a  structural  notion  which  necessitates  the  revision  of  the 
foundations  of  mathematics  and  their  rebuilding  on  the  basis  of  new 
semantics  and  a  future  structural  calculus.  When  we  say  ‘indefinitely 
many*,  this  means,  from  the  reflex  point  of  view,  ‘indefinitely  flexible’, 
or  ‘fully  conditional’  in  the  semantic  field,  and,  therefore,  a  prototype  of 
human  semantic  reactions  (see  Part  VI) .  The  scope  of  the  present  work 
precludes  the  analysis  of  the  notion  of  the  lately  disputed  ‘irrational’; 
but  we  must  state  that  this  revision  requires  new  psycho-logical  and 
structural  considerations  of  fundamental  ‘logical’  postulates  and  of  the 
problems  of  ‘infinity’.  If,  by  an  arbitrary  process,  we  postulate  the  exist¬ 
ence  of  a  ‘number’  which  alters  all  the  while,  then,  according  to  the 
definition  given  here,  such  expressions  should  be  considered  as  functions, 
perhaps,  but  not  as  a  number,  because  they  do  not  give  us  unique  and 
specific  relations. 

These  few  remarks,  although  suggestive  to  the  mathematician,  do 
not,  in  any  way,  exhaust  the  question,  which  can  only  be  properly  pre¬ 
sented  in  technical  literature  in  a  postulational  form. 

It  seems  that  mathematicians,  no  matter  how  important  the  work 
which  they  have  produced,  have  never  gone  so  far  as  to  appreciate  fully 
that  they  are  willy-nilly  producing  an  ideal  human  relational  language 
of  structure  similar  to  that  of  the  world  and  to  that  of  the  human 
nervous  system.  This  they  cannot  help,  in  spite  of  some  vehement 
denials,  and  their  work  should  also  be  treated  from  the  semantic  point 
of  view. 

Similarly  with  measurement.  From  a  functional  or  actional  and 
semantic  point  of  view,  measurement  represents  nothing  else  but  a  search 
for  empirical  structure  by  means  of  extensional,  ordered,  symmetrical, 
and  asymmetrical  relations.  Thus,  when  we  say  that  a  given  length 
measures  five  feet,  we  have  reached  this  conclusion  by  selecting  a  unit 
called  ‘foot’,  an  arbitrary  and  un-speakable  affair,  then  laying  it  end  to 
end  five  times  in  a  definite  extensional  order  and  so  have  established  the 
asymmetrical,  and,  in  each  case,  unique  and  specific  relation,  that  the 
given  entity  represents,  in  this  case,  five  times  as  many  as  the  arbitrarily 
selected  unit. 

Objection  may  be  raised  that  the  formal  working  out  of  a  definition 
of  numbers  in  terms  of  relations,  instead  of  classes,  would  be  very 

V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANGUAGE 

laborious,  and  would  also  involve  a  revision  of  the  foundations  of  mathe¬ 
matics.  This  can  hardly  be  denied ;  but,  in  the  discussions  of  the  founda¬ 
tions,  the  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions  is  still  very  marked, 
thereby  resulting  in  the  manufacture  of  artificial  semantic  difficulties . 
Moreover,  the  benefits  of  such  a  definition,  in  eliminating  the  mysteries 
about  mathematics,  are  so  important  that  they  by  far  outweigh  the 
difficulties. 

As  the  only  possible  content  of  knowledge  is  structural,  as  given 
in  terms  of  relations  and  multiordinal  and  multi-dimensional  order ; 
numbers,  which  establish  an  endless  array  of  exact,  specific,  and,  in  each 
case,  unique,  relations  are  obviously  the  most  important  tools  for  explor- 
ing  the  structure  pf  the  world,  since  structure  can  always  be  analysed 
in  terms  of  relations.  In  this  way,  all  mysteries  about  the  importance 
of  mathematics  and  measurement  vanish.  The  above  understanding  will 
give  the  student  of  mathematics  an  entirely  different  and  a  very  natural 
feeling  for  his  subject.  As  his  only  possible  aim  is  the  study  of  structure 
of  the  world,  or  of  whatever  else,  he  must  naturally  use  a  relational  tool 
to  explore  this  complex  of  relations  called  ‘structure’.  A  most  spectacu¬ 
lar  illustration  of  this  is  given  in  the  internal  theory  of  surfaces,  the 
tensor  calculus . ,  described  in  Part  VIII. 

In  all  measurements,  we  select  a  unit  of  a  necessary  kind,  for  a 
given  case,  and  then  we  find  a  unique  and  specific  relation  as  expressed 
by  a  number,  between  the  given  something  and  the  selected  unit.  By 
relating  different  happenings  and  processes  to  the  same  unit-process,  we 
find,  again,  unique  and  specific  interrelations,  in  a  given  case,  between 
these  events,  and  so  gather  structural  (and  most  important,  because 
uniquely  possible)  wisdom,  called  ‘knowledge’,  ‘science’, . 

If  we  treat  numbers  as  relations,  then  fractions  and  all  operations 
become  relations  of  relations,  and  so  relations  of  higher  order,  into  the 
analysis  of  which  we  cannot  enter  here,  as  these  are,  of  necessity, 
technical. 

It  should  be  firmly  grasped,  however,  that  some  fundamental  human 
relations  to  this  world  have  not  been  changed.  The  primitive  may  have 
believed  that  words  were  things  (identification)  and  so  have  established 
what  is  called  the  ‘magic  of  words’  (and,  in  fact,  the  majority  of  us  still 
have  our  s.r  regulated  by  some  such  unconscious  identifications)  ;  but, 
in  spite  of  this,  the  primitive  or  ‘civilized’  man’s  words  are  not ,  and 
never  could  be,  the  things  spoken  about,  no  matter  what  semantic  dis¬ 
turbances  we  might  have  accompanying  their  use,  or  what  delusions  or 
illusions  we  may  cherish  in  respect  to  them. 

MATHEMATICS  AND  THE  WORLD 

At  present,  of  all  branches  of  mathematics  the  theory  of  numbers 
is  probably  the  most  difficult,  obscure . ,  and  seemingly  with  the  fewest 
applications.  With  a  new  A  definition  of  numbers  in  terms  of  relations, 
this  theory  may  become  a  relational  study  of  very  high  order,  which, 
perhaps,  will  some  day  become  the  foundation  for  epistemology  and  the 
key  for  the  solution  of  all  the  problems  of  science  and  life.  In  the  fields 
of  cosmology  many,  if  not  the  majority,  of  the  problems,  by  necessity, 
cannot  be  considered  as  directly  experimental,  and  so  the  solution  must 
be  epistemological. 

At  present,  in  our  speculations,  we  are  carried  away  by  words,  dis¬ 
regarding  the  simple  fact  that  speaking  about  the  ‘radius  of  the  universe*, 
for  instance,  has  no  meaning ,  as  it  cannot  possibly  be  observed.  Perhaps, 
some  day,  we  shall  discover  that  such  conversations  are  the  result  of  our 
old  stumbling  block,  identification,  which  leads  to  our  being  carried  away 
by  the  sounds  of  words  applicable  to  terrestrial  conditions  but  meaning¬ 
less  in  the  very  small,  as  discovered  lately  in  the  newer  quantum 
mechanics,  and,  in  the  very  large,  as  applied  to  the  cosmos.  An  important 
illustration  of  the  retardation  of  scientific  progress,  blocked  by  the  con¬ 
fusion  of  orders  of  abstractions,  is  shown  in  the  fact  that  the  newer 
quantum  mechanics  were  slow  in  coming,  and  though  astronomers  prob¬ 
ably  know  about  it,  yet  they  still  fail  to  grasp  that  expressions  such  as 
the  ‘radius  of  the  universe’,  the  ‘running  down  of  the  universe*. ,  are 
meaningless  outside  of  psychopathology. 

In  this  connection,  we  should  notice  an  extremely  interesting  and 
important  semantic  characteristic ;  namely,  that  the  term  ‘relation*  is  not 
only  multiordinal  but  also  non~el}  as  it  applies  to  ‘senses*  and  ‘mind*. 
Relations  are  usually  found  empirically;  so  in  a  language  of  relations 
we  have  a  language  of  similar  structure  to  the  world  and  a  unique  means 
for  predictability  and  rationality. 

Let  me  again  emphasize  that,  from  time  immemorial,  things  have 
not  been  words;  the  only  content  of  knowledge  has  been  structural; 
mathematics  has  dealt,  in  the  main,  with  numbers;  no  matter  whether 
we  have  understood  the  character  of  numbers  or  not,  numbers  have 
expressed  relations  and  so  have  given  us  structural  data  willy-nilly,. 
This  explains  why  mathematics  and  numbers  have,  since  time  imme¬ 
morial,  been  a  favorite  field,  not  only  for  speculations,  but  also  why,  in 
history,  we  find  so  many  religious  semantic  disturbances  connected  with 
numbers.  Mankind  has  somehow  felt  instinctively  that  in  numbers  we 
have  a  potentially  endless  array  of  unique  and  specific  exact  relations , 
which  ultimately  give  us  structure,  the  last  being  the  only  possible  con¬ 
tent  of  knowledge,  because  words  are  not  things. 

V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANGUAGE 

As  relations,  generally,  are  empirically  present,  and  as  man  and 
his  ‘knowledge’  is  as  'natural*  as  rocks,  flowers,  and  donkeys,  we  should 
not  be  surprised  to  find  that  the  unique  language  of  exact . ,  relations 
called  mathematics  is,  by  necessity,  the  natural  language  of  man  and 
similar  in  structure  to  the  world  and  our  nervous  system. 

As  has  already  been  stated,  it  is  incorrect  to  argue  from  the  struc¬ 
ture  of  mathematical  theories  to  the  structure  of  the  world,  and  so  try 
to  establish  the  similarity  of  structure;  but  that  such  enquiry  must  be 
independent  and  start  with  quite  ordinary  structural  experiences,  and 
only  at  a  later  stage  proceed  to  more  advanced  knowledge  as  given  by 
