science.  Because  this  analysis  must  be  independent,  it  can  also  be  made 
very  simple  and  elementary.  All  exact  sciences  give  us  a  wealth  of 
experimental  data  to  establish  the  first  thesis  on  similarity  of  structure ; 
and  it  is  unnecessary  to  repeat  it  here.  I  will  restrict  myself  only  to  a 
minimum  of  quite  obvious  facts,  reserving  the  second  thesis— about  the 
similarity  of  structure  with  our  nervous  system — for  the  next  chapter. 

If  we  analyse  the  silent  objective  level  by  objective  means  available 
in  1933,  say  a  microscope,  we  shall  find  that  whatever  we  can  see, 
handle . ,  represents  an  absolute  individual ,  and  different  from  anything 
else  in  this  world .  We  discover,  thus,  an  important  structural  fact  of 
the  external  world ;  namely,  that  in  it,  everything  we  can  see,  touch . , 
that  is  to  say,  all  lower  order  abstractions  represent  absolute  individuals, 
different  from  everything  else. 

On  the  verbal  level,  under  such  empirical  conditions,  we  should  then 
have  a  language  of  similar  structure;  namely,  one  giving  us  an  indefinite 
number  of  proper  names,  each  different.  We  find  such  a  language 
uniquely  in  numbers,  each  number  1,  2,  3 . ,  being  a  unique,  sharply  dis¬ 
tinguishable,  proper  name  for  a  relation,  and,  if  we  wish,  for  anything 
else  also. 

Without  some  higher  abstractions  we  cannot  be  human  at  all.  No 
science  could  exist  with  absolute  individuals  and  no  relations;  so  we  pass 
to  higher  abstractions  and  build  a  language  of  say  xis  (i=  1,  2,  3,  . . .  «), 
where  the  x  shows,  let  us  say,  that  we  deal  with  a  variable  x  with  many 
values,  and  the  number  we  assign  to  i  indicates  the  individuality  under 
consideration.  From  the  structural  point  of  view,  such  a  vocabulary  is 
similar  to  the  world  around  us ;  it  accounts  for  the  individuality  of  the 
external  objects,  it  also  is  similar  to  the  structure  of  our  nervous  sys¬ 
tem,  because  it  allows  generalizations  or  higher  order  abstractions, 
emphasizes  the  abstracting  nervous  characteristics , .  The  subscript  em¬ 
phasizes  the  differences ;  the  letter  x  implies  the  similarities. 

MATHEMATICS  AND  THE  WORLD 

In  daily  language  a  similar  device  is  extremely  useful  and  has  very 
far-reaching  psycho-logical  semantic  effects.  Thus,  if  we  say  ‘pencil  i\ 
‘pencils’,  .  .  .  ‘pendin',  we  have  indicated  structurally  two  main  charac¬ 
teristics:  (1)  the  absolute  individuality  of  the  object,  by  adding  the 
indefinitely  individualizing  subscript  1,  2,  .  .  .  n ;  and  (2)  we  have  also 
complied  with  the  nervous  higher  order  abstracting  characteristics,  which 
establish  similarity  in  diversity  of  different  ‘pencils’.  From  the  point  of 
view  of  relations ,  these  are  usually  found  empirically ;  besides,  they  may 
be  invariant,  no  matter  how  changing  the  world  may  be. 

In  general  terms,  the  structure  of  the  external  world  is  such  that 
we  deal  always  on  the  objective  levels  with  absolute  individuals,  with 
absolute  differences.  The  structure  of  the  human  nervous  system  is  such 
that  it  abstracts,  or  generalizes,  or  integrates . ,  in  higher  orders,  and  so 
finds  similarities,  discovering  often  invariant  (sometimes  relatively 
invariant)  relations.  To  have  ‘similar  structure’,  a  language  should  com¬ 
ply  with  both  structural  exigencies,  and  this  characteristic  is  found  in 
the  mathematical  notation  of  which  can  be  enlarged  to  the  daily  lan¬ 
guage  as  ‘Smith*’,  ‘Fido*’. ,  where  1,  2,  3,  .  . .  n. 

Further  objective  enquiry  shows  that  the  world  and  ourselves  are 
made  up  of  processes,  thus,  *Smith190o’  is  quite  a  different  person  from 
‘SmithiBss’.  To  be  convinced,  it  is  enough  to  look  over  old  photographs 
of  ourselves,  the  above  remark  being  structurally  entirely  general.  A 
language  of  ‘similar  structure’  should  cover  these  facts.  We  find  such  a 
language  in  the  vocabulary  of  ‘function’,  ‘propositional  function’,  as 
already  explained,  involving  also  four-dimensional  considerations. 

As  words  are  not  objects — and  this  expresses  a  structural  fact — we 
see  that  the  ‘is’  of  identity  is  unconditionally  false,  and  should  be  entirely 
abolished  as  such.  Let  us  be  simple  about  it.  This  last  semantic  require¬ 
ment  is  genuinely  difficult  to  carry  out,  because  the  general  el  structure 
of  our  language  is  such  as  to  facilitate  identification.  It  is  admitted  that 
in  some  fields  some  persons  identify  only  a  little ;  but  even  they  usually 
identify  a  great  deal  when  they  pass  to  other  fields.  Even  science  is  not 
free  from  identification,  and  this  fact  introduces  great  and  artificial 
semantic  difficulties,  which  simply  vanish  when  we  stop  identification  or 
the  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions.  Thus,  for  instance,  the  semantic 
difficulties  in  the  foundations  of  mathematics,  the  problems  of  ‘infinity’, 
the  ‘irrational’. ,  the  difficulties  of  Einstein’s  theory,  the  difficulties  of  the 
newer  quantum  theory,  the  arguments  about  the  ‘radius  of  the  universe’, 
‘infinite  velocities’,  the  difficulties  in  the  present  theory.,  .,  are  due,  in 
the  main,  to  semantic  blockages  or  commitment  to  the  structure  of  the 
old  language — we  may  call  it  ‘habit’ — which  says  structurally  very  little, 

V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANGUAGE 

and  which  I  disclose  as  a  semantic  disturbance  of  evaluation  by  showing 
the  physiological ■  mechanism  in  terms  of  order . 

If  we  abolish  the  ‘is’  of  identity,  then  we  are  left  only  with  a  func¬ 
tional,  actional . ,  language  elaborated  in  the  mathematical  language  of 
function.  Under  such  conditions,  a  descriptive  language  of  ordered  hap¬ 
penings  on  the  objective  level  takes  the  form  of  ‘if  so  and  so  happens, 
then  so  and  so  happens’,  or,  briefly,  ‘if  so,  then  so’ ;  which  is  the  proto¬ 
type  of  ‘logical’  and  mathematical  processes  and  languages.  We  see  that 
such  a  language  is  again  similar  in  structure  to  the  external  world 
descriptively ;  yet  it  is  similar  to  the  ‘logical’  nervous  processes,  and  so 
allows  us,  because  of  this  similarity  of  structure,  predictability  and  so 
rationality. 

In  the  traditional  systems,  we  did  not  recognize  the  complete  seman¬ 
tic  interdependence  of  differences  and  similarities,  the  empirical  world 
exhibiting  differences,  the  nervous  system  manufacturing  primarily 
similarities,  and  our  ‘knowledge’,  if  worth  anything  at  all,  being  the 
joint  product  of  both.  Was  it  not  Sylvester  who  said  that  ‘in  mathe¬ 
matics  we  look  for  similarities  in  differences  and  differences  in  similari¬ 
ties’  ?  This  statement  applies  to  our  whole  abstracting  process. 

The  empirical  world  is  such  in  structure  (by  inspection)  that  in  it 
we  can  add,  subtract,  multiply,  and  divide.  In  mathematics,  we  find  a 
language  of  similar  structure.  Obviously,  in  the  physical  world  these 
actions  or  operations  alter  the  relations,  which  are  expressed  as  altered 
unique  and  specific  relations,  by  the  language  of  mathematics.  Further,  as 
the  world  is  full  of  different  shapes,  forms,  curves  . ,  we  do  not  only  find 
in  mathematics  special  languages  dealing  with  these  subjects,  but  we  find 
in  analytical  geometry  unifying  linguistic  means  for  translation  of  one 
language  into  another.  Thus  any  ‘quality’  can  be  formulated  in  terms 
of  relations  which  may  take  the  ‘quantitative’  character  which,  at  present, 
in  all  cases,  can  be  also  translated  into  geometrical  terms  and  methods, 
giving  structures  to  be  visualized. 

It  is  interesting,  yet  not  entirely  unexpected,  that  the  activities  of  the 
higher  nervous  centres,  the  conditional  reflexes  of  higher  order,  the 
semantic  reactions,  time-binding  included,  should  follow  the  exponential 
rules,  as  shown  in  my  Manhood  of  Humanity. 

In  our  experience,  we  find  that  some  issues  are  additive — as,  for 
instance,  if  one  guest  is  added  to  a  dinner  party,  we  will  have  to  add 
plates  and  a  chair.  Such  facts  are  covered  by  additive  methods  and  the 
language  called  ‘linear*  (see  Part  VIII).  In  many  instances — and  these 
are,  perhaps,  the  most  important  and  are  strictly  connected  with  sub- 
microscopic  processes — the  issues  are  not  additive,  one  atom  of  oxygen 

MATHEMATICS  AND  THE  WORLD 

'plus1  two  atoms  of  hydrogen*  under  proper  conditions,  will  produce 
water,  of  which  the  characteristics  are  not  the  sum  of  the  characteristics 
of  oxygen  and  hydrogen  ‘added'  together,  but  entirely  new  characteristics 
emerge.  These  may  some  day  be  taken  care  of  by  non-linear  equations, 
when  our  knowledge  has  advanced  considerably.  These  problems  are 
unusually  important  and  vital,  because  with  our  present  low  development 
and  the  lack  of  structural  researches,  we  still  keep  an  additive  A  lan¬ 
guage,  which  is,  perhaps,  able  to  deal  with  additive,  simple,  immediate, 
and  comparatively  unimportant  issues,  but  is  entirely  unfit  structurally 
to  deal  with  principles  which  underlie  the  most  fundamental  problems  of 
life.  Similarly,  in  physics,  only  since  Einstein  have  we  begun  to  see  that 
the  primitive,  simplest,  and  easiest  to  solve  linear  equations  are  not 
structurally  adequate. 

One  of  the  most  marked  structural  characteristics  of  the  empirical 
world  is  ‘change',  ‘motion',  ‘waves’,  and  similar  dynamic  manifestations. 
Obviously,  a  language  of  similar  structure  must  have  means  to  deal  with 
such  relations.  In  this  respect,  mathematics  is  unique,  because,  in  the 
differential  and  integral  calculus,  the  four-dimensional  geometries  and 
similar  disciplines,  with  all  their  developments,  we  find  such  a  perfect 
language  to  be  explained  more  in  detail  in  the  chapters  which  follow. 

It  will  be  profitable  for  our  purpose  to  discuss,  in  the  next  chapter, 
some  of  the  mathematical  structural  characteristics  in  connection  with 
their  similarity  to  the  human  nervous  system ;  but  here  I  will  add  only 
that,  for  our  purposes,  at  this  particular  point,  we  must  specially  empha¬ 
size  arithmetical  language,  which  means  numbers  and  arithmetical  opera¬ 
tions,  the  theory  of  function,  the  differential  and  integral  calculus 
(language)  and  different  geometries  in  their  two  aspects,  ‘pure’  and 
applied.  Indeed,  Riemann  tells  us  bluntly  that  the  science  of  physics 
originated  only  with  the  introduction  of  differential  equations,  a  state¬ 
ment  which  is  quite  justified,  but  to  which  I  would  add,  that  physics  is 
becoming  scientific  since  we  began  to  eliminate  from  physics  semantic 
disturbances;  namely,  identification  and  elementalism.  This  movement 
was  originated,  in  fact,  although  not  stated  in  an  explicit  form,  by  the 
Einstein  theory  and  the  new  quantum  theories,  the  psycho-logical  trend 
of  which  is  formulated  in  a  general  semantic  theory  in  the  present  work. 

It  is  reasonable  to  consider  that  metric  geometry,  and,  in  particular, 
the  Zi -system,  was  derived  from  touch,  and,  perhaps,  the  ‘kinesthetic 
sense',  and  projective  geometry  from  sight. 

Although  the  issues  presented  here  appear  extremely  simple,  and 
sometimes  even  commonplace,  yet  the  actual  working  out  of  the  verbal 

V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANGUAGE 

schemes  is  quite  elaborate  and  ingenious,  and  impossible  to  analyse  here 
more  fully ;  so  that  only  one  example  can  be  given. 

The  solution  of  mathematical  equations  is  perhaps  to  be  considered 
as  the  central  problem  of  mathematics.  The  word  ‘equation*  is  derived 
from  Latin  aequare ,  to  equalize,  and  is  a  statement  of  the  symmetrical 
relation  of  equality  expressed  as  a=b  or  a  —  b  =  0  or  a/b  =  1.  An 
equation  expresses  the  relation  between  quantities,  some  of  which  are 
known,  some  unknown  and  to  be  found.  By  the  solution  of  an  equation, 
we  mean  the  finding  of  values  for  the  unknowns  which  will  satisfy 
the  equation. 

Linear  equations  of  the  type  ax  =  b  necessitated  the  introduction  of 
fractions.  Linear  equations  with  several  variables  led  to  the  theory  of 
determinants  and  matrices . ,  which  underwent,  later,  a  tremendous  inde¬ 
pendent  development ;  yet  they  originated  in  the  attempt  to  simplify  the 
solution  of  these  equations. 

Quadratic  equations  of  the  type  x1  -}-  ax  +  b  —  0  can  be  reduced 
to  the  form  z2  =  A,  the  solution  of  which  depends  on  the  extraction  of 
a  square  root.  Here,  serious  difficulties  arose,  and  seemingly  necessitated 
the  introduction  of  ‘irrational*  numbers  and  ordinary  complex  numbers, 
involving  the  square  root  of  minus  one  ( \ / — 1 —»«"),  a  notion  which 
revolutionized  mathematics. 

Cubic  equations  of  the  form  x*  +  ax2  +  bx  +  c  —  0  necessitated 
the  extraction  of  cube  roots,  in  addition  to  the  problems  connected  with 
the  solution  of  quadratic  equations,  and  involved  more  difficulties,  which 
have  been  analysed  in  an  extensive  literature. 

Biquadratic  equations  of  the  type  x4  +  ax3  -f-  bx2  +  cx  +  d  —  0 
involve  the  problems  of  quadratic  and  cubic  equations.  When  we  con¬ 
sider  equations  of  a  degree  higher  than  the  fourth,  we  find  that  we 
cannot  solve  them  by  former  methods ;  and  mathematicians  have  had  to 
invent  theories  of  substitutions,  groups,  different  special  functions  and 
similar  devices.  The  solution  of  differential  equations  introduced  further 
difficulties,  allied  with  the  theory  of  function. 

The  linear  transformations  of  algebraic  polynomials  with  two  or 
more  variables  in  connection  with  the  theory  of  determinants,  symmetri¬ 
cal  functions,  differential  operations . ,  necessitated  the  development  of  an 
extensive  theory  of  algebraic  forms  which,  at  present,  is  far  from 
being  complete. 

In  the  above  analysis,  I  have  refrained  from  giving  details,  most 
of  which  would  be  of  no  value  to  the  layman,  and  unnecessary  for  the 
mathematician;  but  it  must  be  emphasized  that  the  theory  of  function 
and  the  theory  of  groups,  with  their  very  extensive  developments, 

MATHEMATICS  AND  THE  WORLD 

involving  the  theory  of  invariance,  and,  in  a  way,  the  theory  of  numbers, 
rapidly  became  a  unifying  foundation  upon  which  practically  the  whole 
of  mathematics  is  being  rebuilt.  Many  branches  of  mathematics  have 
become,  of  late,  nothing  more  than  a  theory  of  invariance  of  special 
groups. 

As  to  practical  applications,  there  is  no  possibility  to  list  them,  and 
the  number  increases  steadily.  But,  without  the  theory  of  analytic  func¬ 
tion,  for  instance,  we  could  not  study  the  flow  of  electricity,  or  heat,  or 
deal  with  two-dimensional  gravitational,  electrostatic,  or  magnetic  attrac¬ 
tions.  The  complex  number  involving  the  square  root  of  minus  one  was 
necessary  for  the  development  of  wireless  and  telegraphy;  the  kinetic 
theory  of  gases  and  the  building  of  automobile  engines  require  geome¬ 
tries  of  n  dimensions;  rectangular  and  triangular  membranes  are  con¬ 
nected  with  questions  discussed  in  the  theory  of  numbers ;  the  theory  of 
groups  has  direct  application  in  crystallography ;  the  theory  of  invariants 
underlies  the  theory  of  Einstein,  the  theory  of  matrices  and  operators 
has  revolutionized  the  quantum  theory ;  and  there  are  other  applications 
in  an  endless  array.* 

In  Part  VIII,  different  aspects  of  mathematics  are  analysed,  but  the 
interested  reader  can  be  referred  also  to  the  above-mentioned  book  of 
Professor  Shaw  for  an  excellent  elementary,  yet  structural,  view  of  the 
progress  of  mathematics. 

CHAPTER  XIX 

MATHEMATICS  AS  A  LANGUAGE  OF  A  STRUCTURE  SIMILAR 
TO  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  THE  HUMAN  NERVOUS  SYSTEM 

In  recent  times  the  view  becomes  more  and  more  prevalent  that  many 
branches  of  mathematics  are  nothing  but  the  theory  of  invariants  of  special 
&oups.  s  UE 

A  natural  law, — if,  strictly  speaking,  there  be  such  a  thing  outside  the 
conception  thereof, — is  fundamentally  nothing  more  nor  less  than  a  con¬ 
stant  connection  among  inconstant  phenomena:  it  is,  in  other  words,  an 
invariant  relation  among  variant  terms.  (264)  cassius  j.  keyser 

Whatsoever  things  are  invariant  under  all  and  only  the  transformations 
of  some  group  constitute  the  peculiar  subject-matter  of  some  (actual  or 
potential)  branch  of  knowledge.  (264)  cassius  j.  keyser 

The  general  laws  of  nature  are  to  be  expressed  by  equations  which  hold 
good  for  all  systems  of  co-ordinates,  that  is,  are  co-variant  with  respect  to 
any  substitutions  whatever  (generally  co-variant),  (iss)  A.  einstein 

i 

The  things  hereafter  called  tensors  are  further  characterized  by  the  fact 
that  the  equations  of  transformation  for  their  components  are  linear  and 
homogeneous.  Accordingly,  all  the  components  in  the  new  system  vanish, 
if  they  all  vanish  in  the  original  system.  If,  therefore,  a  law  of  nature  is 
expressed  by  equating  all  the  components  of  a  tensor  to  zero,  it  is  generally 
covariant.  By  examining  the  laws  of  the  formation  of  tensors,  we  acquire 
the  means  of  formulating  generally  covariant  laws,  (iss)  A.  einstein 

The  thalamus  is  a  centre  of  affective  reactivity  to  sensory  stimuli,  while 
the  cortex  is  an  apparatus  for  discrimination.  (4U>  Henri  pi£ron 

Section  A.  Introductory. 

It  becomes  increasingly  evident  that  we  have  come  to  a  linguistic 
impasse,  reflected  in  our  historical,  cultural,  economic,  social,  doctrinal . , 
impasses,  all  these  issues  being  interconnected.  The  structural  linguistic 
aspect  is  the  most  fundamental  of  them  all,  as  it  underlies  the  others  and 
involves  the  s.r,  or  psycho-logical  responses  to  words  and  other  events  in 
connection  with  meanings. 

One  of  the  benefits  of  building  a  system  on  undeniable  negative 
premises  is  that  many  older  and  controversial  problems  become  relatively 
simple  and  often  uncontroversial,  disclosing  an  important  psycho-logical 
mechanism.  Such  formulations  have  often  the  appearance  of  the  'discov¬ 
ery  of  the  obvious* ;  but  it  is  known,  in  some  quarters,  that  the  discovery 
of  the  obvious  is  sometimes  useful,  not  always  easy,  and  often  much 
delayed ;  as,  for  instance,  the  discovery  of  the  equality  of  gravitational 
and  inertial  mass,  which  has  lately  revolutionized  physics. 

MATHEMATICS  AND  THE  NERVOUS  SYSTEMS  269 

As  words  are  not  the  things  we  are  talking  about,  the  only  possible 
link  between  the  objective  world  and  the  verbal  world  is  structural.  If 
the  two  structures  are  similar,  then  the  empirical  world  becomes  intelli¬ 
gible  to  us — we  ‘understand’,  we  can  adjust  ourselves , .  If  we  carry  out 
verbal  experiments  and  predict,  these  predictions  are  verified  empirically. 

I  f  the  two  structures  are  not  similar,  then  our  predictions  are  not  verified 
— we  do  not  ‘know’,  we  do  not  ‘understand’,  the  given  problems  are 
‘unintelligible’  to  us . ,  we  do  not  know  what  to  do  to  adjust  ourselves , . 

Psychologically,  in  the  first  case  we  feel  security,  we  are  satisfied, 
hopeful . ;  in  the  second  case,  we  feel  insecure,  a  floating  anxiety,  fear, 
worry,  disappointment,  depression,  hopelessness,  and  other  harmful  s.r 
appear.  The  considerations  of  structure  thus  disclose  an  unexpected  and 
powerful  semantic  mechanism  of  individual  and  collective  happiness, 
adjustment . ,  but  also  of  tragedies,  supplying  us  with  physiological  means 
for  a  certain  amount  of  desirable  control,  because  relations  and  structure 
represent  fundamental  factors  of  all  meanings  and  evaluations,  and, 
therefore,  of  all  s.r . 

The  present  increasing  world  unrest  is  an  excellent  example  of  this. 
The  structure  of  our  old  languages  has  shaped  our  s.r  and  suggested  our 
doctrines,  creeds . ,  which  build  our  institutions,  customs,  habits,  and, 
finally,  lead  fatalistically  to*  catastrophes  like  the  World  War.  We  fiave 
learned  long  ago,  by  repeated  sad  experience,  that  predictions  concerning 
human  affairs  are  not  verified  empirically.  Our  doctrines,  institutions, 
and  other  disciplines  are  unable  somehow  to  deal  with  this  semantic 
situation,  and  hence  the  prevailing  depression  and  pessimism. 

We  hear  everywhere  complaints  of  the  stupidity  or  dishonesty  of 
our  rulers,  as  already  defined,  without  realizing  that  although  our  rulers 
are  admittedly  very  ignorant,  and  often  dishonest,  yet  the  most  informed, 
gifted,  and  honest  among  them  cannot  predict  or  foresee  happenings,  if 
their  arguments  are  performed  in  a  language  of  a  structure  dissimilar 
to  the  world  and  to  our  nervous  system.  Under  such  conditions,  calling 
names,  even  under  provocations,  is  not  constructive  or  helpful  enough. 
Arguments  in  the  languages  of  the  old  structure  have  led  fatalistically  to 
systems  which  are  structurally  ‘un-natural*  and  so  must  collapse  and 
impose  unnecessary  and  artificial  stress  on  our  nervous  system.  The  self- 
imposed  conditions  of  life  become  more  and  more  unbearable,  resulting 
in  the  increase  of  ‘mental’  illness,  prostitution,  criminality,  brutality, 
violence,  suicides,  and  similar  signs  of  maladjustment.  It  should  never 
be  forgotten  that  human  endurance  has  limits.  Human  ‘knowledge’ 
shapes  the  human  world,  alters  conditions,  and  other  features  of  the 

270  V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANGUAGE 

environment — a  factor  which  does  not  exist  to  any  such  extent  in  the 
animal  world. 

We  often  speak  about  the  influence  of  heredity,  but  much  less  do 
we  analyse  what  influence  environment,  and  particularly  the  verbal 
environment,  has  upon  us.  Not  only  are  all  doctrines  verbal,  but  the 
structure  of  an  old  language  reflects  the  structural  metaphysics  of  bygone 
generations,  which  affect  the  s.r .  The  vicious  circle  is  complete.  Primi¬ 
tive  mythology  shaped  the  structure  of  language.  In  it  we  have  discussed 
and  argued  our  institutions,  systems . ,  and  so  again  the  primitive  struc¬ 
tural  assumptions  or  mythologies  influenced  them.  It  should  not  be  for¬ 
gotten  that  the  affective  interplay,  interaction,  interchange  is  ever  present 
in  human  life,  excepting,  perhaps,  in  severe  and  comparatively  rare  (not 
in  all  countries)  'mental’  ills.  We  can  stop  talking,  we  can  stop  reading 
or  writing,  and  stop  any  'intellectual’  interplay  and  interaction  between 
individuals,  but  we  cannot  stop  or  entirely  abolish  some  s.r. 

A  structural  linguistic  readjustment  will,  it  is  true,  result  in  making 
the  majority  of  our  old  doctrines  untenable,  leading  also  to  a  funda¬ 
mental  scientific  revision  of  new  doctrines  and  systems,  affecting  all  of 
them  and  our  s.r  in  a  constructive  way.  It  is  incorrect,  for  instance,  to 
use  the  terms  capitalism  as  opposed  to  'socialism’,  as  these  terms  apply 
to  different  non-directly  comparable  aspects  of  the  human  problem.  If 
we  wish  to  use  a  term  emphasizing  the  symbolic  character  of  human  rela¬ 
tions,  we  can  use  the  term  ‘capitalism’,  and  then  we  can  contrast  directly 
individual,  group,  national,  international . ,  capitalisms.  If  we  want  to 
emphasize  the  psycho-logical  aspects,  we  can  speak  of  individualism 
versus  socialism , .  Obviously,  in  life  the  issues  overlap,  but  the  verbal 
implications  remain,  preventing  clarity  and  inducing  inappropriate  s.r 
in  any  discussion. 

In  vernacular  terms,  there  is  at  present  a  ‘struggle’  and  ‘competition* 
between  two  entirely  different  ‘industrialisms*  and  two  different  ‘com¬ 
mercialisms*,  based  ultimately  on  two  different  forms  of  ‘capitalism*. 
One  is  the  ‘individual  capitalism’,  rapidly  being  transformed  into  ‘group 
capitalism*,  in  the  main  advanced  theoretically  to  its  limits  in  the 
United  States  of  America  and  to  a  lesser  extent  in  the  rest  of  the  civil¬ 
ized  world,  and  ‘social  capitalism*,  proclaimed  in  the  United  Socialistic 
Soviet  Republics.  Both  these  extreme  tendencies,  connected  also  with 
semantic  disturbances,  are  due  to  a  verbal  or  doctrinal  ‘declaration  of 
independence*  of  two,  until  lately,  much  isolated  countries.  The  United 
States  of  America  proclaimed  the  doctrine  that  man  is  ‘free  and  inde¬ 
pendent’,  while,  in  fact,  he  is  not  free,  but  is  inherently  interdependent. 
The  Soviets  accepted  uncritically  an  unrevised  antiquated  doctrine  of  the 

M  ATI  I  KM  AT  ICS  AND  TDK  NERVOUS  SYSTEMS  271 

‘dictatorship  of  the  proletarians’,  in  practice,  this  would  mean  the  dic¬ 
tatorship  of  unenlightened  masses,  which,  if  left  actually  to  their  creeds, 
and  deprived  of  the  brain-work  of  scientists  and  leaders,  would  revert 
to  primitive  forms  of  animal  life.  Obviously,  these  two  extreme  creeds 
violate  every  typically  human  characteristic.  We  are  interdependent,  time- 
binders,  and  we  are  interdependent  because  we  possess  the  higher  ner¬ 
vous  centres,  which  complexity  animals  do  not  possess.  Without  these 
higher  centres,  we  could  not  be  human  at  all;  both  countries  seem  to 
disregard  this  fact,  as  in  both  the  brain-work  is  exploited,  yet  the  brain¬ 
workers  are  not  properly  evaluated.  The  ignorant  mob,  with  its  his¬ 
torically  and  psycho-logically  cultivated  animalistic  s.r,  retards  human 
progress  and  agreement.  Leaders  do  not  lead,  but  the  majority  play 
down  to  the  mob  psycho-logics,  in  fear  of  their  heads  or  stomachs. 

In  both  countries,  the  s.r  are  such  that  brain-work,  although  com¬ 
mercially  exploited,  is  not  properly  evaluated,  and  is  still  persecuted 
here  and  there.  For  instance,  in  the  United  States  of  America,  we 
witness  court  trials  and  resolutions  against  the  work  of  Darwin,  in  spite 
of  the  fact  that  without  some  theory  of  evolution  most  of  the  natural 
sciences,  medicine  included,  would  be  impossible.  In  Russia,  we  find 
decrees  against  researches  in  pure  science,  without  which  modern  science 
is  impossible.  Both  countries  seemingly  forget  that  all  ‘material’  progress 
among  humans  is  due  uniquely  to  the  brain-work  of  a  few  mostly  under¬ 
paid  and  overworked  workers,  who  exercise  properly  their  higher  ner¬ 
vous  centres.  With  science  getting  hold  of  problems  of  s.r  and  sanity, 
our  human  relations  and  individual  happiness  will  also  become  the  sub¬ 
ject  matter  of  scientific  enquiry.  If  international  and  interdependent 
brain-workers  produce  discoveries  and  inventions,  any  one,  even  of  the 
lowest  development,  can  use  or  misuse  their  achievements,  no  matter 
what  ‘plan’,  or  ‘no-plan’,  is  adopted.  Both  countries  seem  at  present  not 
to  understand  that  a  great  development  of  mechanical  means  and  the 
application  of  scientific  achievements  exclusively  for  animal  comfort  fail 
to  lead  to  greater  happiness  or  higher  culture,  and  that,  perhaps,  indeed, 
they  lead  in  just  the  opposite  direction.  Personally,  I  have  no  doubt  that 
some  day  they  will  understand  it ;  but  an  earlier  understanding  of  this 
simple  semantic  fact  would  have  saved,  in  the  meantime,  a  great  deal  of 
suffering,  bewilderment,  and  other  semantic  difficulties  to  a  great  num¬ 
ber  of  people,  if  the  rulers  in  both  countries  would  be  enlightened  enough 
and  could  have  foreseen  it  soon  enough. 

The  future  will  witness  a  struggle  between  the  individual  and  group 
capitalism,  as  exemplified  in  the  United  States  of  America,  and  the  collec¬ 
tive  or  social  capitalism,  as  exemplified  in  the  Soviet  Republics.  It  does 

V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANGUAGE 

not  require  prophetic  vision  to  foresee  that  some  trends  of  history  are 
foregone  conclusions  because  of  the  structure  of  the  human  nervous 
system.  As  trusts  or  groups  have  replaced  the  theoretically  ‘individual* 
capitalism  in  the  United  States  of  America,  so  will  the  state  capitalism 
replace  the  trusts,  to  be  replaced  in  its  turn  by  international  capitalism. 

We  are  not  shocked  by  the  international  character  of  science.  We 
are  not  TOO  per  cent  patriotic*  when  it  comes  to  the  use  in  daily  life  of 
discoveries  and  inventions  of  other  nations.  Science  is  a  semantic  prod¬ 
uct  of  a  general  human  symbolic  characteristic ;  so,  naturally,  it  must  be 
general  and,  therefore,  ‘international*.  But  ‘capitalism*  is  also  a  unique 
and  general  semantic  product  of  symbolism ;  it  is  also  a  unique  product 
of  the  human  nervous  system,  dependent  on  mathematics,  and,  as  such, 
by  its  inherent  character,  must  become  some  day  international.  There  is 
no  reason  why  our  s.r  should  be  disturbed  in  one  case  more  than  in  the 
other.  The  ultimate  problem  is  not  whether  to  ‘abolish  capitalism*  or  not, 
which  will  never  happen  in  a  symbolic  class  of  life,  but  to  transfer  the 
control  from  private,  socially  irresponsible,  uncontrolled,  and  mostly 
ignorant,  leaders  to  more  responsible,  professionally  trained ,  and  socially 
controlled  public  servants ,  not  bosses.  If  a  country  cannot  produce 
honest,  intelligent,  and  scientifically  trained  public  men  and  leaders,  that 
is,  of  course,  very  disastrous  for  its  citizens ;  but  this  is  not  to  be  pro¬ 
claimed  as  a  rule,  because  it  is  an  exception.  Thus,  in  the  Soviet  Repub¬ 
lics,  graft  is  practically  non-existent  in  the  sense  that  it  exists  in  the 
United  States;  but  the  mentality  of  the  public  men  is  practically  at  a 
similar  standstill  because  of  a  deliberate  minimizing  of  the  value  of  brain- 
work.  I  wonder  if  it  is  realized  at  all,  in  either  country,  that  any  ‘manual 
worker*,  no  matter  how  lowly,  is  hired  exclusively  for  his  human  brain, 
his  s.r ,  and  not  primarily  for  his  hands ! 

The  only  problem  which  the  rest  of  mankind  has  to  face  is  how  this 
struggle  will  be  managed  and  how  long  it  will  last,  the  outcome  admitting 
of  no  doubt,  as  the  ruthless  elimination  of  individual  capitalism  by  group 
capitalism  (trusts)  in  the  United  States  is  an  excellent  example.  In  the 
Soviet  Republics,  they  simply  have  gone  further,  but  in  a  similar  direc¬ 
tion.  Struggles  mean  suffering ;  and  we  should  reconcile  ourselves  to  that 
fact.  If  we  want  the  minimum  of  suffering,  we  should  stop  the  animal¬ 
istic  methods  of  contest.  Human  methods  of  solving  problems  depend  on 
higher  order  abstractions,  scientific  investigations  of  structure  and  lan¬ 
guage,  revision  of  our  doctrines.,  resulting  in  peaceful  adjustment  of 
living  facts,  which  are  actualities  whether  we  like  it  or  not.  If  we  want 
the  maximum  of  suffering,  let  us  proceed  in  the  stupid,  blind,  animal¬ 
istic  and  unscientific  way  of  trial  and  error,  as  we  are  doing  at  present. 

MATHEMATICS  AND  THE  NERVOUS  SYSTEMS  273 

My  aim  is  not  to  be  a  prophet,  but  to  analyse  different  structural 
and  linguistic  semantic  issues  underlying  all  human  activities,  and  so 
to  produce  material  which  may  help  mankind  to  select  their  lot  con¬ 
sciously.  What  they  will  do  is  not  my  official  concern,  but  it  seems  that 
