both  countries,  which  have  so  much  in  common,  and  which  are  bound  to 
play  an  important  role  in  the  future  of  mankind,  owing  to  their  numbers, 
their  areas,  and  their  natural  resources . ,  will  have  to  pay  more  attention 
to  the  so-called  ‘intellectual’  issues,  or,  more  simply,  not  disregard  the 
difference  between  the  reactions  of  infants  and  adults.  Otherwise,  very 
serious  and  disastrous  cultural  results  for  all  of  us  will  follow. 

The  problems  of  the  world  1933  are  acute  and  immediate,  over¬ 
loaded  with  confusion,  bitterness,  hopelessness,  and  other  forms  of 
semantic  disturbances.  Without  some  means — and,  in  this  case,  scien¬ 
tific  and  physiological  means — to  regulate  our  s.rf  we  shall  not  be  able 
to  solve  our  problems  soon  enough  to  avoid  disasters.  The  similarity  in 
structure  of  mathematics,  and  our  nervous  system,  once  pointed  out  and 
applied ,  gives  us  a  unique  means  to  regulate  the  s.r ,  without  which  it 
is  practically  impossible  to  analyse  dispassionately  and  wisely  the  most 
pressing  problems  of  immediate  importance. 

The  present  investigation  shows  that  the  old  languages  which,  in 
structure,  are  not  similar  to  the  world  and  our  nervous  system,  have 
automatically  reflected  their  structure  on  our  doctrines,  creeds,  and  habits, 
s.rt  and  also  on  those  man-made  institutions  which  result  from  verbal 
arguments.  These,  in  turn,  shape  further  s.r  and,  as  long  as  they  last, 
control  our  destinies. 

Four  important  issues  could  be  shown  in  detail,  but,  for  lack  of 
space,  I  give  only  a  suggestive  sketch  of  them  here. 

1)  In  the  ^-system,  all  our  existing  older  sub-systems,  with  all 
their  benefits  as  well  as  shortcomings,  follow  as  an  A  psycho-logical 
structural  semantic  necessity. 

2)  The  tremendous  handicap  for  any  new  and  less  deficient  sys¬ 
tems  consists  in  the  fact  that  such  systems  lack  new  constructive 
oo -valued  semantics,  and  are  carried  on  the  one  side  by  linguistic  two¬ 
valued  arguments  in  the  language  of  old  el  structure  ;  yet  they  aspire 
‘emotionally*  to  something  new  and  better,  while  the  two  cannot  be 
reconciled. 

3)  An  argument  carried  on  in  the  old  el  and  two-valued  way,  no 
matter  how  fundamentally  true  and  eventually  beneficial,  can  be  easily 
defeated  on  verbal  grounds  if  it  follows  the  old  structure  of  language. 
Our  decisions  are  never  well-grounded  psycho-logically,  and  so  can 
never  command  the  respect  or  achieve  the  reliability  of  scientific  reason- 

V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANGUAGE 

ing.  That  is  why  we  are  groping— the  only  method  possible  under  such 
conditions  being  the  animalistic  trial-and-error  methods,  swaying  masses 
by  inflammatory  speeches  because  reason  has  nothing  to  offer,  being  tied 
up  by  the  old  verbal  structure  to  the  older  consequences  based  on  animal¬ 
istic  and  fundamentally  false-for-man  assumptions. 

4)  In  the  old  A,  el,  two-valued  system,  agreement  is  theoretically 
impossible;  so  one  of  the  main,  and  perhaps  revolutionary,  semantic 
departures  from  the  old  system  is  the  fact  that  a  non-el  oo-valued  A- 
system,  based  on  fundamental  negative  premises,  leads  to  a  theory  of 
universal  agreement,  which  is  based  on  a  structural  revision  of  our 
languages,  producing  new  and  undisturbed  s.r ,  which  eliminate  the 
copying  of  animals  in  our  nervous  reactions. 

The  subject  matter  of  this  chapter  divides,  naturally,  into  three 
interconnected  semantic  parts.  In  the  first,  we  shall  recall  a  few  general 
notions,  known  in  the  main  but  seldom  taken  into  consideration,  reformu¬ 
lated  in  a  language  of  different  structure.  In  the  second,  I  shall  indicate 
how  the  most  important  mathematical  disciplines,  which  traditionally 
and,  in  the  opinion  of  the  majority,  could  hardly  be  called  mathematical, 
represent  a  scientific  and  exact  formulation  of  the  general  ‘thinking* 
process.  In  this  connection,  a  few  words  will  be  said  about  the  theory 
of  aggregates,  and  a  little  more  about  the  theory  of  groups.  This  latter 
theory,  with  its  implications  and  applications,  leads  to  a  reformulation 
of  mathematics  on  quite  obvious  psycho -logical  grounds,  bringing  mathe¬ 
matics  into  the  closest  relationship  to  the  general  processes  of  mentation. 
Finally,  in  the  third  part,  I  shall  indicate  the  astonishing  and  quite  unex¬ 
pected  physiological  fact  of  the  similarity  of  the  structure  of  mathematics 
with  the  structure  and  function  of  our  nervous  system. 

The  intelligent  layman  should  be  reminded  that,  although  he  needs 
to  know  about  mathematics,  the  minimum  given  here,  supplemented, 
perhaps,  by  a  few  most  elementary  and  fascinating  books  on  mathemat¬ 
ical  philosophy,  given  in  the  bibliography  to  this  volume,  yet  he  does  not 
need,  and  probably  never  will  need,  more  technical  mathematics  than  is 
given  in  the  high  schools  and  supplemented  by  the  fundamental  notions 
of  the  differential  calculus.  For  directly  we  treat  all  languages,  mathe¬ 
matics  included,  from  a  more  general  (and,  at  present,  perhaps,  the  most 
general)  aspect;  namely,  structure;  the  reader  will  obtain  all  the  essen¬ 
tial  psycho-logical  benefits  of  modern  science  by  absorbing  the  ^-system 
and  habits,  which  will  result  in  completely  novel  standards  of  evaluation 
and  distinctly  modern  and  adult  s,r. 

The  last  is  of  extreme  and  unrealized  importance.  In  fact,  its  impor¬ 
tance  cannot  be  fully  appreciated  until  we  actually  acquire  such  reactions, 

MATHEMATICS  AND  THE  NERVOUS  SYSTEMS  275 

because  only  then  shall  we  have  semantic  disturbances  eliminated,  so  that 
all  problems  can  be  analysed  properly,  and,  therefore,  agreement  must 
be  reached. 

The  future  generations,  of  course,  will  have  no  difficulties  whatso¬ 
ever  in  establishing  the  healthy  s.r ;  neither  at  present  have  very  young 
children.  These  do  not  need  such  treatises  as  the  present  work.  But, 
before  the  grown-up  parents  or  teachers  can  train  their  children,  they 
must  first  unlearn  a  great  deal  and  train  themselves  to  new  habits  involv¬ 
ing  the  A  standards  of  evaluation.  So,  for  them,  such  a  book,  in  order  to 
be  convincing,  must  deal  with  the  foundations  of  their  difficulties.  The 
last  task  is  difficult  for  the  writer  as  well  for  the  reader. 

What  has  been  said  here  does  not  apply,  I  am  sorry  to  say,  to 
professional  'philosophers’,  ‘logicians’,  ‘psychologists’,  psychiatrists,  and 
teachers.  These,  to  be  adequate  at  all  for  their  responsible  and  difficult 
professional  duties,  must  become  thoroughly  acquainted  with  structure 
in  general,  and  with  the  structure  of  mathematics  in  particular,  as  factors 
in  s.r ,  and  must  work  out  the  present  outline  much  further. 

Section  B.  General. 

Mathematics  in  the  twentieth  century  is  characterized  by  an  enor¬ 
mous  productiveness,  by  the  revision  of  its  foundations,  and  the  quest 
for  rigour,  all  of  which  implies  material  of  great  and  unexplored  psycho¬ 
logical  value,  a  result  of  the  activity  of  the  human  nervous  system. 
Branches  of  mathematics,  as,  for  instance,  mathematical  ‘logic’,  or  the 
analytical  theory  of  numbers,  have  been  created  in  this  period ;  others, 
like  the  theory  of  function,  have  been  revised  and  reshaped.  The  theory 
of  Einstein  and  the  newer  quantum  mechanics  have  also  suggested 
further  needs  and  developments. 

Any  branch  of  mathematics  consists  of  propositional  functions 
which  state  certain  structural  relations.  The  mathematician  tries  to  dis¬ 
cover  new  characteristics  and  to  reduce  the  known  characteristics  to  a 
dependence  on  the  smallest  possible  set  of  constantly  revised  and  simplest 
structural  assumptions.  Of  late,  we  have  found  that  no  assumption  is 
ever  ‘self-evident’  or  ultimate. 

To  those  structural  assumptions,  we  give  at  present  the  more  polite 
name  of  postulates.  These  involve  undefined  terms,  not  always  stated 
explicitly,  but  always  present  implicitly.  A  postulate  system  gives  us 
the  structure  of  the  linguistic  scheme .  The  older  mathematicians  were 
less  particular  in  their  methods.  Their  primitive  propositional  functions 
or  postulates  were  less  well  investigated.  They  did  not  start  explicitly 
with  undefined  terms.  The  twentieth  century  has  witnessed  in  this  field 

V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANGUAGE 

a  marked  progress  in  mathematics,  though  much  less  in  other  verbal 
enterprises ;  which  accounts  for  the  long  neglect  of  the  structure  of  lan¬ 
guages.  Without  tracing  down  a  linguistic  scheme  to  a  postulate  system, 
it  is  extremely  difficult  or  impossible  to  find  its  structural  assumptions. 

A  peculiarity  of  modern  mathematics  is  the  insistence  upon  the 
formal  character  of  all  mathematical  reasoning,  which,  with  the  new 
non-el  theory  of  meanings,  ultimately  should  apply  to  all  linguistic 
procedures. 

The  problems  of  ‘formalism*  are  of  serious  and  neglected  psycho¬ 
logical  importance,  and  are  connected  with  great  semantic  dangers  in 
daily  life  if  associated  with  the  lack  of  consciousness  of  abstracting;  or, 
in  other  words,  when  we  confuse  the  orders  of  abstractions.  Indeed,  the 
majority  of  ‘mentally*  ill  are  too  formal  in  their  psycho-logical,  one-, 
two-,  or  few-valued  processes  and  so  cannot  adjust  themselves  to  the 
oo-valued  experiences  of  life.  Formalism  is  only  useful  in  the  search  for, 
and  test  of,  structure ;  but,  in  that  case,  the  consciousness  of  abstracting 
makes  the  attitude  behind  formal  reasoning  oo-valued  and  probable t  so 
that  semantic  disturbances  and  shocks  in  life  are  avoided.  Let  us  be 
simple  about  it:  the  mechanism  of  the  semantic  disturbance,  called 
‘identification*,  or  ‘the  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions*  in  general, 
and  ‘objectification*  in  particular,  is,  to  a  large  extent,  dependent  on  two¬ 
valued  formalism  without  the  consciousness  of  abstracting. 

In  mathematics,  formalism  is  uniquely  useful  and  necessary.  In 
mathematics,  the  formal  point  of  view  is  pressed  so  far  as  to  disclaim 
that  any  meanings,  in  the  ordinary  sense,  have  been  ascribed  to  the 
undefined  terms,  the  emphasis  being  on  the  postulated  relations  between 
the  undefined  terms.  The  last  makes  the  majority  of  mathematicians  able 
to  adjust  themselves,  and  mathematics  extremely  general,  as  it  allows  us 
to  ascribe  to  the  mathematical  postulates  an  indefinite  number  of  mean¬ 
ings  which  satisfy  the  postulates. 

This  fact  is  not  a  defect  of  mathematics ;  quite  the  opposite.  It  is 
the  basis  of  its  tremendous  practical  value.  It  makes  mathematics  a 
linguistic  scheme  which  embodies  the  possibility  of  perfection,  and 
which,  no  doubt,  satisfies  semantically,  at  each  epoch,  the  great  majority 
of  properly  informed  individual  Smiths  and  Browns.  There  is  nothing 
absolute  about  it,  as  all  mathematics  is  ultimately  a  product  of  the  human 
nervous  system,  the  best  product  produced  at  each  stage  of  our  develop- 
ment.  The  fact  that  mathematics  establishes  such  linguistic  relational 
patterns  without  specific  content,  accounts  for  the  generality  of  mathe¬ 
matics  in  applications. 

MATHEMATICS  AND  THE  NERVOUS  SYSTEMS  277 

If  mathematics  had  physical  content  or  a  definite  meaning  ascribed 
to  its  undefined  terms,  such  mathematics  could  be  applied  only  in  the 
given  case  and  not  otherwise.  If,  instead  of  making  the  mathematical 
statement  that  one  and  one  make  two,  without  mentioning  what  the  one 
or  the  two  stands  for,  we  should  establish  that  one  apple  and  one 
apple  make  two  apples,  this  statement  would  not  be  applied  safely  to 
anything  else  but  apples.  The  generality  would  be  lost,  the  validity  of 
the  statement  endangered,  and  we  should  be  deprived  of  the  greatest 
value  of  mathematics.  Such  a  statement  concerning  apples  is  not  a 
mathematical  statement,  but  belongs  to  what  is  called  ‘applied  mathe¬ 
matics*,  which  has  content.  Such  experimental  facts  as  that  one  gallon 
of  water  added  to  one  gallon  of  alcohol  gives  less  than  two  gallons  of 
the  mixture,  do  not  invalidate  the  mathematical  statement  that  one  and 
one  make  two,  which  remains  valid  by  definition.  The  last  mentioned  ex¬ 
periment  with  the  ‘addition*  of  water  to  alcohol  is  a  deep  sub-microscopic 
structural  characteristic  of  the  empirical  world,  which  must  be  discovered 
at  present  by  experiment.  The  most  we  can  say  is  that  we  find  the 
above  mathematical  statement  applicable  in  some  instances,  and  non- 
applicable  in  others. 

Not  assigning  definite  meanings  to  the  undefined  terms,  mathemat¬ 
ical  postulates  have  variable  meanings  and  so  consist  of  propositional 
functions.  Mathematics  must  be  viewed  as  a  manifold  of  patterns  of 
exact  relational  languages,  representing,  at  each  stage,  samples  of  the  best 
working  of  the  human  ‘mind*.  The  application  to  practical  problems 
depends  on  the  ingenuity  of  those  desiring  to  use  such  languages. 

Because  of  these  characteristics,  mathematics,  when  studied  as  a 
form  of  human  behaviour,  gives  us  a  wealth  of  psycho-logical  and 
semantic  data,  usually  entirely  neglected. 

As  postulates  consist  of  propositional  functions  with  undefined 
terms,  all  mathematical  proof  is  formal  and  depends  exclusively  on  the 
form  of  the  premises  and  not  on  special  meanings  which  we  may  assign 
to  our  undefined  terms.  This  applies  to  all  ‘proof*.  ‘Theories*  represent 
linguistic  structures,  and  must  be  proved  on  semantic  grounds  and  never 
by  empirical  ‘facts*.  Experimental  facts  only  make  a  theory  more 
plausible,  but  no  number  of  experiments  can  ‘prove*  a  theory,  A  proof 
belongs  to  the  verbal  level,  the  experimental  facts  do  not;  they  belong  to 
a  different  order  of  abstractions,  not  to  be  reached  by  language,  the 
connecting  link  being  structure,  which,  in  languages,  is  given  by  the 
systems  of  postulates. 

Theories  or  doctrines  are  always  linguistic.  They  formulate  some¬ 
thing  which  is  going  on  inside  our  skin  in  relation  to  what  is  going  on 

V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANGUAGE 

on  the  un-speakable  levels,  and  which  is  not  a  theory.  Theories  are  the 
rational  means  for  a  rational  being  to  be  as  rational  as  he  possibly  can. 
As  a  fact  of  experience,  the  working  of  the  human  nervous  system  is 
such  that  we  have  theories.  Such  was  the  survival  trend ;  and  we  must 
not  only  reconcile  ourselves  with  this  fact,  but  must  also  investigate  the 
structure  of  theories. 

Theories  are  the  result  of  extremely  complex  cyclic  chains  of  nerve 
currents  of  the  human  nervous  system.  Any  semantic  disturbance,  be  it 
a  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions,  or  identification,  or  any  of  their 
progeny,  called  ‘elementalism’,  'absolutism',  'dogmatism',  ‘finalisin'. , 
introduces  some  deviations  or  resistances,  or  semantic  blockages  of  the 
normal  survival  cycles,  and  the  organism  is  at  once  on  the  abnormal 
non-adjustment  path. 

The  structure  of  protoplasm  of  the  simplest  kind,  or  of  the  most 
elaborate  nervous  system,  is  such  that  it  abstracts  and  reacts  in  its  own 
specific  way  to  different  external  and  internal  stimuli. 

Our  ‘experience’  is  based  normally  on  abstractions  and  integrations 
of  different  stimuli  by  different  receptors,  with  different  and  specific 
reactions.  The  eye  produces  its  share,  and  we  may  see  a  stone;  but  the 
eye  does  not  convey  to  us  the  feel  of  weight  of  the  stone,  or  its  tem¬ 
perature,  or  its  hardness,.  To  get  this  new  wisdom,  we  need  other 
receptors  of  an  entirely  different  kind  from  those  the  eye  can  supply. 
If  the  eye  plays  some  role  in  establishing  the  weight,  for  instance,  with¬ 
out  ever  giving  the  actual  feel  of  weight,  it  is  usually  misleading.  If  we 
would  try  to  lift  a  pound  of  lead  and  a  pound  of  feathers,  which  the 
balance  would  register  as  of  equal  weight,  the  pound  of  lead  would  feel 
heavier  to  us  than  the  pound  of  feathers.  The  eye  saw  that  the  pound 
of  lead  is  smaller  in  bulk,  and  so  the  doctrinal,  semantic,  and  muscular 
expectation  was  for  a  smaller  weight,  and  so,  by  contrast,  the  pound 
of  lead  would  appear  unexpectedly  heavy. 

As  the  eye  is  one  of  the  most  subtle  organs,  in  fact,  a  part  of  the 
brain,  science  is  devising  methods  to  bring  all  other  characteristics  of  the 
external  world  to  direct  or  indirect  inspection  of  the  eye.  We  build  bal¬ 
ances,  thermometers,  microscopes,  telescopes,  and  other  instruments,  but 
the  character  and  feel  of  weight,  or  warmth , ,  must  be  supplied  directly 
by  the  special  receptors,  which  uniquely  can  produce  the  special  ‘sensa¬ 
tions'.  The  swinging  of  the  balance,  or  the  rise  of  the  column  of  the 
thermometer,  establishes  most  important  relations ,  but  does  not  give  the 
immediate  specific  and  un-speakable  feel  of  ‘weight’  or  of  ‘warmth’. 
Our  first  and  most  primitive  contact  with  a  stone,  its  feel . ,  is  a  personal 
abstraction  from  the  object,  full  of  characteristics  supplied  by  the 

MATHEMATICS  AND  THE  NERVOUS  SYSTEMS  279 

peculiarities  of  the  special  receptors.  Our  primitive  picture  ‘stone*  is  a 
summary,  an  integration,  of  all  these  separate  ‘sense*  abstractions.  It  is 
an  abstraction  from  many  abstractions,  or  an  abstraction  of  a  higher 
order. 

Theories  are  relational  or  structural  verbal  schemes*  built  by  a 
process  of  high  abstractions  from  many  lower  abstractions,  which  are 
produced  not  only  by  ourselves  but  by  others  (time-binding).  Theories, 
therefore,  represent  the  shortest,  simplest  structural  summaries  and  gen¬ 
eralizations,  or  the  highest  abstractions  from  individual  experience  and 
through  symbolism  of  racial  past  experiences.  Theories  are  mostly  not 
an  individual,  but  a  collective,  product.  They  follow  a  more  subtle  but 
inevitable  semantic  survival  trend,  like  all  life.  Human  races  and  epochs 
which  have  not  revised  or  advanced  their  theories  have  either  perished, 
or  are  perishing. 

The  process  of  abstracting  in  different  orders  being  inherent  in  the 
human  nervous  system,  it  can  neither  be  stopped  nor  abolished  ;  but  it 
can  be  deviated,  vitiated,  and  forced  into  harmful  channels  contrary  to 
the  survival  trend,  particularly  in  connection  with  pathological  s.r.  No 
one  of  us,  even  when  profoundly  ‘mentally*  ill,  is  free  from  theories. 
The  only  selection  we  can  make  is  between  antiquated,  often  primitive- 
made,  theories,  and  modern  theories,  which  always  involve  important 
semantic  factors. 

The  understanding  of  the  above  is  of  serious  importance,  as,  by 
proper  selection  of  theories,  all  wasteful  semantic  disturbances,  which 
lead  even  to  crimes,  and  such  historical  examples  of  human  un-sanity  as 
the  ‘holy  inquisition*,  burning  at  the  stake,  religious  wars,  persecution  of 
science,  the  Tennessee  trial . ,  could  have  been  avoided. 

Whenever  any  one  says  anything ,  he  is  indulging  in  theories.  A 
similar  statement  is  true  of  writing  or  ‘thinking*.  We  must  use  terms, 
and  the  very  selection  of  our  terms  and  the  structure  of  the  language 
selected  reflect  their  structure  on  the  subject  under  discussion.  Besides, 
words  are  not  the  events.  Even  simple  ‘descriptions*,  since  they  involve 
terms,  and  ultimately  undefined  terms,  involve  structural  assumptions, 
postulates,  and  theories,  conscious  or  unconscious — at  present,  mostly 
the  latter. 

It  is  very  harmful  to  sanity  to  teach  a  disregard  for  theories  or 
doctrines  and  theoretical  work,  as  we  can  never  get  away  from  them  as 
long  as  we  are  humans.  If  we  disregard  them,  we  only  build  for  our¬ 
selves  semantic  disturbances.  The  difference  between  morbid  and  not  so 
obviously  morbid  confusions  of  orders  of  abstractions  is  not  very  clear. 
The  strong  affective  components  of  such  semantic  disturbances  must 

V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANGUAGE 

lead  to  absolutism,  dogmatism,  finalism,  and  similar  states,  which  are 
semantic  factors  out  of  which  states  of  un-sanity  are  built. 

We  know  that  we  must  start  with  undefined  terms,  which  may  be 
defined  at  some  other  date  in  other  undefined  terms.  At  a  given  date,  our 
undefined  terms  must  be  treated  as  postulates.  If  we  prefer,  we  may 
call  them  structural  assumptions  or  hypotheses.  From  a  theoretical  point 
of  view,  these  undefined  terms  represent  not  only  postulates  but  also 
variables,  and  so  generate  propositional  functions  and  not  propositions. 
In  mathematics,  these  issues  are  clear  and  simple.  Every  theory  is  ulti¬ 
mately  based  on  postulates  which  consist  of  propositional  functions  con¬ 
taining  variables,  and  which  express  relations,  indicating  the  structure  of 
the  scheme. 

It  appears  that  the  main  importance  of  the  linguistic  higher  order 
abstractions  is  in  their  public  character,  for  they  are  capable  of  being 
transmitted  in  neural  and  extra-neural  forms.  But  our  private  lives  are 
influenced  also  very  much  by  the  lower  order  abstractions,  ‘feelings', 
‘intuitions', .  These  can  be,  should  be,  but  seldom  are,  properly  influenced 
by  the  higher  order  abstractions.  These  ‘feelings'. ,  are  personal,  un¬ 
speakable,  and  so  are  non-transmittable.  For  instance,  we  cannot  trans¬ 
mit  the  actual  feeling  of  pain  when  we  burn  ourselves;  but  we  can 
transmit  the  invariant  relation  of  the  extremely  complex  fire-flesh-nerve- 
pain  manifold.  A  relation  is  present  empirically,  but  also  can  be  expressed 
by  words.  It  seems  important  to  have  means  to  translate  these  higher 
order  abstractions  into  lower,  and  this  will  be  the  subject  of  Part  VII. 

Section  C.  The  psycho-logical  importance  of  the  theory  of  aggregates 
and  the  theory  of  groups. 

Starting  with  the  A  denial  of  identity,  we  were  compelled  to  con¬ 
sider  structure  as  the  only  possible  link  between  the  empirical  and  the 
verbal  worlds.  The  analysis  of  structure  involved  relations  and  m.o  and 
multi-dimensional  order,  and,  ultimately,  has  led  us  to  a  semantic  defini¬ 
tion  of  mathematics  and  numbers.  These  definitions  make  it  obvious 
that  all  mathematics  expresses  general  processes  of  mentation  par  excel¬ 
lence.  We  could  thus  review  all  mathematics  from  this  psycho-logical 
point  of  view,  but  this  would  not  be  profitable  for  our  purpose;  so  we 
will  limit  ourselves  to  a  brief  sketch  connected  with  the  theory  of  aggre¬ 
gates  and  the  theory  of  groups,  because  these  two  fundamental  and  most 
general  theories  formulate  in  a  crisp  form  the  general  psycho-logical 
process,  and  also  show  the  mechanism  by  which  all  languages  (not  only 
mathematics)  have  been  built.  Besides,  with  the  exception  of  a  few 
specialists,  the  general  public  is  not  even  aware  of  the  existence  of  such 

MATHEMATICS  AND  THE  NERVOUS  SYSTEMS  281 

disciplines  which  depart  widely  from  traditional  notions  about  mathe¬ 
matics.  They  represent  most  successful  and  powerful  attempts  at  build- 
in  g  exact  relational  languages  in  subjects  which  are  on  the  border-line 
between  psycho-logics  and  the  traditional  mathematics.  Because  they  are 
exact,  they  have  been  embodied  in  mathematics,  although  they  belong 
just  as  well  to  a  general  science  of  relations,  or  general  semantics,  or 
‘psychology',  or  ‘logic',  or  scientific  linguistics  and  psychophysiology. 
There  are  other  mathematical  disciplines,  as,  for  instance,  analysis  situs, 
or  the  ‘algebra  of  logic'. ,  to  which  the  above  statements  apply ;  but,  for 
our  present  purposes,  we  shall  limit  ourselves  to  the  former  two. 

Dealing  with  the  theory  of  aggregates,  I  will  give  only  a  few  defini¬ 
tions  taken  from  the  Encyclopaedia  Britannica,  with  the  purpose  of 
drawing  the  attention  of  the  ‘psychologists',  and  others,  to  those  psycho¬ 
logical  data. 

The  theory  of  aggregates  underlies  the  theory  of  function.  An 
aggregate,  or  manifold,  or  set,  is  a  system  such  that :  (1)  It  includes  all 
entities  to  which  a  certain  characteristic  belongs;  and  (2)  no  entity 
without  this  characteristic  belongs  to  the  system;  (3)  any  entity  of  the 
system  is  permanently  recognizable  as  distinct  from  other  entities. 

The  separate  entities  which  belong  to  such  a  collection,  system, 
aggregate,  manifold,  or  set  are  called  elements.  We  assume  the  possibil¬ 
ity  of  selecting  at  pleasure,  by  a  definite  process  or  law,  one  or  more 
elements  of  any  aggregate  A ,  which  would  form  another  aggregate  B , . 

The  above  few  lines  express  how  the  human  ‘thought'  processes 
work  and  how  languages  were  built  up.  It  is  true  that  the  exactness 
imposes  limitations,  and  so  the  mathematical  theories  are  not  expressed 
in  the  usual  antiquated  ‘psychological'  terms,  although  they  describe  one 
of  the  most  important  psycho-logical  processes. 

Lately,  the  theory  of  aggregates  has  led  to  a  weighty  question: 
Does  one  of  the  fundamental  laws  of  old  ‘logic' ;  namely,  the  two-valued 
law  of  the  ‘excluded  third'  (A  is  either  B  or  not  B),  apply  in  all 
instances  ?  Or  is  it  valid  in  some  instances  and  invalid  in  others  ? 

This  problem  is  the  psycho-logical  kernel  of  the  new  revision  of 
the  foundation  of  mathematics,  which  has  lately  been  considerably 
advanced  by  Professor  Lukasiewicz  and  Tarski  with  their  many-valued 
‘logic',  which  merges  ultimately  with  the  mathematical  theory  of  proba¬ 
bility  ;  and  on  different  grounds  has  perhaps  been  solved  in  the  present 
non~elt  ^-system. 

The  notion  of  a  group  is  psychologically  still  more  important.  It  is 
connected  with  the  notions  of  transformation  and  invariance.  Without 
giving  formal  definitions  unnecessary  for  our  purpose,  we  may  say  that 

V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANGUAGE 

if  we  consider  a  set  of  elements  a,  b>  c. ,  and  we  have  a  rule  for  combin¬ 
ing  them,  say  O,  and  if  the  result  of  combining  any  two  members  of  the 
set  is  itself  a  member  of  the  set,  such  aggregate  is  said  to  have  the 
‘group  property*. 

Thus,  if  we  take  numbers  or  colours,  for  instance,  and  the  rule 
which  we  accept  is  ‘+*,  we  say  that  a  number  or  a  colour  is  transformed 
by  this  rule  into  a  number  or  a  colour,  and  so  both  possess  the  ‘group 
property*.  Obviously,  by  performing  the  given  operation,  we  have  trans¬ 
formed  one  element  into  another;  yet  some  characteristics  of  our  ele¬ 
ments  have  remained  invariant  under  transformation.  Thus,  if  1  is  a 
number  and  2  is  a  number,  the  operation  (+*  transforms  1  into  3,  since 
1  H”  2  **=  3 ;  but  3  has  the  character  of  being  a  number ;  so  this  charac¬ 
teristic  is  preserved  or  remains  invariant.  Similarly,  with  colours,  if  we 
add  colours,  these  are  transformed,  but  remain  colours,  and  so  both  sets 
have  the  ‘group  property*.  Keyser  suggests  that  the  ‘mental*  processes 
have  the  group  property,  which  is  undoubtedly  true.1 

The  role  this  theory  plays  in  our  language  is  of  great  importance, 
because  in  it  we  find  a  method  of  search  for  structure,  and  a  method  by 
which  we  can  establish  a  similarity  of  structure  between  the  un-speakable 
objective  level  and  the  verbal  level,  based  on  invariance  of  relations 
which  are  found  or  discovered  in  both. 

The  role  of  groups  in  physical  theory  is  best  described  by  quoting 
Professor  Rainich.  (Remarks  in  brackets  are  mine.)  ‘A  physicist,  we 
may  take  it,  is  a  person  who  measures  according  to  certain  rules.  Let  us 
denote  by  a  the  number  he  obtained  in  a  given  situation  by  applying  the 
rule  number  one,  by  b  the  number  obtained  in  the  same  situation  by 
measuring  according  to  rule  number  two  and  so  on  ( a  may  be  e.g.  the 
volume,  b  the  pressure,  c  the  temperature  of  gas  in  a  given  container). 
The  physicist  finds  further  that  the  results  of  measurements  of  the  same 
kind  undertaken  in  different  situations  satisfy  certain  relations,  we 
may  write,  for  instance : 

r(afb)  —  c. 

‘A  mathematician  is  busy  deducing  from  some  given  propositions 
other  propositions ;  this  usually  leads  to  numbers  which  we  may  call  A , 
C,  .  .  .  .  These  numbers  also  satisfy  certain  relations,  say 

R  ( A,B )  =  C. 

‘Then  comes,  as  Professor  Weyl  says,  a  messenger,  a  go-between 
who  may  be  a  mathematician  or  a  physicist,  or  both,  and  says :  “If  you 
establish  a  correspondence  between  the  physical  quantities  and  the  mathe¬ 
matical  quantities,  if  you  assign  A  to  a,  B  to  b,  etc.,  the  same  relations 

MATHEMATICS  AND  TIIE  NERVOUS  SYSTEMS  283 

hold  for  the  physical  quantities  as  for  the  corresponding  mathematical 
quantities  so  that  Rs~r”  [Similarity  of  structure.] 

Tn  the  course  bf  time  new  procedures  of  measurement  are  invented, 
some  physical  relations  do  not  find  their  counterpart  in  the  mathematical 
theory,  the  mathematical  theory  has  to  be  patched  up  by  introducing  new 
quantities  till  too  many  quantities  appear  in  it  which  do  not  correspond 
to  physical  quantities;  then  comes  the  phenomenological  point  of  view 
and  sweeps  the  theory  out  of  applied  mathematics — the  theory  becomes 
pure  mathematics  once  more,  and  physicists  begin  to  look  around  for  a 
new  theory.  Everybody  can  find  examples  for  this  situation;  it  is 
enough  to  mention  the  Bohr  atom  which  was  not  even  mentioned  today 
only  fifteen  years  after  its  introduction. 

‘However  the  theory  of  groups  which  is  being  applied  to  physics 
is  not  just  one  of  many  mathematical  theories  of  the  character  described 
above ;  its  application  is  of  a  far  more  fundamental  nature  and  we  shall 
