be  able  to  indicate  what  it  is  by  analysing  further  the  scheme  outlined 
above. 

Tt  may  happen,  and  in  fact  it  happens  often,  that  the  same  mathe¬ 
matical  theory  can  be  applied  to  the  same  physical  facts  in  more  than  one 
way ;  for  instance,  instead  of  assigning  to  the  physical  quantities  a,b ,  .  .  . 
the  mathematical  quantities  A,B,  ...  we  might  have  assigned  to  them 
,Br ,  .  .  .  with  the  same  results,  that  is,  the  relations  for  physical  quan¬ 
tities  are  the  same  as  for  the  mathematical  quantities  corresponding  to 
them  now  (think  of  space  considered  from  the  experimental  point  of 
view — and  of  coordinate  geometry  ;  different  ways  of  establishing  a 
correspondence  result  from  different  choices  of  coordinate  axes).  If 
this  happens  it  means  that  the  mathematical  theory  possesses  a  peculiar 
property,  namely,  that  if  A'  is  substituted  for  A,  Bf  for  B  and  so  on,  no 
relation  of  the  type  R(A,B)=C  which  was  correct  before  the 
substitution  is  destroyed ;  in  other  words,  there  are  substitutions  or  trans¬ 
formations  for  which  all  relations  are  invariant.  All  such  transforma¬ 
tions  constitute  what  we  call  a  group ;  the  existence  and  the  properties  of 
such  a  group  present  a  very  important  characteristic  of  the  mathematical 
theory.  Moreover  it  is  clear  that  if  two  different  mathematical  theories 
can  be  applied — in  the  sense  described  above — to  the  same  physical 
theory,  the  groups  of  these  two  theories  will  be  essentially  the  same,  so 
that  the  groups  reflect  some  of  the  most  fundamental  properties  of 
physical  systems/2 

The  connection  between  groups  and  structure  is  described  by 
Professor  Shaw  as  follows :  The  first  branch  of  dynamic  mathematics 
is  the  theory  of  operations.  It  includes  the  general  theory  of  operators 

V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANHUACE 

of  any  type  and  in  particular  the  theory  of  groups  of  operators.  The 
structure  of  such  groups  is  evidently  a  study  of  form.  It  may  often  be 
exemplified  in  some  concrete  manner.  Thus  the  groups  of  geometric 
crystals  exemplify  the  structure  of  thirty-two  groups  of  a  discontinuous 
character,  and  the  230  space-groups  of  the  composition  of  crystals 
exemplify  the  corresponding  infinite  discontinuous  groups.  The  study 
of  the  composition  series  of  groups,  the  subgroups  and  their  relations, 
whether  in  the  case  of  substitution  groups,  linear  groups,  geometric 
groups,  or  continuous  groups,  is  a  study  of  form.  Also,  the  study  of  the 
construction  of  groups,  whether  by  generators,  or  by  the  combination  of 
groups,  or  in  other  ways,  is  also  a  study  of  structure  or  form.  The 
calculus  of  operations  in  general,  with  such  particular  forms  as  differ¬ 
ential  operators,  integral  operators,  difference  operators,  distributive 
operations  in  general,  is  for  the  most  part  a  study  of  structure.  In  so  far 
as  any  of  these  is  concerned  with  the  synthesis  of  compound  forms  from 
simple  elements,  it  is  to  be  classed  as  a  study  of  form,  as  the  term  is 
here  used/3  ( 

In  the  notion  of  a  group,  we  have  become  acquainted  with  two 
terms ;  namely,  transformation  and  invariance.  The  first  implies  ‘change* ; 
the  other,  a  lack  of  ‘change*  or  ‘permanence*.  Both  of  these  characteris¬ 
tics  are  semantically  fundamental,  but  involve  serious  complexities. 

The  world,  ourselves  included,  can  be  considered  as  processes  which 
can  be  analysed  in  terms  of  transformed  stages  with  all  their  derivative 
notions.  In  the  objective  world,  ‘change*  is  ever  present  and  is,  perhaps, 
the  most  important  structural  characteristic  of  our  experience.  But 
when  a  highly  developed  nervous  system,  a  process  itself,  is  acted  upon 
by  other  processes,  such  nervous  system  discovers,  at  some  stage  of  its 
development,  a  certain  relative  permanence,  which,  at  a  still  later  stage,  is 
formulated  as  invariance  of  function  and  relations.  The  latter  formula¬ 
tion  is  non-el  because  it  can  be  discovered  empirically,  which  means  by 
the  lower  nerve  centres,  but  also  is  the  main  necessity  and  means  of 
operating  of  the  higher  nerve  centres,  so-called  ‘thought*.  All  that  we 
usually  call  &  process  of  ‘association*  is  nothing  else  than  a  process  of 
relating ,  a  direct  consequence  of  the  structure  of  the  nervous  system, 
where  stimuli  are  registered  in  a  certain  four-dimensional  order,  which, 
on  the  psycho-logical  level,  take  the  form  of  relations.  From  this  point 
of  view,  it  is  natural  that  the  higher  nerve  centres,  as  a  limit  of  integrat¬ 
ing  processes,  should  produce  and  discover  invariance  of  relations,  which 
appears  then  as  the  supreme  product  and  so,  ultimately,  a  necessity  of 
the  activity  of  the  higher  centres.  Obviously,  if  the  invariance  of  rela¬ 
tions  has  any  objective  counterpart  whatsoever  in  the  external  world, 

MATI I  KM  ATK'S  AND  T1IK  NKRVOUS  SYSTKMS  285 

this  invariance  is  impressed  on  the  nervous  system  more  than  other  char¬ 
acteristics  ;  and  so,  at  a  certain  stage,  a  nervous  system  which  is  capable 
of  producing  and  using  a  highly  developed  symbolism,  must  discover 
and  formulate  this  invariance. 

It  seems  that  relations ,  because  of  the  possibility  of  discovering 
them  and  their  invariance  in  both  worlds,  are,  in  a  way,  more  ‘objective’ 
than  so-called  objects.  We  may  have  a  science  of  ‘invariance  of  rela¬ 
tions’,  but  we  could  not  have  a  science  of  permanence  of  things ;  and  the 
older  doctrines  of  the  permanence  of  our  institutions  must  also  be 
revised.  Under  modern  conditions,  which  change  rather  rapidly  nowa¬ 
days,  obviously,  some  relations  between  humans  alter,  and  so  the  institu¬ 
tions  must  be  revised.  If  we  want  their  invariance ,  we  must  build  them 
on  such  invariant  relations  between  humans  as  are  not  altered  by  the 
transformations.  This  present  work,  indeed,  is  concerned  with  investi¬ 
gating  such  relations,  and  they  are  found  in  the  mechanism  of  time¬ 
binding,  which,  once  stated,  becomes  quite  obvious  after  reflection. 

As  Professor  Shaw  says  :  ‘We  find  in  the  invariants  of  mathematics 
a  source  of  objective  truth.  So  far  as  the  creations  of  the  mathematician 
fit  the  objects  of  nature,  just  so  far  must  the  inherent  invariants  point 
to  objective  reality.  Indeed,  much  of  the  value  of  mathematics  in  its 
applications  lies  in  the  fact  that  its  invariants  have  an  objective  meaning. 
When  a  geometric  invariant  vanishes,  it  points  to  a  very  definite  charac¬ 
ter  in  the  corresponding  class  of  figures.  When  a  physical  invariant 
vanishes  or  has  particular  values,  there  must  correspond  to  it  physical 
facts.  When  a  set  of  equations  that  represent  physical  phenomena  have 
a  set  of  invariants  or  covariants  which  they  admit,  then  the  physical 
phenomena  have  a  corresponding  character,  and  the  physicist  is  forced 
to  explain  the  law  resulting.  The  unnoticed  invariants  of  the  electro¬ 
magnetic  equations  have  overturned  physical  theories,  and  have  threat¬ 
ened  philosophy.  Consequently  the  importance  of  invariants  cannot  be 
too  much  magnified,  from  a  practical  point  of  view’.4 

It  should  be  noticed  that  the  non-el  character  of  the  terms  relation, 
invariance  . ,  which  apply  both  to  ‘senses’  and  ‘mind’,  is  particularly  impor¬ 
tant,  as  it  allows  us  to  apply  them  to  all  processes ;  and  that  such  a  lan¬ 
guage  is  similar  in  structure  not  only  to  the  world  around  us,  but  also  to 
our  nervous  processes.  Thus,  a  process  of  being  iron,  or  a  rock,  or  a 
table,  or  you,  or  me,  may  be  considered,  for  practical  purposes,  as  a 
temporal  and  average  invariance  of  function  on  the  sub-microscopic  level. 
Under  the  action  of  other  processes,  the  process  becomes  structurally 
transformed  into  different  relational  complexes,  and  we  die,  and  a  table 
or  rock  turns  into  dust,  and  so  the  invariance  of  this  function  vanishes. 

V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANGUAGE 

The  notion  of  a  function  involves  the  notion  of  a  variable.  The 
functional  notion  has  been  extended  to  the  propositional  function  and, 
finally,  to  the  doctrinal  function  and  system- function.  The  term  trans¬ 
formation  is  closely  related  to  that  of  function  and  relation.  This  notion 
is  based  on  our  capacity  to  associate,  or  relate,  any  two  or  more  ‘mental* 
entities.  We  can,  for  instance,  associate  a  with  b  or  b  with  a.  We  say 
that  we  have  transformed  a  into  b ,  or  vice  versa. 

An  excellent  example  of  transformation,  given  by  Keyser,  is  an 
ordinary  dictionary,  which  would  be  genuinely  mathematical  if  it  were 
more  precise.  In  a  dictionary,  every  word  is  transformed  into  its  verbal 
meaning,  and  vice  versa.  A  telephone  directory  is  another  example. 
Quite  obviously,  the  term  ‘transformation*  has  far-reaching  implica¬ 
tions.  If  a  is  transformed  into  b,  this  implies  that  there  is  a  relation 
between  a  and  b  which  is  being  established,  by  the  fact  of  transforma¬ 
tion,  Once  a  relation  is  established,  we  have  a  propositional  function  of 
two  or  more  variables  which  define  an  extensional  set  of  all  elements 
connected  by  this  relation.5  i 

We  see  that  these  three  terms  are  inseparably  united  and  are  three 
aspects  of  one  psycho-logical  process.  If  we  have  a  transformation,  we 
have  a  function  and  a  relation ;  if  we  have  a  function,  we  have  a  relation 
and  a  transformation ;  if  we  have  a  relation,  we  have  a  transformation 
and  a  function.  Transformation,  as  we  see,  is  a  psycho-logical  term  of 
action.  A  relation  has  a  psycho-logically  mixed  character.  A  proposi¬ 
tional  function  is  a  static  statement,  on  record,  with  blanks  for  the  values 
of  the  variables.  In  it  the  form  is  invariant,  but  it  may  take  an  indefinite 
number  of  values.  The  extensional  manifold  of  the  values  for  the  vari¬ 
able  is  static,  given  once  for  all  in  a  given  context.  It  is  extensional 
and,  therefore,  may  be  empirical  and  experimental. 

Let  us  take  as  an  example,  for  instance,  the  transformation  of  a  set 
of  integers  1,  2,  3 , .  Let  us  suppose  that  the  given  law  of  transformation 
is  given  by  the  function  2x .  The  result  would  be  the  manifold  of 

even  integers  2,  4,  6 , .  We  see  that  integers  are  transformed  into  integers ; 
therefore,  the  characteristic  of  being  an  integer  is  preserved;  in  other 
words,  this  characteristic  is  an  invariant  under  the  given  transformation 
y  —  2x,  but  the  values  of  the  integers  are  not  preserved. 

The  theory  of  invariance  is  an  important  branch  of  mathematics, 
made  famous  of  late  through  the  work  of  Einstein.  Einstein  fulfilled 
the  dearest  dream  of  Riemann  and  attained  the  methodological  and  scien¬ 
tific  ideal,  that  a  ‘law  of  nature*  should  be  formulated  in  such  a  manner 
as  to  be  invariant  under  groups  of  transformations.  Such  a  semantic 
ideal,  once  stated,  cannot  be  denied ;  it  expresses  exactly  a  necessity  of 

MAT  1 1 KMATICS  AND  TI-IK  NERVOUS  SYSTEMS  287 

the  proper  working  of  the  human  nervous  system.  In  fact,  a  ‘law*  of 
nature  represents  nothing  else  than  a  statement  of  the  invariance  of  some 
relations.  When  the  Einstein  criterion  is  applied,  it  renders  most  of 
the  old  ‘natural  laws'  invalid,  as  they  cannot  stand  the  test  of  invari¬ 
ance.  The  older  ‘universal  laws'  then  appear  as  local  private  gossips, 
true  for  one  observer  and  false  for  another. 

The  method  of  the  theory  of  invariance  gives  us  the  trend  of  rela¬ 
tions  that  abide,  and  so  expresses  important  psycho-logical  characteristics 
of  the  human  ‘mind'.  Its  further  significance  is  revealed  by  Keyser  in 
the  suggestion  that  when  a  group  of  transformations  leaves  some  speci¬ 
fied  psycho-logical  activity  invariant,  it  defines  perfectly  some  actual  or 
potential  branch  of  science,  some  actual  or  potential  doctrine.® 

We  all  know  how  deeply  rooted  in  us  is  the  feeling,  the  longing  for 
stability,  how  worried  we  are  when  things  become  unstable.  Worries 
and  fear  are  destructive  to  semantic  health  and  should  be  taken  into 
account  in  a  theory  of  sanity.  A  similar  semantic  urge  apparently 
moved  mathematicians  when  they  worked  out  the  theory  of  invariance ; 
it  was  a  formulation  of  a  necessity  of  the  activities  of  the  human  ner¬ 
vous  system.  That  similar  semantic  methods,  if  applied,  would  give 
similar  results  in  our  daily  lives,  scarcely  needs  to  be  emphasized. 

We  have  already  spoken  of  the  mathematical  theory  of  invariance 
as  a  mathematical  species  of  a  semantic  theory  of  universal  agreement. 
Similarly,  in  a  ^-system  based  on  relations  and  structure,  it  is  possible 
to  formulate  a  theory  of  universal  agreement  which  would  be  structur¬ 
ally  impossible  in  the  ^-system,  and  so  the  dreams  of  Leibnitz  become 
a  sober  reality ;  but  we  must  first  re-educate  our  s.r. 

Section  D.  Similarity  in  structure  of  mathematics  and  of  our  nervous 
system. 

In  the  chapter  on  the  Semantics  of  the  Differential  Calculus,  the 
fundamental  notions  and  method  of  this  calculus  are  explained.  Here 
we  may  say,  briefly,  that  it  consists  in  stratifying,  or  expanding  into  a 
series,  of  an  interval  of  any  sort  which  proceeded  by  large  steps.  The 
large  steps  are  divided  into  a  great  number  of  smaller  and  smaller  steps, 
which,  in  the  limit,  when  the  numbers  of  steps  become  infinite,  take  on 
the  aspect  of  ‘continuity*  so  that  we  can  study  the  ‘rate  of  change*. 
When  ‘time'  is  taken  into  consideration,  the  dynamic  may  be  translated 
into  static,  and  vice  versa;  processes  can  be  analysed  at  any  stage,. 
This  short  description  is  far  from  exact  or  exhaustive;  I  emphasize 
only  in  an  intuitive  way  what  is  of  main  semantic  importance  for  our 
purpose. 

V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANGUAGE 

The  main  object  of  the  present  chapter  is  to  explain  that  the  struc¬ 
ture  of  the  human  nervous  system  is  such  that,  on  some  levels,  we 
produce  dynamic  abstractions ;  on  others,  static.  As  the  organism  works 
as-a-whole,  for  its  optimum  working,  and,  therefore,  for  sanity,  we  need 
a  language,  a  method,  which  may  be  translated  into  a  s.r  by  which  to 
translate  the  dynamic  into  the  static,  and  vice  versa ;  and  such  a  language, 
such  a  method,  is  produced  and  supplied  by  mathematicians.  To  some 
readers,  these  remarks  may  appear  so  obvious  as  to  make  it  unnecessary 
to  write  them,  but  I  have  found,  through  personal  observation  of 
reactions  of  different  individuals,  and  by  a  careful  survey  of  the  litera¬ 
ture  of  the  subject,  that  even  many  mathematicians  and  physicists  do 
not  have  this  s.r  in  all  problems — or,  at  least,  they  do  not  know  how 
to  apply  it. 

In  Part  VII,  elementary  A  methods  are  worked  out,  which  supply 
the  neurological  semantic  benefits  of  the  calculus,  very  easily  imparted  to 
even  small  children  without  any  mathematical  technique ,  and  establishing 
in  them  a  mathematical  attitude  toward  all  language  in  general,  training 
them  in  the  only  structural  psycho-logics  of  sanity ;  namely,  that  of  the 
calculus,  which  thus  becomes  the  foundation  of  healthy  and  normal 
human  s.r .  And  this,  let  us  repeat  again,  without  any  mathematical  tech¬ 
nique.  We  find,  also,  that  there  are  simple  and  physiological  means,  based 
on  structure,  of  training  our  s.r  and  imparting  the  feel  for  the  structural 
stratification  inherent  in  the  consciousness  of  abstracting. 

To  start  with,  let  me  mention  briefly  a  quite  unexpected,  unconscious, 
structural  biological  characteristic  of  mathematics;  namely,  its  (in  the 
main)  non-el%  organism-as-a- whole  character. 

From  the  time  of  Aristotle,  biologists,  physiologists,  neurologists, 
‘psychologists',  psychiatrists  and  others  have  spoken  a  great  deal  about  the 
organism-as-a-whole ;  yet,  they  have  not  seemed  to  realize  that  if  they 
produce  el  terms,  they  cannot  apply  the  non~el  principle. 

It  will  probably  not  be  an  exaggeration  to  say  that  the  majority  of 
mathematicians  have  never  heard  of  this  principle,  and  that,  if  they 
have,  they  paid  no  attention  to  it;  yet ,  in  practice,  they  have  applied  it 
very  thoroughly.  The  main  mathematical  terms  are  non-elt  organism-as^ 
a-whole  terms  which  apply  to  ‘senses'  as  well  as  to  ‘mind'.  For  instance, 
relation,  order,  difference,  variable,  function,  transformation,  invariance . , 
can  mostly  be  seen  as  well  as  ‘thought'  of.  The  use  of  such  terms  pre¬ 
vents  our  speculation  from  degenerating  into  purely  el  speculations  on 
words,  a  process  always  closely  related  to  the  morbid  semantic  manifes¬ 
tations  of  the  ‘mentally’  ill.  and  obviously  based  on  the  pathological 
confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions,  involving  inappropriate  evaluation. 

MAT1 IKMAT1CS  AND  THE  NKRVOUS  SYSTEMS  289 

This  fact  alone  is  of  serious  importance,  as  it  indicates  that  mathe¬ 
matics  is  a  language  of  similar  structure  to  the  structure  of  organisms 
and  is  a  correct  language,  not  only  neurologically,  but  also  biologically . 
This  characteristic  of  mathematics,  quite  unexpectedly  discovered,  made 
the  fusion  of  geometry  and  physics  possible.  It  underlies,  also,  the 
theory  of  space-time  and  the  Einstein  theory.  It  will  be  seen  later  that 
it  has  also  serious  psycho-neurological  importance. 

It  was  already  emphasized  that  the  existing  'psychologies’  are  ani¬ 
malistic  or  metaphysical,  because  either  they  disregard  one  of  the  most 
unique  human  characteristics,  such  as  the  behaviour  called  mathematiz- 
ing,  or  they  indulge  in  speculations  on,  and  in,  el  terms.  It  was  suggested 
that  no  human  'psychologist*  can  actually  perform  his  official  task  unless 
he  is  an  equipped  student  of  mathematics.  Unless  we  actually  apply  the 
non-el  principle,  and  take  into  account  that  the  structure  of  languages 
introduces  implications,  unconscious  in  the  main,  and  that  no  man  is  ever 
free  from  some  doctrines  and  some  so-called  'logical’  processes  involving 
physiological  and  semantic  concomitants,  no  general  theory  of  human 
'psychology’  can  be  produced. 

The  above  solves  a  very  knotty  semantic  problem,  for  we  see  that  if 
we  apply  the  non-el  principle,  any  'psychology’  on  the  human  level  must 
become  psycho-logics,  though  the  old  term  ‘psychology’  could  be  retained 
as  applying  to  animal  researches  only.  The  very  name  'psychology’,  or 
the  'theory  or  science  of  mind’,  is  obviously  el,  and  treats  ‘mind’  as  an 
objective  separate  entity.  As  these  results  were  originally  reached  inde¬ 
pendently,  it  is  interesting  to  notice  that  the  modem  methods  and  the 
application  of  the  structural  positive  knowledge  1933  lead  to  very  many 
analogies  and  similarities,  though  this,  after  all,  might  be  expected. 

Notice  the  hyphen  which,  out  of  the  el  and  delusional  objectified 
‘space’  and  ‘time’,  made  the  einsteinian  space-time  a  language  of  non-el 
structure  similar  to  the  world  around  us ;  and  the  hyphen  which  out  of  el 
‘psychology’  makes  a  non-el  human  discipline  of  psycho-logics.  It  seems 
that  a  little  dash  here  and  there  may  be  of  serious  semantic  importance 
when  we  deal  with  symbolism. 

To  facilitate  exposition,  it  is  useful  to  stress,  in  the  present  section, 
the  neurological  and  psychiatrical  side,  as  an  outline  of  the  methods  of 
the  calculus,  and  related  subjects  will,  of  necessity,  require  separate 
treatment. 

When  rats  are  trained  to  perform  a  simple  experiment  requiring 
some  'mentality*  and  afterwards  a  large  part  of  the  cerebral  cortex  is 
removed,  their  training  may  be  wholly  lost.  If  such  decorticated  rats  are 
trained  again,  they  re-acquire  the  habit  as  readily  as  before.  It  appears 

V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANGUAGE 

that,  with  rats,  the  cortex  is  not  essential  for  these  learning  processes. 
They  ‘learn’  as  well,  or  nearly  as  well,  with  their  sub-cortical  and  thal¬ 
amic  regions.7  In  what  follows,  to  avoid  misstatements,  I  will  use  the 
rather  vague  term,  yet  sufficient  for  my  purpose,  ‘thalamic  region*  or 
‘lower  centres’  instead  of  more  specific  terms,  the  use  of  which  would 
complicate  the  exposition  unnecessarily.  With  dogs,  apes,  and  men,  the 
situation  is  increasingly  different.  Their  nervous  systems  are  more  dif¬ 
ferentiated.  Their  functional  interchangeability  is  impaired.  In  the  most 
complex  human  brain  there  still  exists  some  interchangeability  of  func¬ 
tion.  When  an  arm,  for  instance,  is  paralysed  through  a  brain-lesion,  the 
arm  may  re-acquire  a  nearly  normal  function,  though  there  is  no  regen¬ 
eration  of  the  destroyed  brain  tissue.  However,  the  interchangeability  is 
less  pronounced  than  in  the  lower  brains.  There  seems  to  be  no  doubt 
that  the  thalamic  regions  are  not  only  a  vestibule  through  which  all  im¬ 
pulses  from  the  receptors  have  to  pass  in  order  to  reach  the  cortex,  but 
also  that  the  affective  characteristics  are  strictly  connected  with  processes 
in  these  regions.  It  seems  that  some  very  primitive  and  simple  associa¬ 
tions  can  be  carried  on  by  the  thalamic  regions. 

The  cortex  receives  its  material  as  elaborated  by  the  thalamus.  The 
abstractions  of  the  cortex  are  abstractions  from  abstractions  and  so 
ought  to  be  called  abstractions  of  higher  order.  In  neurology,  similarly, 
the  neurons  first  excited  are  called  of  ‘first  order’ ;  and  the  succeeding 
members  of  the  series  are  called  neurons  of  the  ‘second  order’,.  Such 
terminology  is  structurally  similar  to  the  inherent  structure  and  function 
of  the  nervous  system.  The  receptors  are  in  direct  contact  with  the  out¬ 
side  world  and  convey  their  excitation  and  nerve  currents  to  the  lower 
nerve  centres,  where  these  impulses  are  further  elaborated  and  then 
abstracted  by  the  higher  centres. 

According  to  our  daily  experience  and  scientific  knowledge,  the  out¬ 
side  world  is  an  ever-changing  chain  of  events,  a  kind  of  flux;  and, 
naturally,  those  nerve  centres  in  closest  contact  with  the  outside  world 
must  react  in  a  shifting  way.  These  reactions  are  easily  moved  one  way 
or  another,  as  in  our  ‘emotions’,  ‘affective  moods’,  ‘attention’,  ‘concen¬ 
tration’,  ‘evaluation’,  and  other  such  semantic  responses.  In  these  pro¬ 
cesses,  some  associative  or  relational  circuits  exist,  and  there  may  be 
some  very  low  kind  of  ‘thinking*  on  this  level.  Birds  have  a  well-devel¬ 
oped,  or,  perhaps,  over-developed,  thalamus  but  under-developed  and 
poor  cortex,  which  may  be  connected  with  their  stupidity  and  excitability. 

Something  similar  could  be  said  about  the  ‘thalamic  thinking’  in 
humans;  those  individuals  who  overwork  their  thalamus  and  use  their 
cortex  too  little  are  ‘emotional*  and  stupid.  This  statement  is  not  exag- 

MATHEMATICS  AND  THE  NERVOUS  SYSTEMS  291 

gerated,  because  there  are  experimental  data  to  show  how  through  a 
psycho-neural  training  the  s.r,  in  some  cases,  can  be  re-educated,  and 
that  with  the  elimination  of  the  semantic  disturbances  there  is  a  marked 
development  of  poise,  balance,  and  a  proportional  increase  of  critical 
judgement,  and  so  ‘intelligence’.  Idiots,  imbeciles,  and  morons  are  usually 
‘emotional’  and  excitable,  as  well  as  deficient  in  their  ‘mental’  processes. 
A  similar  characteristic  can  be  found  in  other  unclassified  ‘mentally’  de¬ 
ficient,  and  their  name  is  legion — a  characteristic  strictly  connected  with, 
and  often  produced  by,  disturbances  of  the  s.r.  When  these  shifting, 
dynamic,  affective,  thalamic-region,  lower  order  abstractions  are  ab¬ 
stracted  again  by  the  higher  centres,  these  new  abstractions  are  further 
removed  from  the  outside  world  and  must  be  somehow  different. 

In  fact,  they  are  different;  and  one  of  the  most  characteristic  dif¬ 
ferences  is  that  they  have  lost  their  shifting  character.  These  new 
abstractions  are  relatively  static.  It  is  true  that  one  may  be  supplanted 
by  another,  but  they  do  not  change.  In  this  fact  lies  the  tremendous 
value  and  danger  of  this  mechanism,  as  disclosed  clearly  by  the  disturb¬ 
ances  of  the  s.r.  The  value  is  chiefly  in  the  fact  that  such  higher  order 
abstractions  represent  a  perfected  kind  of  memory,  which  can  be  recalled 
exactly  in  the  form  as  it  was  originally  produced.  For  instance,  the 
circle,  defined  as  the  locus  of  points  in  a  plane  at  equal  distance  from  a 
given  point  called  the  centre,  remains  permanent  as  long  as  we  wish  to 
use  this  definition.  We  can,  therefore,  recall  it  perfectly,  analyse  it . , 
without  losing  the  definiteness  and  the  stability  of  this  memory.  Thus, 
critical  analysis,  and,  therefore,  progress,  becomes  possible.  Compare  this 
perfected  memory,  which  may  last  indefinitely  unchanged,  with  memories 
of  ‘emotions*  which,  whether  dim  or  clear,  are  always  distorted.  We  see 
that  the  first  are  reliable,  that  the  others  are  not. 

Another  most  important  characteristic  of  the  higher  order  abstrac¬ 
tions  is  that,  although  of  neural  origin,  they  may  be  preserved  and  used 
over  and  over  again  in  extra-neural  forms,  as  recorded  in  books  and 
otherwise.  This  fact  is  never  fully  appreciated  from  a  neurological  point 
of  view.  Neural  products  are  stored  up  or  preserved  in  extra-neural 
form,  and  they  can  be  put  back  in  the  nervous  system  as  active  neural 
processes.  The  above  represents  a  fundamental  mechanism  of  time¬ 
binding  which  becomes  overwhelmingly  important,  provided  we  discover 
the  physiological  mechanism  of  regulating  the  s.r,  on  the  one  hand,  and 
discover  the  mechanism  by  which  these  extra-neural  factors  can  be  made 
physiologically  effective,  on  the  other. 

If  humans  are  characterized  by  the  fact  that  they  build  up  this 
cumulative  affair  called  ‘civilization*,  this  is  possible  through  those  higher 

V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANGUAGE 

order  abstractions  and  the  time-binding  ability  to  extend  our  nervous 
system  by  extra-neural  means,  which,  in  the  meantime,  may  play  a  most 
important  neural  role  and  become  active  nervous  impulses.  The  last  is 
only  possible  if  some  abstractions  are  static,  and  so  can  be  recorded, 
leading  ultimately  to  further  extensions  of  the  human  nervous  system 
by  extra-neural  means,  such  as  microscopes,  telescopes,  and  practically 
all  modern  scientific  instruments,  books,  and  other  records. 

To  illustrate  what  has  been  said  here,  I  know  of  no  better  example 
than  is  found  in  moving  pictures.  When  we  watch  a  moving  picture 
representing  some  life  occurrence,  our  ‘emotions*  are  aroused,  we  ‘live 
through*  the  drama;  but  the  details,  in  the  main,  are  blurred,  and  a 
short  time  after  seeing  it  either  we  forget  it  all  or  in  parts,  or  our 
memory  falsifies  most  effectively  what  was  seen.  It  is  easy  to  verify 
the  above  experimentally  by  seeing  one  picture  twice  or  three  times, 
with  an  interval  of  a  few  days  between  each  seeing.  The  picture  was 
‘moving*,  all  was  changing,  shifting,  dynamic,  similar  to  the  world  and 
our  feelings  on  the  un-speakable  levels.  The  impressions  were  vague, 
shifting,  non-lasting,  and  what  was  left  of  it  was  mostly  coloured  by  the 
individual  mood.,  while  seeing  the  moving  picture.  Naturally,  under 
such  conditions,  there  is  little  possibility  of  a  rational  scientific  analysis 
of  a  situation. 

But  if  we  stop  the  moving  film  which  ran,  say,  thirty  minutes,  and 
analyse  the  static  and  extensional  series  of  small  pictures  on  the  reel,  we 
find  that  the  drama  which  so  stirred  our  ‘emotions*  in  its  moving  aspect 
becomes  a  series  of  slightly  different  static  pictures,  each  difference 
between  the  given  jerk  or  grimace  being  a  measurable  entity,  establish¬ 
ing  relations  which  last  indefinitely. 

The  moving  picture  represents  the  usually  brief  processes  going  on 
in  the  lower  nerve  centres,  ‘close  to  life*,  but  unreliable  and  evading 
scrutiny.  The  arrested  static  film  which  lasts  indefinitely,  giving  measur¬ 
able  differences  between  the  recorded  jerks  and  grimaces,  obviously 
allows  analysis  and  gives  a  good  analogy  of  the  working  of  higher  nerve 
centres,  disclosing  also  that  all  life  occurrences  have  many  aspects,  the 
selection  of  which  is  mostly  a  problem  of  our  pleasure  and  of  the  selec¬ 
tion  of  language.  The  moving  picture  gives  us  the  process ;  each  static 
film  of  the  reel  gives  us  stages  of  the  process  in  chosen  intervals.  In 
case  we  want  a  moving  picture  of  a  growing  plant,  for  instance,  we 
photograph  it  at  given  intervals  and  then  run  it  in  a  moving-picture  pro¬ 
jector,  and  then  we  see  the  process  of  growth.  These  are  empirical 
facts,  and  the  calculus  supplies  us  with  a  language  of  similar  structure 
with  many  other  important  consequences. 

MATHEMATICS  AND  THE  NERVOUS  SYSTEMS  293 

It  is  characteristic  that  those  who  claim  to  be  most  interested  in 
human  affairs  and  human  processes,  whom  we  call,  among  others, 
‘philosophers',  ‘psychologists'. ,  should  not  have  discovered  much  of  value 
in  these  fields.  But  mathematicians,  who  disclaim  meaning  in  their  un¬ 
defined  terms,  or  ‘truth'  in  their  postulates,  or  interest  in  human  affairs, 
have  had  a  most  astonishing  and  unique  success  by  elaborating  methods 
for  the  translation  of  the  dynamic  into  static  and  the  static  into  dynamic. 
Claims  and  disclaims  matter  little,  but  working  in  accordance  with  the 
survival  order  of  the  nerve  structure  and  currents  has  produced  most 
valuable  results. 

The  different  methods  of  mathematics  and  the  four-dimensional 
‘world'  of  Minkowski  form  the  means  for  translating  the  dynamic  into 
static  and  vice  versa.  Minkowski  established  a  language  of  a  new  struc¬ 
ture,  closer  to  actual  facts  of  the  world  around  us  and  ourselves, 
making  the  general  theory  of  Einstein  possible.  Further  analysis  of  these 
issues  is  carried  out  in  Part  IX,  and  it  is  one  of  the  semantic  founda¬ 
tions  upon  which  a  positive  theory  of  sanity  can  be  built. 

Disclaiming  definite  meanings,  mathematicians  have  an  intuitive 
predilection  for  selecting  their  terms  and  pursuing  their  line  of  enquiry 
among  possible  meanings ,  although  formally  these  meanings  are  disre¬ 
garded.  The  feeling  which  directs  the  selection  of  material  which  is 
formally  interesting  and  important  is  akin  to  the  artistic  sense,  but, 
unfortunately,  in  spite  of  its  importance,  it  has  been  neglected  by 
‘psychologists'.  Quite  often  it  is  the  ‘feel'  which  directs  the  mathema¬ 
ticians  in  their  researches  and  suggests  or  modifies  lines  of  development 
or  the  selection  of  one  set  of  postulates  in  preference  to  other  sets.  This 
is  why  the  ordinary  sense  of  the  terms  used  in  mathematics  is  so  im¬ 
portant,  although  it  represents  only  some  of  the  possible  meanings. 
These,  with  their  implications,  usually  represent  most  important  struc¬ 
tural  characteristics  of  the  human  nervous  system  and  the  world. 

This  is  to  be  expected  because  of  the  reasons  given  above ;  the  more 
so  that  invariance  in  this  shifting  world  is  a  characteristic  of  relations, 
and  mathematics  is  a  language  of  exact  relations  which,  in  the  mean¬ 
time,  have  mostly  objective  counterparts.  The  highest  abstractions  at 
every  date  are  detached  from  the  outside  world  neurologically,  and 
should  remain  detached,  to  represent  ‘pure  mind'  in  action.  These  higher 
abstractions  are  on  the  public  level,  as  they  are  transmittable  verbally 
with  all  characteristics  included.  They  are  static,  unhampered  directly 
