by  the  outside  events,  although  they  normally  originate  in  them.  These 
higher  order  abstractions  are  ‘digested'  and  translated  into  lower  order 
abstractions  and  returned  to  the  lower  centres;  and  they  receive  their 

V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANGUAGE 

meanings  close  to  life.  Such  meanings  are  enlightened  meanings,  a  sur¬ 
vival  process,  and  each  nervous  level  did  its  work  properly. 

We  know  that  a  number  of  human  races  have  perished  without 
leaving  many  traces  of  their  existence.  This  process  is  going  on  con¬ 
tinually,  even  now.  Some  races  are  progressing;  some  are  regressing; 
some  are  at  a  seeming  standstill.  It  would  appear  that  the  mechanism 
of  higher  order  abstractions  had  and  has  survival  value,  and,  therefore, 
should  not  be  neglected  but  cultivated.  In  this  special  case,  cultivation 
is  a  condition  inherent  in  the  process  and  a  necessity  for  time-binders/ 

Serious  semantic  dangers  are  also  revealed  by  analysis  and  verified 
by  observation.  These  higher  order  abstractions,  let  us  repeat,  are  static 
and  may  last  indefinitely,  as  long  as  for  structural  reasons  we  do  not 
replace  the  old  by  new  ones.  Even  then,  though  rejected,  they  remain 
as  a  permanent  fact  on  record.  Obviously,  these  higher  abstractions 
have  only  a  ‘second-hand'  connection  with  the  outside  world.  Even  their 
character  is  changed,  they  are  static  while  the  world  is  dynamic.  The 
lower  ‘sense’  world  has  ‘characteristics  left  out’,  owing  to  the  mechanism^ 
of  abstracting  of  the  lower  centres;  and  the  abstractions  of  higher  orders 
have  all  characteristics  included’,  because  these  are  abstractions  from 
abstractions,  an  intra-organismal  process  in  its  entirety,  their  starting 
material  being  already  an  end-product  of  the  activities  of  the  lower 
centres.  This  mechanism  is  only  under  full  control  if  we  are  conscious 
of  abstracting,  because  the  higher  order  abstractions  in  the  nervous 
chain  affect,  in  their  turn,  the  lower  centres,  and,  in  pathological  cases, 
impress  on  them  a  semantic  delusional  or  illusional  evaluation  as  if  a 
character  of  experience.  In  severe  cases,  even  the  lower  nerve  centres 
are  stimulated  to  such  an  extent  that  hallucinations  appear. 

If  we  do  not  know  how  to  handle  different  order  abstractions,  this 
results  in  serious  semantic  dangers.  If  the  distribution  of  the  returning 
nerve  currents  is  a  non-survival  one,  we  exhibit  semantic  disturbances, 
such  as  identification  or  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions,  delusions, 
illusions,  and  hallucinations.  Thus,  we  ascribe  to  the  products  of  the 
lower  nerve  centres,  the  lower  order  abstractions,  characteristics  fic¬ 
titious  and  impossible  for  them,  such  as  ‘immutability’,  ‘permanence’, 
involving  disorientation  about  ‘time’. ,  . ,  which  are  characteristics  of  the 
higher  order  abstractions,  but  do  not  belong  to  the  world  as  given  by 
the  lower  abstractions,  and  result  in  an  improper  evaluation  disturbing 
to  the  ^.r.  Such  disturbances  make  us,  naturally,  absolutists  and  dog¬ 
matists,  involve  serious  affective  disturbances,  and  lead  to  non-adaptive 
behaviour  and  reactions,  and  other  semantic  manifestations  of  un-sanity. 
These,  in  their  turn,  make  adjustment  more  difficult,  often  affecting  the 

MATHEMATICS  AND  THE  NERVOUS  SYSTEMS  295 

structure  of  man-made  institutions,  which  again  make  adjustments  more 
complex  and  often  impossible.  We  become  un-sane,  ‘insane’,  and  life, 
whether  public  or  private,  becomes  a  mess.  In  such  a  vicious  semantic 
circle,  we  distort  our  education,  our  systems,  and  institutions.  Often  the 
morbid  reactions  of  powerful  individuals  are  forced  upon  masses,  who 
are  then  ruled  by  these  morbid  products,  with  injury  to  their  nervous 
systems.  Different  mass  hysterias,  ‘revivals’,  wars,  political  and  religious 
propaganda,  very  often  commercial  advertisements,  offer  notable 
examples. 

The  morbid  semantic  influence  of  commercialism  has  not  been 
investigated,  but  it  does  not  take  much  imagination  to  see  that  com¬ 
mercial  psycho-logics,  as  exemplified  by  the  theories  of  commercial 
evaluation,  ‘wisdom’,  appeal  to  selfishness,  animal  cunning,  concealing  of 
true  facts,  appeal  to  ‘sense’  gratification . ,  produce  a  verbal  and  semantic 
environment  and  slogans  for  the  children  which,  if  preserved  in  the 
grown-ups,  must  produce  some  pathological  results.  It  is  hoped  that 
some  day  a  psychiatrist  will  investigate  this  large,  neglected,  and  very 
important  semantic  problem. 

The  lack  of  structural  linguistic  researches  and  investigation  of  our 
s.r ,  and  the  ignorance  of  those  who  rule,  make  us  nearly  helpless. 
Malaria  or  other  germ  diseases  would  never  be  eliminated  were  we  to 
preserve  religiously  the  sources  of  infection.  The  semantic  sources  of 
un-sanity  are  not  only  defended  but  are  actively  sponsored  by  organized 
ignorance  and  the  power  of  merchants,  state,  and  church. 

The  situation  is  acute.  If  we  could  entirely  eliminate  our  cortex,  it 
would,  perhaps,  not  be  so  serious.  We  could,  perhaps,  live  as  complex 
a  life  as  a  fish  and  have  a  nervous  system  perfectly  adjusted  to  such  a 
life.  But,  unfortunately,  with  a  structural  change,  or.  according  to 
Lashley,  with  the  change  even  in  the  total  mass  of  the  brain,  the  activi¬ 
ties  and  the  role  of  the  whole,  including  other  parts,  are  profoundly 
altered.8  These  become  inadequate,  as  shown  by  the  boy  born  without 
the  cortex,  already  described.  His  nervous  system  was  much  more  com¬ 
plex  than  that  of  fishes  or  of  some  lower  animals  which  lead  adequately 
a  rather  complex  life.  But  the  boy  was  less  equipped  for  life  than  they. 
Even  his  ‘senses’,  though  apparently  ‘normal’  on  macroscopic  levels, 
must  have  been  pathological  on  colloidal  and  sub-microscopic  levels  and 
did  not  function  properly.  We  know,  also,  that  in  many  cases  of  ‘mental’ 
ills  the  ‘sense  reactions’  are  abnormal ;  sometimes  the  patients  seem  to 
be  entirely  insensitive  to  stimuli  which  would  produce  most  acute  pain 
to  other  less  pathological  individuals. 

V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANGUAGE 

It  is  impossible  to  eliminate  completely  from  our  lives  or  nerve 
currents  the  higher  abstractions  and  their  psycho-neural  effect.  Curi¬ 
ously  enough,  this  elementary  fact  has  never  been  emphasized  or  taken 
into  account  seriously ;  yet  it  is  a  crucial  semantic  factor  in  our  attitude 
toward  science  and  our  future.  Those  who  attempt  such  elimination, 
whether  by  actively  persecuting  science,  or  by  emitting  propaganda 
against  science,  or  by  the  cynical  or  ignoring  attitude  toward  'mental’ 
achievements,  whether  personally,  or  in  education,  or  in  public  prints, 
or  other  public  activities,  do  not  succeed  in  eliminating  the  higher  order 
abstractions,  but  simply  introduce  pathological  semantic  reactions  and 
succeed  in  disorganizing  their  own  nervous  systems  and  those  of  others. 
I  intended  this  implication  when  I  said  that  our  existing  educational . , 
systems  produce  morons,  but  'geniuses'  are  born.  Such  very  general 
semantic  directives  are,  perhaps,  responsible  for  the  extremely  low  level 
of  our  non-technical  development.  Humans  are  not  to  be  judged  simply 
by  the  ability  to  drive  an  automobile  or  by  the  knowledge  of  how  to  use 
a  bathtub;  nor  yet  by  their  capacity  for  buying  and  selling  things  pro¬ 
duced  by  others. 

The  tendency  of  some  public  prints  to  appeal  to  the  morbidity  of 
mob  psycho-logics  and  to  its  ignorance,  insisting  that  all  that  is  said 
should  be  said  in  'one-syllable'  words,  so  that  the  mob  can  understand, 
in  a  human  class  of  life,  is  an  arresting  or  regressive  tendency .  What 
should  be  urged  for  sanity,  and  for  humans,  is  that  the  mob  should  also 
learn  the  use  of  at  least  two-syllable  words !  Then,  perhaps,  the  day 
would  come  when  they  could  follow  easily  and  habitually  the  use  of 
non-el  terms  and,  perhaps,  even  of  words  connected  by  a  hyphen. 

This  appeal  to  mob  psycho-logics  and  ignorance  affects  profoundly 
our  s.r  and  should  be  investigated.  It  definitely  appears  that  in  countries 
where  the  majority  reads  only  the  sort  of  publications  referred  to  above 
and  commercial  advertisements,  their  psycho-logical  equipment  and 
standards  are  lower  than  those  of  perfectly  illiterate  peasants  of  other 
countries.  It  is  not  fully  realized  that  in  a  symbolic  class  of  life,  sym¬ 
bolism  of  any  sort — e.g.,  public  prints — plays  an  environmental  role  and 
creates  s.r  which  may  be  distinctly  morbid.  The  problems  of  public 
prints,  commercialism . ,  and  their  psycho-logical  effect  on  the  s.r  should 
undergo  a  searching  analysis  by  psychiatrists,  and  definite  suggestions 
should  be  formulated  by  psychiatric  scientific  organizations  or  congresses. 

Under  the  conditions  prevailing  at  present,  it  is  futile  to  preach 
morals  of  any  metaphysical  kind.  They  have  never  worked  satisfac¬ 
torily,  and  increasingly  they  cannot  work,  particularly  under  the  present 
much  more  complex  conditions  of  life.  They  disorganize  the  survival 

MATHEMATICS  AND  THE  NERVOUS  SYSTEMS  297 

activities  and  processes  of  the  human  nervous  system.  The  imposed  and 
delusional  dogmas  are  themselves  the  result  of  pathological  evaluation 
in  their  originators;  a  necessity,  perhaps,  on  a  primitive  level,  but  pro¬ 
foundly  semantically  harmful  under  the  complexities  of  life-conditions 
1933. 

As  it  is  impossible  to  eliminate  the  influence  of  the  higher  order 
abstractions,  we  should  investigate  whether  or  not  we  can  control  these 
processes  and  the  related  s.r.  We  can  learn  to  regulate  these  processes, 
which  otherwise  may  become  pathological,  and  to  redirect  the  currents 
into  constructive  survival  channels.  I  can  state  definitely  that  this  is  pos¬ 
sible.  We  can  control  physiologically  the  s.r  through  the  elimination  of 
identification,  by  training  in  order,  in  consciousness  of  abstracting,  and 
similar  disciplines,  and  thus  eliminate  the  pathological  semantic  disturb¬ 
ances  of  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions.  Such  training,  whenever 
possible,  has  seemingly  a  beneficial  influence  even  on  the  more  extreme 
pathological  states  listed  above,  and  suggests  general  preventive  value. 

Let  me  briefly  restate  the  fundamental  differences  between  lower 
order  abstractions  and  higher.  The  lower  order  abstractions  are  manu¬ 
factured  by  the  lower  nerve  centres,  which  are  closer  to,  and  in  direct 
contact  with,  actual  life  experiences.  These  are  non-permanent,  shifting, 
vague  and  un-speakable,  but  often  very  intense.  They  play  a  most  im¬ 
portant  role  in  our  daily  lives.  They  cannot  be  transmitted,  as  they  are 
essentially  of  a  non-transmittable  character,  and  have  a  private,  non¬ 
public  character.  All  ‘sense*  impressions,  ‘feelings*,  ‘moods*. ,  are  repre¬ 
sentative  of  them.  We  should  remember  that,  detached,  they  are 
fictions,  manufactured  verbally,  because  our  language  happens  to  be 
eL  Actually,  these  lower  centres  are  in  the  cyclic  chain  and  so  influence, 
and  are  influenced  by,  the  full  cycle,  including  the  higher  order  abstrac¬ 
tions,  whatever  the  latter  may  be  in  a  given  individual.  The  main  point 
is  that  they  are  shifting,  changing,  non-permanent,  non-stable — ‘moving*, 
so  to  say — and  remain  un-speakable. 

The  higher  order  abstractions  are  abstractions  from  the  lower 
order  abstractions,  being  further  removed  from  the  outside  world,  and 
are  of  a  distinctly  different  character.  These  are  static,  ‘permanent*,  and 
cannot  be  entirely  eliminated  from  any  one. 

From  the  point  of  view  of  sanity,  the  problem  of  how  we  can 
handle  these  functions  becomes  paramount.  In  the  cyclic  nervous  chain, 
we  always  must  translate  one  level  into  the  other.  Obviously,  if,  in  the 
higher  centres,  we  elaborate  shifting,  changing,  non-permanent  material, 
this  material  is  not  appropriate  for  them ;  they  cannot  work  properly,  and 
some  pathological  processes  may  set  in. 

V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANGUAGE 

If  we  elaborate  in  the  lower  nerve  centres  abstractions  that  are 
static,  permanent . ,  in  character,  and  hence  inappropriate  for  the  lower 
centres,  we  build  up  morbid  non-survival  identifications,  delusions,  illu¬ 
sions,  hallucinations,  and  other  disturbances  of  evaluation,  resulting  in 
milder  cases  in  absolutism,  dogmatism,  fanaticism . ,  and,  in  heavier  cases, 
in  a  neurosis  or  even  a  psychosis. 

It  seems  quite  obvious  that  each  nervous  level  has  its  own  specific 
kind  of  material  to  deal  with:  As  they  are  in  a  cyclic  nervous  chain 
and  are  interconnected  in  a  bewilderingly  complex  way,  the  problem 
of  appropriate  translation  of  one  level  of  abstractions  into  the  other 
becomes  a  semantic  foundation  for  a  well-balanced  functioning  of  the 
nervous  system.  In  this  respect,  we  differ  fundamentally  from  animals. 
The  above  difficulties  do  not  arise  in  animals  to  that  extent,  because  their 
nervous  systems  are  not  differentiated  enough  for  such  sharp  differen¬ 
tiation  in  the  functioning.  For  this  reason,  without  human  interference, 
there  could  be  no  ‘insane'  animals  which  could  survive  (see  Part  VI). 
But,  having  no  static  higher  order  abstractions  in  the  human  sense,  the^ 
cannot  pass  on  their  ‘experiences',  which  are  transmittable  only  in  the 
higher  order  formulations  in  neural  and  extra-neural  forms  to  the  next 
generations.  Animals  are  not  time-binders. 

For  humans,  the  proper  translation  of  dynamic  into  static  and  static 
into  dynamic  becomes  paramount  for  sanity,  on  psycho-logical  levels, 
affecting,  probably  by  colloidal  processes,  the  psycho-neural  foundation 
of  semantic  responses. 

Psychiatry  informs  us  that  most  of  the  ‘mentally'  ill  have  their  main 
disturbances  in  the  dynamic  affective  field.  It  is  a  very  difficult  field  to 
reach  by  the  older  methods,  the  more  so  that  the  older  el  sharp  distinc¬ 
tion  between  intellect  and  ‘emotions'  prevented  the  discovery  of  work¬ 
able  means.  ‘Thinking'  and  ‘feeling'  are  not  to  be  divided  so  simply. 
We  know  how  ‘thinking'  is  influenced  by  ‘feeling';  but  we  know  very 
little  how  ‘feeling'  is  influenced  by  ‘thinking'— perhaps,  because  we  have 
not  analysed  the  semantic  issues  in  non-el  terms. 

All  psychotherapy,  with  its  manifold  theories,  each  contributing  its 
share,  is  a  semantic  attempt  to  influence  ‘feeling'  by  ‘thinking*.  A  large 
number  of  successful  cases  seems  to  show  clearly  that  some  such  means 
are  possible.  Large  numbers  of  failures  show  equally  that  the  methods 
used  are  not  structurally  satisfactory.  The  need  of  more  scientific  inves¬ 
tigations  of  a  more  general  and  fundamental,  non-el  character  becomes 
emphatic.  The  present  enquiry  shows  that  such  structural  investigations 
suggest  that  the  method  can  be  found  in  the  psycho-logics  of  the  ‘mind' 
at  .its  best;  namely,  in  mathematics,  which  unexpectedly  leads  to  a 

MAT  1 1  KM  AT  ICS  AND  THE  NERVOUS  SYSTEMS  299 

physiological  control  of  the  s.r,  effective  not  only  as  a  therapeutic,  but 
also  as  a  preventive,  educational  means. 

Identification  as  a  factor  of  un-sanity  seems  to  be  a  natural  conse¬ 
quence  of  the  evolution  from  'animal*  to  'man*,  particularly  at  our  pres¬ 
ent  stage,  while  the  human  race  is  so  recent  a  product.  The  human 
cortex  appeared  only  comparatively  lately  and  is  a  young  structure; 
the  thalamic  regions  have  a  much  longer  history  of  functioning.  It 
seems  natural  that  the  nervous  impulses  should  pass  the  shorter,  more 
phylogenetically  travelled,  paths  in  preference  to  comparatively  newer 
and  longer  paths,  a  principle  well  known  in  neurology  in  connection  with 
so-called  ‘Bahnung*.  If  education,  and  on  human  levels  any  kind  of 
adjustment  involving  s.r  involves  some  education,  fails  to  force  the  nerve 
:urrents  into  their  proper  channels,  or  actively  establishes  in  them 
semantic  psycho-neural  blockages  through  pathological  evaluation  ac¬ 
quired  because  of  faulty  training,  we  should  expect  either  infantilism 
or  regression  to  still  lower  levels.  Whatever  the  correct  explanation  of 
the  distribution  of  nerve  currents,  semantic  blockages . ,  may  be,  observa¬ 
tion  shows  unmistakably  that  some  such  assumptions  are  necessitated  by 
observed  manifestations  in  behaviour.  Experiments  show,  also,  that  such 
defects  can  be  helped  greatly  by  the  proper  re-training  and  re-education 
of  the  s.r . 

To  understand  the  structure  of  these  semantic  disturbances,  we 
must  become  acquainted  with  the  affective  components  which  underlie 
mathematics  and  mathematical  methods,  hitherto  disregarded,  because 
of  the  el  character  of  our  old  terminology.  There  is  another  striking 
connection.  In  severe  'mental*  illnesses,  we  usually  find  a  disorientation 
in  ‘space*  and  ‘time*,  which  are,  by  necessity,  relational  data  of  experi¬ 
ence.  In  the  semantic  disturbances  called  identification,  we  also  find,  as 
a  rule,  relational  disorientation  about  ‘space*  and  ‘time*,  more  subtle  but 
very  vicious  in  effect,  bordering  on  what  are  called  ‘philosophical*  prob¬ 
lems,  which,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  represent  psycho-neural  disturbances. 
Since  Einstein,  the  disturbances  can  be  easily  eliminated,  provided  we 
take  into  account  structural  non-el  issues  in  connection  with  s.r  and  a 
A-system. 

It  is  instructive  to  make  a  short  survey  of  the  methods  by  which 
the  mechanism  of  the  nervous  cycle — ‘senses’,  ‘feelings*.,  first;  ‘mind*, 
which  again  influences  the  ‘feelings’,  next — works  in  mathematics. 
Weierstrass,  the  famous  mathematician,  says,  in  one  of  his  writings, 
that  a  mathematician  is  a  kind  of  poet.  This  is  largely  true.  Mathe¬ 
matics  is  not  only  a  rigorous  linguistic  relational  pattern,  but  it  uses 
the  highest  abstractions  which  we  have  reached  at  a  given  period  from 

V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANGUAGE 

the  data  given  by  the  lower  nerve  centres,  which  are  closer  to  experience, 
or  rather  which  constitute  experience.  The  older  arguments  about  the 
connection  or  lack  of  connection  between  the  lower  order  abstractions 
(‘sense’  data . ,) ,  and  mathematics  are  due  solely  to  a  confusion  of  orders 
of  abstractions  and  are  a  useless  gambling  in  el  terms.  Only  in  severe 
‘mental’  ills  is  the  speech  of  the  patients  entirely  unconnected  with  first 
order  external  ‘realities’,  and  so  the  study  of  relations  of  many  kinds 
and  orders,  called  ‘mathematics’,  cannot,  as  long  as  it  is  sane,  be  entirely 
detached  from  ‘reality’.  In  fact,  it  is  useless  for  mathematicians  to  try 
to  produce  disciplines  which  have  no  practical  applications.  As  long 
as  it  is  professionally  accepted  as  mathematics,  and,  therefore,  a  science 
and  sane,  whatever  mathematicians  produce  will  always  be  connected 
with  lower  order  abstractions,  and  must  have  an  application  sooner  or 
later.  When  these  higher  order  abstractions,  produced  very  often  by 
many  individuals,  are  absorbed  and  returned  in  a  modified  form  to  the 
lower  centres  as  ‘visualization’,  ‘intuition’,  ‘feelings’. ,  the  given  individual 
is  closer  to  the  external  world  than  he  was  before,  because  he  has 
absorbed,  digested,  and  appropriated  the  nervous  results  of  many  more 
experiences  than  he  himself  could  have  gathered  alone.  He  is  able  to 
compare,  evaluate,  and  relate,  revise  and  adjust  his  private  experiences 
and  observations  with  the  translated  experiences  from  higher  abstrac¬ 
tions  of  many  more  individuals.  The  translation  is  indispensable,  because 
the  reactions  of  both  levels  are  entirely  different,  and  comparable  only 
when  they  are  on  one  level.  Creative  work  has  begun . 

Experiences  given  by  the  lower  centres  and  lower  abstractions  are 
full  of  meanings,  colouring,  affective  and  semantic  components,  and 
these  are  not  directly  comparable  with  the  higher  abstractions  produced 
by  the  higher  nerve  centres.  They  must  be  first  transformed,  ‘digested’, 
and  translated  into  terms  of  the  lower  centres,  which  are  the  only  ones 
which  are  effective  on  the  lower  levels.  We  call  them  ‘visualization’, 
‘intuition’,  ‘feeling’,  ‘culture’, .  The  exact  mechanism  is  not  well  known, 
but  we  have  a  number  of  data  which  show  that  the  lower  nerve  centres 
are  somehow  engaged  in  these  processes. 

When  this  is  accomplished,  the  mathematician  has  at  his  disposal 
an  enormous  amount  of  data ;  first,  his  personal  experiences  and  observa¬ 
tion  of  actual  life  (lower  centres  and  lower  order  abstractions),  and  also 
all  the  personal  experiences  and  observations  of  past  generations.  Al¬ 
though  the  latter  were  stored  in  the  form  of  higher  order  abstractions 
only  as  an  account  of  past  experiences  in  neural  or  extra-neural  forms, 
his  nervous  cycle  was  affected  by  them,  and  they  were  translated  back 
into  experiences  of  the  lower  levels. 

MATHEMATICS  AND  THE  NERVOUS  SYSTEMS  301 

With  such  an  enormous  amount  of  data  of  experience,  he  can 
re-evaluate  the  data,  ‘see’  them  anew,  and  so  produce  new  and  more 
useful  and  structurally  more  correct  higher  order  abstractions.  In  their 
turn,  these  will  produce  similar  semantic  effects  with  other  individuals , . 
The  mechanism  is,  after  all,  well  known  and  general,  obvious  even  in 
the  relations  between  some  feeble-minded  parents  and  their  eventually 
feeble-minded  children.  It  is  entirely  obvious  on  racial  grounds ;  but,  at 
present,  it  is  not  so  obvious,  and  often  but  slightly  effective,  on  personal 
and  individual  grounds,  because  we  have  had  no  means  of  training 
structurally  and  effectively  the  s.r  in  proper  evaluation.  The  mechanism 
is  entirely  general,  but  it  is  obvious  and  seen  at  work  in  the  majority  of 
creative  scientists  and  so-called  ‘geniuses’.  These  processes  have  not  been 
analysed  in  terms  of  order,  and  so,  although  we  use  them  often,  we  are 
not  conscious  of  their  mechanism  and  have  no  means  of  training  our  s.r. 
The  s.r  are  a  product  of  training,  education . ,  and  are  not  inborn  in  a 
given  form.  Even  birds  bred  in  a  laboratory  which  have  never  heard 
their  parents  or  other  birds  sing  will  sing,  as  this  is  an  inborn  reflex, 
but  the  melody  produced  is  different  from  that  of  their  parents.  Under 
normal  conditions,  the  form  of  the  song  is  standardized  and  is  a  result 
of  copying  parents.  In  other  words,  the  melody-environment  has  affected 
them.  With  humans,  it  is  not  only  a  question  of  the  given  noises,  the 
‘melody-environment’  which  we  relate  with  some  experiences,  but  the 
s.r  involve  affective  responses  to  meanings,  and  this  depends  on  the 
structure  of  language,  involving  unconscious,  yet  vital,  evaluation  factors 
and  our  attitude  toward  language,  which  ultimately  depends  on  our 
knowledge  of  the  mechanism  and  use  of  language. 

These  problems  are  extremely  complex  and  subtle,  and,  at  this 
stage,  we  are  not  ready  to  go  into  further  details,  the  more  so  that  there 
is  a  very  simple  and  effective  physiological  structural  method  given  in 
Part  VII,  which  in  practice  eliminates  enormous  theoretical  difficulties. 
There  is  little  doubt  that  this  mechanism  of  recasting,  or  translation  of 
abstractions,  is  present  in  all  of  us,  but  this  mechanism  requires  knowl¬ 
edge  of  the  proper  way  to  handle  it,  and  that  knowledge  is  not  inborn, 
but  has  to  be  acquired  by  education.  Up  to  the  present  date,  these 
problems  have  been  disregarded,  and  the  s.r  treated  in  a  haphazard  way ; 
once  the  physiological  mechanism  of  these  reactions  is  discovered,  how¬ 
ever,  we  shall  be  able  to  use  its  benefits  without  the  inherent  dangers  of 
disturbances. 

Here  we  must  face  a  rather  unexpected  fact. 

Mathematics  is  alone  and  unique  in  that  it  has  no  content  or  definite 
meanings  ascribed  to  the  undefined  terms ;  and,  therefore,  only  in  mathe- 

V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANGUAGE 

matics  can  we  avoid  the  vicious  influencing  of  lower  centres  through  the 
feeling  of  false  analogies  which  distort  and  disorganize  the  process. 
It  is  important  to  notice  that  the  main  and  only  lasting  advances  in 
‘philosophy'  have  been  made  by  mathematicians ;  and,  as  a  rule,  when¬ 
ever  a  trained  mathematician  attempts  to  work  at  any  other  profession 
not  requiring  mathematics,  he  shortly  becomes  an  outstanding  worker 
in  the  new  field.  It  must  be  obvious  that  the  returning  nerve  currents, 
when  they  produce  the  ‘feel'  (language  of  the  lower  centres)  of  physics, 
or  chemistry,  or  biology,  or  other  sciences  with  a  definite  content,  must 
have  a  most  pronounced  semantic  effect.  Because  of  this  physical  con¬ 
tent,  identification  and  other  semantic  disturbances  are  usually  present, 
instead  of  the  highly  beneficial  visualization. 

Empirically,  this  is  quite  obviously  true.  Let  us  survey  the  character 
of  this  process  in  physicists  and  chemists.  Their  problems,  the  content 
of  their  abstractions,  are  obviously  not  so  closely  related  to  human  lives 
as  the  problems  of  biology.  History  shows  that  the  attitude  (affective) 
of  those  scientists  toward  human  affairs  is  often  shallow,  but  very  sel¬ 
dom  vicious  or  harmful.  But  let  us  take  the  attitudes  of  biologists, 
whose  subject  is  seemingly  much  closer,  or,  at  least,  more  affectively 
related  to  our  problems,  and  we  see,  from  Aristotle  on,  the  brutalizing 
and  unscientific  (1933)  effect  of  the  false  biological  analogies.  Prac¬ 
tically  all  the  vicious,  unjustified,  and  unscientific  generalizations  which 
have  made  the  white  race  the  most  animalistic,  selfish,  cruel,  hypocritical, 
and  un-sane  race  on  earth  are  mainly  due  to  the  biological,  A ,  distorted 
reasonings  and  s.r  produced  by  false  analogy. 

In  all  this  ‘philosophy',  they  always  reasoned  from  pigs,  cats,  and 
dogs  to  man.  Since  they  were  ‘scientific',  we  blindly  assumed  that  they 
must  know  what  they  were  talking  about.  Even  today,  the  majority  of 
the  older  biologists  refuse  to  investigate  the  structure  of  their  language. 
They  do  not  seem  to  be  able  to  realize  that  most  biological  ‘philosophies’ 
are  structurally  fallacious  and  unscientific  in  1933.  They  still  uncon¬ 
sciously  follow  Aristotle.  They  refuse  to  understand  that  life  is  made  up 
of  absolute  and  unique  individuals,  and  that  ‘man'  or  ‘animal*  is  not  an 
object,  but  labels  verbal  fictions. 

In  actual  life,  the  differences  between  individuals  are  absolute,  and 
father  and  son  are  different.  These  are  the  empirical  facts  of  their 
sciences,  the  rest  being  verbal  fictions.  The  notorious  Tennessee  trial 
demonstrated  that  in  a  large  country  like  the  United  States  of  America, 
with  a  few  good  universities,  there  was  no  biologist  to  voice  these  points 
about  ‘evolution’.  It  is  true  that,  through  the  work  of  neurologists  and 
some  others,  biologists,  of  late,  are  beginning  to  see  that  they  cannot 

MATHKMATICS  AND  THE  NERVOUS  SYSTEMS  303 

generalize  in  the  way  they  have  done  for  more  than  two  thousand  years. 
Naturally,  there  are  notable  exceptions;  yet  even  these  do  not  realize 
the  structural  linguistic  and  semantic  issues  involved. 

I  most  emphatically  do  not  deny  that  animal  researches  are  extremely 
useful  and  necessary;  but  I  question  the  right  of  biologists  to  remain 
innocent  of  the  importance  of  linguistic  and  semantic  issues,  and  to 
indulge  in  vicious,  unwarranted  generalizations  which,  although  they  may 
express  their  own  metaphysics  and  s.r ,  should  not  be  advanced  as  ‘scien¬ 
tific'  results.  Biologists  ought  to  be  informed  enough  to  understand  that 
‘man'  and  ‘animal'  are  verbal  fictions,  and  labels  for  something  going  on 
inside  our  skins — not  labels  for  the  unique  individuals  with  which  they 
have  to  deal  outside  their  skins. 

An  example  may,  perhaps,  be  useful.  We  know  that  rats,  prairie 
dogs,  and  some  other  animals  are  mostly  immune  to  scurvy,  but  that 
man,  monkeys,  and  guinea  pigs  are  mostly  not  immune.  How  can  we 
generalize  from  a  rat  to  a  man  or  a  guinea  pig?  Or  how  much  can  we 
learn  about  the  behaviour  of  a  bee  from  the  behaviour  of  an  oyster,  to 
use  the  example  of  Professor  Jennings?  Even  in  ‘man’,  what  helps  one 
‘man',  kills  another. 

Similar  false  analogies  occur  in  the  A  classification  of  ‘man'  as  an 
‘animal'.  This  classification  disregards  completely  the  s.r  and  twists  the 
generally  accepted  folk-meaning  of  the  term  ‘animal'  into  a  special  mean¬ 
ing  which  introduces  very  vicious  semantic  implications.  If  we  classify 
‘man'  as  an  ‘animal*,  the  structural  A  'plus'  elementalism  is  automatically 
introduced,  since  ‘man',  obviously,  has  many  characteristics  of  behaviour 
not  shown  by  the  ‘animal',  taken  in  its  folk-meaning.  The  disregard  of 
the  folk-meaning  in  our  terminology  shows  clearly  the  complete  dis¬ 
regard  for  s.r  which  are  very  strongly  related  to  those  folk-meanings. 
If  we  are  to  call  ‘man*  an  ‘animal',  then  ‘man’  must  be  an  ‘animal*  ‘plus* 
something.  If  we  were  to  call  him  some  sort  of  a  junior  ‘god*,  he  would 
be  a  ‘god'  ‘minus'  something.  The  latter  structural  fallacy  would  be 
just  as  vicious  in  its  implications,  and  would  again  deliver  our  specula¬ 
tions  into  the  semantic  clutches  of  the  structure  of  a  primitive-made  el 
language. 

Similar  objections  could  be  raised  to  that  class  of  ‘biological 
psychologies'  exemplified  by  the  ‘behaviourists' — (not  to  be  confused 
with  the  illuminating  and  highly  constructive  biological  psychiatry  or 
psychobiology  introduced  by  Professor  Adolf  Meyer).9  The  ‘behav¬ 
iourists*  try  to  be  ultra-‘scientific\  not  realizing  that  their  knowledge 
of  scientific  method  and  structure  belongs  somewhere  to  the  sixteenth 
century. 

V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANGUAGE 

Creative  mathematicians,  after  becoming  acquainted  with  the  work 
of  their  predecessors  and  contemporaries,  achieve  their  own  results,  at 
first,  through  ‘intuition’,  ‘feeling’,.  They  ‘visualize’  the  most  abstract 
theories,  though  sometimes  it  takes  the  invention  of  new  means  to 
achieve  this  result.  Their  lower  nervous  centres  are  affected  by  the 
higher  abstractions  made  by  themselves  and  others.  This  process  ac¬ 
counts  for  the  fact  that  no  mathematical  achievement  is  ever  detached, 
or  possibly  can  be  detached,  from  life.  The  source  of  all  creative  work 
is  always  in  the  lower  centres,  which  are  in  more  direct  contact  with  the 
world  around  us,  through  ‘feelings’,  ‘intuitions’,  ‘visualization*,  and 
other  first  order  reactions. 

Mathematics  and  what  is  called  ‘sublimation’  in  psychiatry  have  a 
similar  neural  mechanism,  which  is  expressed  structurally  in  the  spiral 
theory,  or  in  the  cyclic  chain  of  nerve  currents,  where  the  end-product 
of  one  process  becomes  the  starting  point  of  the  next.  As  was  said 
before,  this  is  quite  obvious  on  racial  grounds,  but  more  difficult  to  dis¬ 
cover  or  apply  in  individual  experience,  if  we  disregard  structure  and 
non-el 

If  we  can,  let  us  discover  means  by  which  the  ‘feel’  of  modem 
science  can  be  imparted  without  falsification  and  technicalities,  which, 
perhaps,  may  be  only  auxiliary  means  to  get  the  more  fundamental  life 
