results.  We  may  at  once  anticipate  the  means  which  we  shall  discover. 
The  key  problem  is  to  eliminate,  first,  the  semantic  disturbance  called 
identification  or  the  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions,  and  similar  dis¬ 
turbances  of  evaluation.  This  elimination  is  attained  physiologically 
through  the  development  of  the  consciousness  of  abstracting,  which  leads 
to  proper  evaluation,  visualization  without  semantic  disturbances.  In 
other  words,  we  must  find  means  by  which  higher  abstractions  can  be 
translated  physiologically  into  lower  abstractions,  uniquely  connected 
with  the  translation  of  the  dynamic  into  the  static  and  vice  versa. 

The  present  status  of  the  white  race — I  do  not  know  enough  about 
the  structures  of  languages  of  other  races  and  their  s.r  to  speak  about 
them — is  such  that  a  majority  of  our  self-imposed  difficulties  is  due  to 
the  lack  of  scientific  structural  analysis,  which  lack  makes  it  impossible 
to  control  or  regulate  physiologically  and  adequately  the  semantic  evalu¬ 
ation  through  education.  Under  such  conditions,  everything  based  on 
arguments  involving  the  ‘is’  of  identity  and  the  older  el  ‘logic’  and  ‘psy¬ 
chology’,  such  as  the  prevailing  doctrines,  laws,  institutions,  systems . , 
cannot  possibly  be  in  full  accordance  with  the  structure  of  our  nervous 
system.  This,  in  turn,  affects  the  latter  and  results  in  the  prevailing 
private  and  public  un-sanity.  Hence,  the  unrest,  unhappiness,  nervous 

MATHEMATICS  AND  THE  NERVOUS  SYSTEMS  305 

strain,  irritability,  lack  of  wisdom  and  absence  of  balance,  the  instability 
gf  our  institutions,  the  wars  and  revolutions,  the  increase  of  ‘mental' 
ills,  prostitution,  criminality,  commercialism  as  a  creed,  the  inadequate 
standards  of  education,  the  low  professional  standards  of  lawyers, 
priests,  politicians,  physicians,  teachers,  parents,  and  even  of  scientists 
— which  in  the  last-named  field  often  lead  to  dogmatic  and  antisocial 
attitudes  and  lack  of  creativeness. 

This  is,  naturally,  an  unsatisfactory  semantic  state  of  affairs,  and, 
in  consequence,  our  nervous  systems  do  not  function  properly,  according 
to  the  potentialities  of  proper  evaluation  inherent  in  their  structure. 
False  creeds  or  doctrines  underlying  the  s.r,  particularly  when  connected 
with  strong  affective  tension,  play  as  great  a  havoc  with  our  responses 
and  capacities  on  sub-microscopic  colloidal  levels  as  any  macroscopic 
organic  lesion  of  our  nervous  system.  If  our  s.r  are  pathological,  invari¬ 
ably  some  affective  disturbance,  and  psycho-neural  blockages  on  the 
colloidal  level,  must  be  present.  The  nervous  currents  are  then  deviated 
and  forced  into  lower,  non-survival-for-man  channels,  resulting  in 
various  forms  of  arrested  development  or  regressive  symptoms.  Through 
this  we  are  deprived  of  the  higher  {human)  ‘intelligence*,  which  is  the 
result  of  the  optimum  working  of  the  nervous  system  on  all  levels; 
we  become  ‘mentally*  deficient  in  various  aspects  and  degrees,  and  we 
have  to  copy  animals,  primitives,  and  infants,  and  so  present,  in  milder 
disturbances,  the  pathetic  picture — so  often  seen — of  adult  infantilism, 
or  display  other  regressive  manifestations.  Thousands  of  such  cases 
have  been  analysed  and  recorded  in  psychiatrical  literature.  The  mechan¬ 
ism  of  these  disturbances  is  quite  clear,  because,  after  the  re-education 
of  the  s.r,  if  this  is  at  all  successful,  the  psycho-neurological  colloidal 
blockage  is  eliminated,  and  the  patient  is  relieved  from  his  semantic 
afflictions. 

Instances  of  infantilism  and  animalistic  reactions  are  abundant 
everywhere;  but  as  this  problem  is  analysed  further  in  Part  VII,  here 
we  shall  not  pursue  the  matter  further. 

It  should  be  noticed,  however,  in  this  connection,  that  sex  abnor¬ 
malities  of  every  description  and  most  sex  disturbances  are  also  inter¬ 
connected  with  infantilism  in  adults.  In  public  life  and  activities,  the 
results  are  equally  pathetic.  Instead  of  analysing  and  foreseeing,  we 
proceed  by  trial  and  error,  as  animals  do,  a  wasteful  and  painful  method. 
The  possession  of  an  adequate  physiological  method  for  the  translation 
from  the  appropriate  reactions  of  one  level  to  that  of  another,  therefore, 
becomes  paramount.  The  non-el  language  and  the  methods  of  mathe¬ 
matics  appear,  then,  to  be  of  neurological  value.  The  terms  are  easily 

V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANGUAGE 

and  correctly  applied  to  both  levels,  and  thus  facilitate  passing  from  the 
language  appropriate  to  one  level  to  the  language  appropriate  to  the 
other.  But,  in  this  case,  to  avoid  confusion,  we  should  have  to  make 
clear  the  multiordinality  of  terms  and  to  embody  recognition  of  this 
multiordinality  in  every,  even  the  most  elementary,  education,  as  any 
education  shapes  and  moulds  some  s.r.  This  will  aid  the  working  of  the 
human  nervous  system,  which,  at  present,  is  blocked,  sometimes  very 
effectively,  by  disturbances  of  evaluation.  The  old  el,  subject -predicate 
language  has  a  structure  dissimilar  to  the  structure  of  this  world  as  we 
know  it  in  1933,  and  also  dissimilar  to  the  structure  and  function  of  the 
human  nervous  system,  and  so,  by  necessity,  hampers  the  s.r  and  deviates 
them  from  their  natural  course. 

That  the  problems  before  us  are  subtle,  and  that  the  demarcation 
line  between  ‘sanity7,  ‘un-sanity7,  and  ‘insanity7  is  extremely  thin,  is  no 
reason  for  neglecting  this  neurological  benefit  of  psychophysiological 
investigation.  It  seems  obvious  that  the  attitude  toward  our  forms  of 
representation,  and  toward  our  s.r ,  are  fundamentally  affected  by  the 
disturbances  of  evaluation  called  identification  or  confusion  of  orders 
of  abstractions,  and,  in  particular,  by  objectification,  which  ascribe  un¬ 
justified  and  delusional  values  and  meanings  to  these  forms. 

Up  to  this  point,  we  have  been  emphasizing  the  beneficial  structural 
aspect  of  mathematics,  and  it  is  now  necessary  to  explain  why  mathe- 
matizing,  when  considered  as  a  formal  interplay  of  contentless  symbols, 
should  not  be  considered  a  high-class  ‘mental7  activity,  no  matter  how 
useful  and  important  it  may  be,  and  why  the  majority  of  mathematicians 
do  not  get  the  full  psycho-logical  semantic  benefit  of  their  training  and 
activities.  The  nervous  systems  of  many  such  mathematicians  do  not  act 
fully  and  successfully,  nor  pass  normally  through  the  cycle  of  their 
natural  activities.  Such  a  technician  is  seldom,  if  ever,  what  we  call  a 
great  man.  He  seldom  has  a  direct  creative  influence  on  our  lives.  But, 
in  the  case  of  a  man  with  a  more  efficient  nervous  system,  the  cycle  is 
completed  successfully,  the  higher  abstractions  are  translated  back  into 
new  lower  abstractions,  which  are  closer  to  life.  Such  an  individual 
sees ,  visualizes  ,  has  ‘intuitions7. ,  in  his  symbolic  interplays.  He  then 
has  a  new  structural  vision  through  a  new  survey  of  his  own  experiences 
and  all  the  experiences  of  others  when  translated  in  terms  of  lower 
centres.  He  gains  a  deeper  insight,  which  he  ultimately  makes  useful 
to  all  of  us. 

Immediate  experience,  always  un-speakable,  is  strictly  connected 
with  the  lower  centres.  In  the  translation  of  experience  into  higher 
order  abstractions  and  language,  the  un-speakable  character  of  experi- 

MATHEMATICS  AND  THE  NERVOUS  SYSTEMS  307 

ence  is  lost,  and  a  new  neurological  process  is  needed  to  re-translate  these 
higher  order  abstractions  into  new  lower  abstractions,  and  thus  fully 
and  successfully  to  complete  the  nervous  cycle.  One  can  learn  to  play 
with  symbols  according  to  rules,  but  such  play  has  little  creative  value. 
If  the  translation  is  made  into  the  language  of  lower  centres — namely, 
into  'intuitions’,  'feelings’,  'visualizations’. , — the  higher  abstractions  gain 
the  character  of  experience,  and  so  creative  actrfity  begins.  Individuals 
with  thoroughly  efficient  nervous  systems  become  hat  we  call  'geniuses’. 
They  create  new  values  by  inventions  of  new  methods  and  in  other  ways, 
which  give  us  a  new  structural  means  of  exploring,  and  thus  of  dealing 
with,  the  world  around  us  and  ourselves,  and  so,  ultimately,  human 
adjustment  is  helped. 

It  is  important  for  the  reader  to  become  thoroughly  familiar  with 
the  simple  division  of  our  nervous  processes  into  terms  of  order  in  a 
cyclic  chain.  Even  neurology  calls  the  neurons  excited  first  of  'first 
order’,  and  the  succeeding  members  of  the  series,  of  'second  order’, . 
The  above  considerations  have  an  important  practical  semantic  bearing 
for  all  of  us,  since  many  of  the  processes  which  we  are  describing  can 
be  influenced  educationally  by  simple  methods,  because  the  term  'order’, 
when  applied,  acquires  a  physiological  character  for  evaluation .  The 
description  and  verbal  analysis  of  the  process  is,  naturally,  complex,  but 
once  the  physiological  base  of  evaluation  is  discovered,  the  training 
becomes  very  simple,  although  not  easy. 

The  principal  aim  of  this  present  work  is  to  make  available  a  simple 
and  practical  physiological  means  for  accomplishing  what  is  highly 
desirable,  and,  at  the  same  time,  for  eliminating  what  is  semantically 
undesirable.  We  deal  with  mathematics,  because  mathematics  is  unique , 
and,  being  unique,  has  no  substitute.  When  discussing  the  theory  of 
meanings,  we  have  shown  that  all  verbalism  is,  ultimately,  similar  to 
mathematics  in  structure.  This  conclusion  contradicts  many  current 
theories  of  language  and  meanings,  and  so,  at  this  stage  of  our  argument, 
we  lay  special  emphasis  on  the  only  discipline  in  which  these  issues  are 
clear  and  obvious  ;  namely,  mathematics.  The  older  theories,  based  on 
ignorance  of  mathematics,  have  led  to  serious  abuses  of  our  linguistic 
capacities  and  to  s.r  which  are  mostly  pathological,  with  the  result  that 
practically  99  per  cent  of  us  are  semantically  disturbed  and  un-sane. 
Many  of  us,  even,  are  on  the  verge  of  more  serious  ‘mental’  illnesses. 

It  will  be  well  to  give  a  rough  picture  of  the  similarities  of,  and 
differences  between,  the  working  of  the  human  'mind’  at  its  worst 
('insanity’),  and  its  working  at  its  best  (mathematics).  We  shall  find 
that  the  average  man  is  between  the  two,  often  dangerously  close  to  the 

V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANGUAGE 

first.  The  following  picture  is  rough  and  one-sided,  but  suggestive,  and 
should  be  worked  out  more  fully. 

The  insane  have  structural,  conscious  or  unconscious,  ‘premises', 
which  are  ‘false’,  or,  in  general,  semantically  inappropriate.  Their  s.r 
are  shifting  when  they  should  be  static,  or  static  when  they  should  be 
flexible.  In  the  main,  the  difficulty  of  evaluation  lies  in  the  lower 
abstractions  and  the  affective  field.  These  abstractions  are  not  properly 
transmitted  or  translated  or  regulated  by  the  higher  centres ;  or  else,  the 
higher  order  static  abstractions  are  projected  with  too  strong  affective 
components  on  the  lower  centres.  Hence,  different  identifications,  delu¬ 
sions,  illusions,  and  hallucinations  result.  Their  ‘ideas’  are  evaluated  as 
things  or  experience,  and  affectively  objectified  in  different  degrees, 
which  results  in  the  above  mis-evaluating  manifestations.  These  seman¬ 
tic  disturbances  and  tensions  make  the  ‘mentally’  ill  believe  irresistibly 
in  the  ‘truth’  of  their  ‘premises’  and  their  inductions  and  deductions, 
which  they  follow  blindly.  In  them,  as  in  the  rest  of  us,  some  internal 
affective  pressure  comes  first,  but  because  in  humans  the  effect  of  higher 
nerve  centres  cannot  be  entirely  abolished,  this  affective  pressure  is 
rationalized  somehow  into  some  sort  of  ‘premises’.  This  organism-as-a- 
whole  process  is  entirely  general  and  applies  to  all  of  us  in  all  our 
activities,  but  is  most  clearly  seen  in  the  ordered  details  in  the  work  of 
creative  scientists  and  ‘geniuses’,  and  in  the  more  severe  cases  of  ‘mental* 
illness.  To  the  mentally’  ill  these  ‘premises’  have  the  value  of  ‘the’  and 
not  ‘a  premise.  They  act  upon  them,  and  so  cannot  adjust  themselves 
to  a  world  different  from  their  fancies.  They  would  seldom  survive  at 
all  if  left  alone  by  themselves,  particularly  in  a  complex  ‘civilization*. 

Mathematicians,  also,  have  structural  premises,  often  called  pos¬ 
tulates,  but  they  never  evaluate  them  to  be  ‘true’ ;  wherefore  their  prem¬ 
ises  cannot  be  ‘false .  They  have  no  claims,  and  claims  are  always 
affective.  Like  the  ‘insane’,  they  follow  up  these  premises  blindly,  but, 
being  generally  conscious  of  abstracting  in  the  field  of  their  profession, 
they  are  not  usually  subject  to  semantic  disturbances  in  this  field  and 
do  not  live  out  their  theories  in  life,  the  theories  thus  remaining  affec¬ 
tively  hypothetical.  If  a  mathematician  were  to  believe,  with  strong 
affective  evaluation,  that  his  premises  are  ‘true’,  these  premises  then 
would  become  mostly  false,  or  meaningless,  or,  in  general,  inappropriate. 
If  he  lived  through  them,  the  given  individual  would  then  be  ‘mentally’ 
ill,  not  because  of  his  premises,  but  because  of  the  semantic  disturbance, 
which  would  involve  erroneous  evaluation,  identifications,  confusion  of 
orders  of  abstractions  in  his  affective  attitude  toward  his  premises.  This 
subtle  organism-as-a- whole  mechanism,  in  which  all  affective  pressure 

MATH  KM  AT  ICS  AND  THE  NERVOUS  SYSTEMS  309 

can  be  rationalized,  and  all  rationalization  can  produce  affective  mani¬ 
festations,  not  only  makes  the  present  non-el  analysis  possible  and  legiti¬ 
mate,  but  also  offers  some  explanation  of  those  remarkable  cases  of 
'mental’  illness  in  a  number  of  mathematical  geniuses.  Under  such 
organism-as-a- whole  structural  conditions,  a  general  consciousness  of 
abstracting  not  restricted  to  a  special  field  is  the  only  possible  safeguard 
against  the  semantic  disturbances  which  lead  to  an  unbalanced  ‘mental’ 

condition.  (  . 

As  we  have  seen,  the  difference  between  ‘sanity  and  insanity  is 
subtle.  The  reader  must  be  reminded  that  it  takes  a  good  ‘mind’  to  be 
‘insane’.  Morons,  imbeciles,  and  idiots  are  ‘mentally’  deficient,  but  could 
not  be  ‘insane’. 

The  so-called  ‘sane’  also  have  structural  premises;  we  all  have  some 
standards  of  evaluation.  These  are  also  usually  false,  or,  in  general, 
inappropriate,  being  mostly  due  to  our  savage  inheritance.  But  the 
saner  we  are,  the  less  we  abide  by  them.  Therefore,  in  a  world  quite 
different  structurally  from  our  fancies,  we  are  often  able  to  adjust  our¬ 
selves  for  all  practical  purposes,  often  avoiding  major  disasters  for  a 
number  of  years. 

For  instance,  the  believers  in  extraordinary  blisses  in  the  ‘other 
life’  or  the  ‘other  world’  should  welcome  death.  Why  be  so  unhappy 
here,  when,  according  to  their  doctrines,  there  is  such  an  ideally  happy 
future  after  death?  Why  make  use  of  medicine  and  doctors,  when  a 
deadly  illness  should  open  the  door  to  everlasting  bliss !  In  conflict  with 
such  a  creed,  he  lives  as  long  as  he  can,  often  most  unhappily,  and  is 
generally  willing  to  spend  fortunes  on  doctors  and  medicines  to  delay 
the  bliss!  The  genuine  and  very  serious  danger  to  all  of  us  of  such 
creeds  is  that  when  the  s.r  of  an  individual  are  trained  in  this  way  he 
finally  does  become  indifferent,  or  apathetic  toward  actualities  in  this 
world ,  so  that  cunning,  and  often  pathological,  individuals  are  thus  given 
an  opportunity  of  directing  human  affairs  toward  their  personal  ends. 

Naturally,  with  the  increase  of  the  complexities  of  conditions,  the 
dangers  also  increase  in  a  geometrical  ratio,  because  when  nt.o  realities 
become  too  unbearable,  the  masses  cease  to  be  influenced  by  these  seman¬ 
tic  illusions,  and  they  'break  all  barriers,  only  to  fall  again  under  the 
influence  of  new  leaders  very  often  equally  irresponsible  and  ignorant. 

Unfortunately,  the  failure  to  understand  these  semantic  issues, 
based  on  animalistic  lack  of  foresight,  results  invariably  in  a  great  deal 
of  unnecessary  suffering.  There  is  little  doubt  that  without  these  delu¬ 
sions  and  illusions  we  should  look  after  the  conditions  of  our  actual 
lives  more  closely,  and  many  of  our  pressing  needs  would  be  adjusted. 

V.  MATHEMATICS  A  A  LANGUAGE 

The  difficulties  which  we  have  are  mostly  man-made,  and  so  only  man¬ 
kind  can  remedy  them,  and  any  attempts  to  escape  from  m.o  reality 
only  aggravate  the  situation. 

Lack  of  space  does  not  allow  me  to  dwell  here  on  many  other 
aspects  of  mathematics  which  are  of  neurological  structural  importance, 
except  to  mention  the  theory  of  statistics  and  probability.  All  human 
knowledge  is  neurologically  due  to  a  process  of  abstracting  in  different 
orders,  giving  us  the  only  structural  knowledge  of  processes,  which,  in 
1933,  must  always  be  considered  on  three  levels,  the  macroscopic,  the 
microscopic,  and  the  sub-microscopic. 

Because  the  nervous  system  is  an  abstracting,  integrating  mechan¬ 
ism,  all  human  psycho-neurological  reactions  and,  particularly,  psycho¬ 
logical,  to  be  similar  in  structure,  must  be  based  on  the  mathematical 
theories  of  statistics  and  probability.  On  the  objective  level,  we  deal  with 
absolute  individuals,  and  so  all  statements,  or  higher  order  abstractions, 
can  only  be  probable.  Historically,  mathematicians  have  elaborated  not 
only  both  theories,  but  Boole,  in  his  Laws  of  Thought, ,  extended  the 
mathematical  approach  to  ‘logic'  in  connection  with  the  theory  of  proba¬ 
bility.  Finally,  the  difficulties  of  the  law  of  excluded  third  have  been 
solved  by  Lukasiewicz  and  Tarski10  in  their  ‘many-valued  logic',  which, 
when  N  increases  indefinitely,  merges  with  the  mathematical  theory  of 
probability,  a  result  reached  independently  by  a  different  type  of  analysis 
in  the  present  system.  Any  possible  future  scientific  A ,  non-el  ‘logic', 
which  I  call  general  semantics,  must  be  built  on  this  structurally  more 
correct  foundation.  It  should  be  noticed  that  the  notions  of  probability 
are  very  flexible,  and  entirely  cover  our  structural  needs,  the  field  of 
degrees  of  probability  ranging  from  impossibility  to  certainty.  This  new 
semantics  involves  entirely  new  affective  attitudes,  and  underlies  new 
and  better  balanced  s.r. 

Under  such  conditions,  the  restricted  ‘uncertainty  principle'  of  Heis¬ 
enberg  becomes  a  structural,  most  revolutionary,  and  creative  general 
principle ,  transferring  the  laws  of  two-valued  ‘cause  and  effect'  from 
the  realm  of  gambling  on  words  by  ‘philosophers'  to  the  scrutiny  of 
scientists,  and  establishing  oo-valued  ‘determinism'  on  a  neuro-mathe- 
matical  base  of  ‘the  greatest  probability'.  Methodologically  and  psycho¬ 
logically,  this  requires  full  consciousness  of  abstracting ,  achieved,  as  yet, 
by  extremely  few  of  us,  even  among  physicists  and  mathematicians. 
Then  the  ‘law'  of  two-valued  ‘cause  and  effect',  instead  of  depending  on 
the  el  and  objectified  older  interpretations,  will  be  based  on  the  mathe¬ 
matical,  and  much  more  reliable,  oo-valued  principle  of  greatest  proba- 

MATHEMATICS  AND  THE  NERVOUS  SYSTEMS  311 

bility.  This  will  eliminate  to  a  large  extent  semantic  disturbances,  and 
so  the  problems  of  sanity  will  be  greatly  helped  towards  solution. 

To  those  who  are  accustomed  to  the  disclaimers  made  by  many 
mathematicians  of  human  values  in  their  work,  such  an  analysis  as  I 
have  given  in  the  present  chapter  must  seem  unexpected.  But,  upon 
reflection,  we  may  see  that,  after  all,  it  is  only  a  natural  evaluation. 
Language  is  a  unique,  and,  therefore,  most  important,  human  character¬ 
istic.  Ought  we  to  wonder  that  these  linguists  of  exact  sciences,  whom 
we  call  mathematicians,  should  have  produced  unknowingly  and  unwit¬ 
tingly  great  human  values,  fundamentally  affecting  the  s.r?  They  could 
not  help  it.  Once  they  worked  out  their  own  problems  properly — and 
no  one  doubts  that  they  did  it  well — the  results  were  bound  to  have 
broad  human  significance.  Their  activities  were  kept  on  the  proper  levels 
and  so  were  naturally  a  help  toward  sanity.  In  Part  VII,  I  shall  discuss 
another  mathematical  discovery,  known  as  the  Theory  of  mathematical 
types',  of  Russell,  which,  when  generalized,  becomes  a  physiological 
theory  of  enormous  semantic  importance  and  of  fundamental  and  con¬ 
stant  human  application. 

In  spite  of  popular  belief,  mathematics  is  the  simplest  language  in 
existence.  Our  daily  language  is  so  very  complex  in  its  structure  that 
for  many  thousand  years  it  evaded  analysis.  Probably,  the  writer,  with¬ 
out  the  study  of  mathematics,  would  not  have  been  able  to  discover  the 
ultimately  extremely  simple  yet  workable  principles  outlined  in  the  pres¬ 
ent  work. 

PART  VI 

ON  THE  FOUNDATION  OF  PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGY 

It  is  an  important  principle  of  physiological  epistemology  that  a  phe¬ 
nomenon  which  occurs  generally,  cannot  possibly  be  the  specific  function 
of  an  organ  which  is  peculiar  to  a  few  forms  only.  (306)  jacques  loeb 

I  have  observed,  as  a  consequence  of  serious  and  repeated  emotional 
shocks,  very  curious  cases  of  infantilism  in  adults,  where  complete  amnesia, 
accompanying  sexual  inhibition  and  disturbances  of  the  affective  area, 
produced  the  mentality  and  conduct  of  a  little  child.  <4ii)  henri  pieron 

The  organism  is  reacting  as  a  whole  to  its  environment  as  a  whole,  and 
it  is  doing  so  in  ways  that  cannot  be  formulated  in  terms  of  an  algebraic 
sum  or  simple  mechanical  resultant  of  the  interplay  of  the  simple  reflex 
responses  to  external  stimulation.  ...  the  mechanisms  of  traditional  reflex¬ 
ology  seem  hopelessly  inadequate.  (224>  c.  judson  herrick 

CHAPTER  XX 

GENERAL  CONSIDERATIONS 

We  know  also  how  different  extra  stimuli  inhibit  and  discoordinate  a 
well-established  routine  of  activity,  and  how  a  change  in  a  pre-established 
order  dislocates  and  renders  difficult  our  movements,  activities  and  the 
whole  routine  of  life.  (394)  I.  p.  pavlov 

The  experiments  show  that  a  compound  stimulus  the  component  units 
of  which  remain  themselves  unaltered,  and  consequently  most  probably 
affect  the  same  cells  of  the  cerebral  cortex,  behaves  in  different  modifica¬ 
tions  as  a  different  stimulus,  evoking  in  these  cells  now  an  excitatory 
process  and  now  an  inhibitory  one.  (394>  I.  P.  pavlov 

We  thus  come  to  the  following  conclusion :  when  perfectly  neutral  stimuli 
fall  upon  the  hemispheres  at  a  time  when  there  prevails  a  state  of  inhibition 
they  acquire  an  inhibitory  function  of  their  own,  so  that  when  they  act 
subsequently  upon  any  region  of  the  brain  which  is  in  a  state  of  excitation 
they  produce  inhibition.  (394)  I.  p.  pavlov 

Some  of  the  most  important  researches  in  the  function  of  the  higher 
nervous  centres  have  been  done  lately  by  Professor  Pavlov  in  his  work 
on  the  so-called  ‘conditioned  reflexes’.  This  work  was  developed  in  a 
series  of  papers  covering  a  period  of  nearly  thirty  years  of  experimenta¬ 
tion,  but  the  average  international  scientist  did  not  know  this  work  as 
an  entirety,  because  the  papers  were  scattered  and  written  mostly  in 
Russian.  Only  in  1927  did  the  Oxford  Press  publish  Pavlov’s  Condi¬ 
tioned  Reflexes,  an  Investigation  of  the  Physiological  Activity  of  the 
Cerebral  Cortex  in  the  English  translation  of  Doctor  G.  V.  Anrep ;  and 
in  1928  The  International  Publishers  (New  York)  published  Pavlov’s 
Lectures  on  Conditioned  Reflexes,  Twenty- five  Years  of  Objective 
Study  of  the  Higher  Nervous  Activity  (Behaviour)  of  Animals  in  the 
translation  of  Doctor  W.  Horsley  Gantt.  Both  translators  were  collabo¬ 
rators  of  Professor  Pavlov  in  Leningrad  for  a  number  of  years.  In 
these  two  books,  the  latest  experiments  and  interpretations  are  given. 

Hitherto,  most  of  the  researches  on  the  function  of  the  higher 
nervous  systems  were  formulated  in  ‘psychological’  languages,  which, 
obviously,  are  not  fit  for  physiological  disciplines.  Professor  Pavlov, 
himself,  suggests  this  fact  as  an  explanation  why,  until  his  work,  the 
physiology  of  the  cerebral  cortex  was  so  little  known.  There  is  no  doubt 
that  the  descriptive  physiological  language  of  happenings,  functionings . , 
used  by  him  exclusively,  is  responsible  for  his  results.  This  language 
suggests  structurally  new  experimentations,  which  suggestions  are  lack¬ 
ing  in  other  accounts  of  the  kind  where  antiquated  ‘psychological*  terms 
are  used. 

Although  I  knew  as  much  as  the  average  scientist  about  the  work 
of  Pavlov,  this  knowledge  was  not  integrated  enough  to  make  some 

dU>  VI.  ON  rSYCI  lOIil  YSIOIXKiY 

issues  clear.  But,  after  I  had  formulated  my  ^-system,  I  read  the 
books  of  Pavlov  and  found,  to  my  great  satisfaction,  that  a  neurological 
mechanism,  the  analysis  of  which  underlies  my  own  work,  and  the  exist¬ 
ence  of  which  was  independently  discovered  by  me  on  theoretical 
grounds,  had  been  discovered  by  Professor  Pavlov  and  his  co-workers 
on  experimental  grounds,  thus  supplying  additional  experimental  veri¬ 
fication  for  my  system. 

It  seems  that  the  so-called  ‘ethics*. ,  in  general,  sanity,  which  underlie 
desirable  human  characteristics  have  a  definite  physiological  mechanism, 
automatically  involving  on  psycho-logical  levels  these  desirable  semantic 
attitudes.  It  appears  that  some  of  the  psycho-logical  problems  enor¬ 
mously  complex  and  difficult  to  reach,  or  even  inaccessible,  are  solved, 
not  by  preaching,  but  by  the  most  simple  and  elementary  physiological 
training,  a  fact  which  has  been  verified  empirically.  Obviously,  such 
simplification,  if  at  all  possible,  must  be  of  fundamental  importance. 

Physiology  deals,  in  the  main,  with  the  functioning  of  oVgans  in 
organisms,  and  results  in  various  formulations.  Thus,  there  might  be 
an  hypothetical  ‘physiological  theory  of  most  effective  feeding*,  for  in¬ 
stance,  stating  that  food  should  be  secured  first  in  one*s  hand,  or  spoon, 
or  fork,  before  putting  it  in  the  mouth , .  A  group  of  people  who  habitu¬ 
ally  disregarded  the  ‘physiological  theory*  and  abandoned  attempts  to  act 
in  accordance  with  it  after  the  first  unsuccessful  one,  would  be  badly 
underfed  or  would  simply  perish.  Facts  of  experience  show  that  some 
such  ‘physiological  theory*  must  have  been  known  and  applied  from  time 
immemorial,  and  that,  perhaps,  because  of  it  we  survive  at  all! 

How  about  the  ‘mental*  field?  As  I  demonstrate— and  close  observa^ 
tion  will  verify  this  very  generally — the  existing  theories  of  ‘mental* 
life,  closely  related  with  our  linguistic  habits,  are  A,  grossly  inadequate, 
and  lead  to  a  wholesale  production  of  morons,  imbeciles,  ‘emotionally* 
disturbed,  and,  in  general,  un-sane  individuals.  Investigation  shows  the 
possibility  of  a  simple  and  obvious  physiological  theory  of  the  use  of  our 
nervous  system,  which  automatically  leads  to  desirable  psycho-logical, 
semantic  states  of  general  sanity. 

In  the  frivolous  example  of  a  ‘physiological  theory  of  feeding*  given 
above,  the  problems  of  order  were  important.  In  the  physiological 
theory  of  sanity,  order  becomes  paramount*  Processes  and  function 
involve  series  of  states,  by  necessity  exhibiting  order.  Adjustment  to 
life-conditions  means  adjustment  of  processes,  and  a  physiological  theory 
of  sanity  must  be  based  structurally  on  four-dimensional  order,  where 
‘space*  and  ‘time*  are  indivisibly  interwoven. 

GENERAL  CONSIDERATIONS 

Pavlov  shows,  in  an  unusually  impressive  variety  and  numbers  of 
experiments,  how  ‘order’  and  ‘delay’  (four-dimensional  order,  in  the 
language  used  here  in  this  connection)  are  intimately  related  with  most 
fundamental  processes  in  the  higher  nervous  centres,  and  how,  by  the 
changes  or  interplays  of  them,  we  can  produce  or  eliminate  pathological 
states  of  the  nervous  system. 

In  the  human  field  we  find  a  quite  similar  situation,  unanalysable 
by  older  methods,  because  all  order  involves  asymmetrical  relations, 
which,  as  we  have  already  shown,  cannot  be  dealt  with  by  A  means. 

The  issue  is  clear  and  definite :  either  we  persist  in  our  old  A  habits 
of  speech,  in  which  case  asymmetrical  relations  and  order  evade  our 
grasp,  and  proper  evaluation  and  sanity  are  physiologically  impossible, 
or  we  build  a  A- system  free,  or  at  least  more  free,  from  these  evalua- 
tional  limitations,  which  allows  us  to  deal  with  order,  and  sanity  becomes 
physiologically  possible . 

‘Stimuli  are  never  “simple”,  and,  by  necessity,  involve  fourfold 
space-time  structure  and  order.  Survival  values  involve,  also,  this  four¬ 
dimensional  order.  For  instance,  the  natural  survival  order  is  “senses” 
first,  “mind”  next;  object  first,  label  next;  description  first,  inference 
next , .  The  reversal  of  the  natural  order  appears  pathological  and  patho¬ 
genic  and  is  found  as  a  symptom  in  practically  all  forms  of  “mental” 
ills,  as  well  as  in  most  human  difficulties  and  disturbances  which,  at 
present,  are  still  not  considered  abnormal.  Thus,  objectivity  is  ascribed 
to  words,  “mind”  projected  into  “senses”,  inferences  evaluated  as  descrip¬ 
tions  . , — quite  common  “symptoms”  .  .  .  Observations  on  human  levels 
show  that  we  still  copy  animals  in  our  nervous  responses,  confuse  orders 
of  abstractions  (non-existent  for  the  animals),  leading  fatalistically  to 
the  reversal  of  the  natural  order  and  to  pathological  results,  making  the 
great  majority  of  us  un-sane.’* 

A  structural  non-el  enquiry  into  the  objective  world  shows  quite 
clearly  that  no  event  is  ever  ‘simple’ ;  it  is,  at  least,  a  limited  whole  of 
interrelated  factors.  The  eventual  ‘simplicity’  is  manufactured  by  a 
nervous  process  of  higher  and  higher  abstractions. 

In  our  consideration  of  ‘order’  and  ‘delay’,  and  the  role  they  play  in 
connection  with  the  activities  of  the  nervous  system,  we  must  first  dis¬ 
criminate  sharply  between  the  objective  level  which  is  unspeakable , 
because  anything  that  can  be  said  is  not  the  object,  and  the  verbal  level, 
on  which  we  can,  at  will,  concentrate  attention  on  similarities,  or  differ¬ 
ences,  or  both.  Secondly,  we  must  pay  special  attention  to  structure — 

♦From — Discussion  by  A.  Korzybski.  Proceedings  of  the  First  International 
Congress  of  Mental  Hygiene.  New  York,  1932. 
