
VI.  ON  PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGY 

that  is  to  say,  search  for  structure  in  the  empirical  world,  and,  once  this 
has  been  found,  adjust,  accordingly,  the  structure  of  our  language. 

The  structure  of  the  daily,  as  well  as  of  the  ‘philosophical*,  lan¬ 
guage,  which  we  inherited,  in  the  main,  from  our  primitive  ancestors,  is 
such  that  we  have  separate  terms  for  factors  which  are  not  separable, 
such  as  ‘matter*,  ‘space*,  ‘time’,  or  ‘body*,  fsoul*,  ‘mind*, .  Then,  as  it  were, 
we  try  to  make  out  of  the  word,  flesh,  by  reversing  the  natural  order 
and  affectively  ascribing  a  delusional  objectivity  to  these  terms. 

If  we  deal  with  the  silent,  un-speakable,  objective  level  and  try  to 
divide  according  to  the  implications  of  the  verbal  division,  we  find  a 
brutal  fact,  which,  until  Einstein  and  Minkowski,  has  escaped  scientific 
verbal  formulation,  that  this  cannot  be  done  at  all.  On  the  objective 
level  every  dealing  with  ‘matter*  involves  ‘space*  and  ‘time* ;  any  dealing 
with  ‘space*  involves  some  fulness  of  something  and  ‘time*;  and  every 
dealing  with  ‘time*  involves  ‘something*  and  ‘space*. 

^  The  structure  of  the  world  happens  to  be  such  that  empirically  ‘mat¬ 
ter  ,  space ,  time ,  cannot  be  divided ;  wherefore,  we  should  have  a 
non~el  language  of  similar  structure ..  This  was  accomplished  by  Einstein- 
*  see  page  Jdi  Minkowksi,  when  they  created  a  language  of  ‘space-time*,  in  which  the 
hard  lumps  against  which  we  bump  our  noses  are  connected  analytically 
with  the  curvature  of  space-time. 

In  this  new,  non-el ,  four-dimensional  language,  every  three-dimen¬ 
sional  point  of  space  has  a  date,  and  so  is  different.  For  our  purpose, 
we  do  not  need,  at  present,  to  bother  much  about  its  curvature  or  the 
kinks  in  space-time,  called  in  the  old  way  ‘matter’,  but  we  must  empha¬ 
size  that  the  fourfold  order  is  of  great  importance,  as  it  corresponds 
structurally  to  experience ,  and  is  intimately  connected  with  physiological 
reactions,  the  semantic  included. 

There  is  a  great  deal  of  confusion  about  these  problems  among 
laymen  and  also  among  scientists.  From  a  structural  point  of  view,  the 
issues  are  quite  simple,  and  there  is  nothing  sensational  in  the  latest 
announcement  of  Einstein  that  ‘space*  in  its  importance  is  displacing 
‘matter*  ( Nottingham  Lectures).  Naturally,  the  statement  in  this  form 
is  rather  baffling  and  attracted  much — even  newspaper — attention.  Yet 
it  seems  that  even  the  einsteinists  do  not  fully  realize  the  verbal ,  struc¬ 
tural ,  and  semantic  issues  involved. 

For  the  layman,  as  well  as  for  the  majority  of  the  physicists  in  their 
less  sober,  or  metaphysical,  moments,  ‘space*  is  ‘emotionally*  newtonian 
and  an  ‘absolute  void*,  which,  of  course,  being  ‘absolute  nothingness*, 
cannot  have  objective  existence,  by  definition.  For  Einstein,  ‘space-time* 
is,  semantically,  ‘fulness*,  not  ‘emptiness’,  and,  in  his  language ,  he  does 

GENERAL  CONSIDERATIONS 

not  need  any  term  like  ‘ether’,  as  his  ‘plenum’,  structurally,  covers  the 
ground,  without  his  committing  himself  to  a  definite  two- valued  mechan¬ 
istic  ether.  The  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions,  from  which  we  all 
suffer,  is  semantic,  and  is  due  to  disregard  of  the  structure  and  role  of 
language.  If  we  accept  a  non-el  language  of  space-time,  structurally  we 
deal  with  fulness,  and  we  should  not  use  the  term  ‘space’,  as  its  old 
semantic  implications  are  ‘emptiness’  and  so  are  very  confusing.  The 
‘sensation’  of  Einstein’s  declaration  amounts  to  the  fact  that  the  sub- 
microscopic  fulness  (‘space’)  is  more  important  than  a  few  kinks  or 
concentrations  of  that  fulness  (‘matter’), — a  fact  which  science  has 
established,  and  which  is  quite  obvious. 

Experiments  with  ‘conditioned  reflexes’  have  established  firmly  tlv 
fact  that  stimuli  can  be  compounded,  and  that,  when  established,  the 
compound  stimulus  acts  as  a  unit,  and  that  a  change  in  the  four-dimen¬ 
sional  order  of  factors  (including  delays)  acts  as  a  different  stimulus, 
not  necessarily  resulting  in  the  established  reflex.  This  often  introduces 
great  complexities. 

As  an  example  of  this,  we  will  use  the  so-called  ‘delayed  reflex . 
When  established,  the  ‘conditioned  reflex’  does  not  appear  at  once  after 
the  stimulation,  but  after  the  stimulation  combined  with  the  usual  ‘time’- 
delay  has  occurred,  thus  showing  that  the  ‘time’  factor  plays  a  physio¬ 
logical  role  in  a  compound  stimulus.  Organisms  live  in,  and  consist 
of,  periodic  processes,  such  as  the  alternation  of  day  and  night,  sleep, 
taking  in  food,  heart-beats,  breathing,  electronic  pulsations . ;  so  that  any 
stimulus,  no  matter  how  nominally  ‘simple’,  is,  in  reality,  a  compound 
stimulus  of,  let  us  say,  x  and  y  heart-beats  and  what  not.  An  organism 
represents,  invariably,  a  clock  of  some  sort,  and,  when  that  clock  stops, 
life  ceases. 

Under  such  actual  structural  conditions  a  four-dimensional  analysis 
makes  every  ‘simple’  stimulus  compound,  and  thus  four-dimensional 
order  becomes  a  potent  physiological  factor,  exerting  definite  effects. 
The  interplay  of  four-dimensional  order  of  factors  represents,  in  general, 
a  new  stimulus ;  we  have  an  interplay  of  positive  and  negative  excitations 
which  may  lead  to  clashes  between  the  two  that  the  nervous  system  finds 
difficult  to  resolve,  and  so  pathological  results  follow. 

If  we  pass  to  sub-microscopic  levels  and  processes,  we  find  that, 
although  we  may  speak  of  them  as  ‘chemical’  or  ‘stimuli  of  greater 
physiological  strength’. ,  yet,  by  structural  necessity,  they  represent  dif¬ 
ferent  kinds  of  multi-dimensional  order,  because,  as  we  say  in  1933,  the 
dynamic  physical  unit  of  that  order  is  a  quantum  of  action.  The  meta¬ 
physician  should  not  get  excited  about  this  statement,  because  whatever 

VI.  ON  PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGY 

he  might  say  will  also  be  a  verbal  statement  of  a  given  date,  made 
mostly  without  any  structural  considerations,  and  based  mostly  upon 
the  reversed  survival  order,  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions  and 
other  semantic  disturbances.  As  the  world,  both  outside  and  inside  our 
skins,  is  invariably  found  to  exhibit  a  fourfold  space-time  order,  it  is 
inevitable  that  this  order  should  be  structurally  impressed  on  the  nervous 
system,  establishing  a  natural  survival  order.  Therefore,  changes  in  this 
order  on  the  macroscopic  level,  the  level  of  outward  events,  must  have 
direct  inward  sub-microscopic  effects,  disturbing  or  restoring  the  nervous 
equilibrium.  This  statement  may  appear  innocent;  it  is  not;  it  has  a 
vital  human  significance,  as  it  involves  standards  of  evaluation.  In  short, 
it  means  that,  in  the  actual  application  of  the  consideration  of  order  in 
education  and  training  on  the  daily-life  levels,  we  can  affect  the  evasive 
(as  yet)  microscopic  and  sub-microscopic  structural  levels  of  the  human 
nervous  system,  thus  directly  affecting  our  s.r  and  behaviour. 

To  make  this  clearer,  let  us  recall  some  of  the  neurological  researches 
of  Bolton  (as  quoted  by  Herrick).  The  cortex  has  different  layers,  char¬ 
acterized  by  the  difference  in  the  number,  size,  shape,  internal  structure, 
and  density  of  neural  cells.  Bolton's  third  layer  of  granules  divides  the 
cortex  into  two  types  of  layers.  Those  closer  to  the  base  of  the  brain,  or 
below  the  third,  are  called  the  infragranular ;  those  above,  the  supra- 
granular,  layers. 

The  Six-months  New-bo»*n  Normal 
mole  foetus  ohiltf  human 

adult 

Fig.  1 

Diagrams  of  the  relative  thickness  of  the 
supragranular,  granular,  and  infragranular 
cerebral  cortex  in  the  six-months  foetus,  the 
new-born  child,  the  normal  human  adult,  and 
the  adult  mole.  The  granular  layer  is  dotted. 
(Redrawn  from  G.  A.  Watson  (1907),  and 
adopted  from  Herrick.1) 

The  lower  mammals  show 
a  well-developed  infragranular 
cortex,  and  a  very  poorly  or¬ 
ganized  supragranular  cortex, 
the  latter  increasing  in  relative 
size  and  complexity  as  we 
ascend  the  animal  series.  On 
the  human  level,  we  find  a  most 
important,  and  usually  disre¬ 
garded,  fact — that  the  human 
nervous  system  is  not  com¬ 
pleted  at  birth,  but  develops 
structurally  years  after  birth. 

The  above  explains  why 
animalistic  theories  and  meth¬ 
ods,  primitive-made  languages 
of  wrong  structure,  and  similar 
relics,  result  in  training  the  s.r 
of  our  children  in  the  patho- 

GENERAL  CONSIDERATIONS 

logical  order,  and  bring  about  such  great  harm,  individually  and  col¬ 
lectively.  It  enables  us  to  understand,  also,  why  all  forms  of  'mental*  ills 
invariably  exhibit  infantile  characteristics  of  some  sort. 

If  we  train  a  child  with  a  physically  undeveloped  nervous  system  in 
animalistic  doctrines  strictly  connected  with  a  primitive-made  language 
of  wrong  structure,  in  the  pathological  reversed  order  of  responses,  such 
semantic  training  must  affect  harmfully  the  still  developing  nervous 
system.  So,  when  we  say,  and  demonstrate,  that  we  still  copy  animals 
in  our  nervous  responses,  we  imply  an  undeveloped  or  thwarted  nervous 
system,  of  which  the  development  has  been  arrested  or  made  regressive. 
Such  a  deficiency,  of  course,  is  superimposed  functionally,  and  so  struc¬ 
turally,  upon  whatever  congenital  deficiency  there  might  have  been  in  a 
given  case.  We  are  nearly  all  in  a  situation  of  this  kind.  We  continue 
to  be  educated  under  animalistic  conditions  since  we  became  time-binders, 
which,  from  a  biological  point  of  view,  is  a  very  recent  event,  and  it  is 
not  rash  to  assume  that  our  nervous  system  is  still  not  fully  developed, 
the  more  so  that  we  submit  the  cortex,  which  in  childhood  is  still  incom¬ 
plete,  to  injurious  semantic  influences.  Obviously,  such  a  fundamental 
human  function  as  language,  when  used  in  a  way  not  in  correspondence 
with  the  structure  of  the  nervous  system,  must  act  detrimentally  on  its 
development. 

In  congenital  extreme  imbecility,  the  cortex  is  poorly  organized, 
thin,  and  deficient  in  nerve  cells,  and  the  infragranular  layers  show  less 
impairment  than  the  supragranular  layers.  It  seems  that  Bolton’s  second 
supragranular  layer  is  the  last  to  mature,  and  its  relative  development 
corresponds  to  the  relative  development  of  an  animal  or  human  being, 
and,  in  a  way,  it  goes  parallel  with  the  so-called  'intelligence*. 

In  human  defectives,  its  deficiency  corresponds  with  the  degree  of 
psycho-logical  arrest,  regression,  or  deterioration.  Let  us  recall  that 
these  ‘mental’  deficiencies,  which,  in  behaviour  as  well  as  in  nervous 
structure,  take  us  one  step  (or  several)  back  toward  the  level  of  the 
infant,  or  even  to  that  of  the  animal,  are  always  connected  with  infantile 
behaviour  in  adults,  and  semantic  disturbances. 

Nervous  as  well  as  muscular  tissues  have  differentiated  from  the 
general  protoplasm,  and  we  know  positively  that,  through  training,  we 
can  enlarge  or  otherwise  improve  muscular  tissues,  and  there  is  no  reason 
to  doubt  that  something  similar  can  be  done  to  nervous  tissue.  All  educa¬ 
tion,  and  the  establishing  of  any  conditional  or  s.r ,  shows  this,  although 
in  a  rather  vague  way. 

If,  by  a  physiological  training  based  on  order,  we  can  alter  a  nervous 
deficiency,  as  shown  by  behaviour,  we  may  conclude  that  there  are  physio- 

VI.  UN  PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGY 

logical  means  by  which  we  can  effectively  train  and  help  the  development 
of  nervous  cells  and  supragranular  layers— or,  at  least,  not  hinder  their 
natural  development.  On  the  macroscopic  levels,  this  beneficial  training 
consists  in  forming  habits  of  proper  evaluation  through  the  natural  sur¬ 
vival  order.  The  effect  of  this  on  the  sub-microscopic  level  is  neural 
colloidal,  and  structural,  a  result  which,  by  the  older  methods,  could  not 
be  reached,  either  with  ease  or  with  effectiveness. 

Although  these  conclusions  are  necessary,  it  is  impossible  directly  *d 
verify  them  empirically,  because  we  should  have  to  dissect  the  brain  of  a 
given  person  before,  and  during,  the  training.  In  this  case,  as  in  many 
others,  we  have  to  observe  ‘human  nature’  and  semantic  responses  to 
stimuli  of  a  given  individual  before  and  after  the  training;  and,  on  the 
foundation  of  what  we  know  of  the  development  of  the  nervous  system 
in  animals,  infants,  ‘mentally’  defective  and  well-developed  adults,  build 
our  eventual  conclusion  as  preliminary  hypotheses  for  further  structural 
testing,  improvement,  and  empirical  verification. 

To  realize  fully  the  importance  and  necessity  of  this  conclusion,  we 
must  first  understand  that,  in  accordance  with  the  modern  discoveries  of 
mathematics,  physics,  chemistry,  colloidal  chemistry,  and  other  branches 
of  science,  all  function  depends  on  structure ,  because  the  unit-brick  of 
structure  represents  a  dynamic  unit  of  a  quantum  of  action.  In  the 
remarks  which  follow,  it  is  impossible  to  be  as  full  and  precise  as  I 
should  like  to  be,  because  to  be  able  to  do  so  would  be  equivalent  to  being 
able  to  solve  all  scientific  problems ;  yet  the  reader  should  realize  that  the 
considerations  of  structure  will  become  extremely  creative  and  helpful  as 
long  as  we  recognize  a  quantum  of  action,  or  any  other  dynamic  unit. 

We  may  recall  that  the  characteristics  of  molecules  are  due  to  atomic 
structure,  and  that  the  characteristics  of  atoms  are  due  to  electronic 
structure.  The  latest  quantum  theories  also  seem  to  find  that  the  char¬ 
acteristics  of  electrons  are  an  outgrowth  of  structure;  and,  if  the  sug¬ 
gestions  of  Dirac  are  verified,  even  the  difference  between  positive  and 
negative  electricity  is  structural.  Even  at  present  it  appears  that  ‘struc¬ 
ture’  is  not  only  a  term  fit  to  handle  and  explain,  but  that  it  has  an 
objective  counterpart,  allowing  a  similarity  of  structure,  and,  therefore, 
making  the  understanding  of  this  world  possible. 

This  last  very  important  semantic  point  is  based  on  the  fact  that 
relations  of  similar  structure  have  similar  ‘logical’  characteristics,  and 
that,  therefore,  in  structure  we  find  means  by  which  the  events  can 
always  be  made  intelligible  to  us,  and  so  properly  evaluated. 

Experience— my  own,  as  well  as  that  drawn  from  scientific  litera¬ 
ture-impresses  me  with  the  fact  that  we  very  seldom  realize  that  our 

GENERAL  CONSIDERATIONS 

knowledge'  (or,  roughly,  what  we  can  say )  is  not  ‘it’,  as  the  ‘it'  is 
always  un-speakable. 

Between  two  houses  or  two  stones,  there  is  some  sort  of  sub- 
microscopic  interaction ;  but  on  the  macroscopic  level,  nothing  definite 
happens.  So  we  say  that  in  the  given  context  or  configuration,  the  units 
under  consideration  are  too  heavy  (implying  gravitational  structure),  or 
the  medium,  the  plenum  in  which  they  are  immersed,  is  too  light  (again 
structural  implications)  and  so,  macroscopically,  nothing  obvious  happens. 

If  that  structure  is  changed,  different  conditions,  different  relations 
and  results  prevail.  Thus,  if  the  particles  are  very  small,  and  the  media 
not  too  heavy,  the  surface  phenomena,  electrical  charges . ,  begin  to  play 
an  important  role.  We  then  have  colloidal  behaviour  of  enormous  com¬ 
plexity  and  variability  where  we  find,  not  necessarily  life,  but  many 
inorganic  forms,  duplicating  some  forms  found  in  life.  Obviously,  col¬ 
loidal  structure  accounts  for  that.2 

When  little  colloidal  wholes,  most  probably  of  specialized  internal 
structure,  arise,  we  may  have  not  only  colloids,  but  also  little  wholes, 
separated  by  a  membrane,  or  perhaps  by  surface  phenomena,  which  rep¬ 
resent  a  most  generalized  membrane.  We  may  have  a  new  structural 
fact,  an  interplay  of  the  inside  with  the  outside,  and  life  begins. 

The  general  irritability  and  conductivity  of  protoplasm  is  known 
to  be  strictly  connected  with  permeability  to  the  passage  of  ions  and, 
therefore,  is  a  structural  phenomenon.  On  this  structural  foundation, 
physiological  gradients  result,  forming  a  dynamic  field  of  forces,  again 
involving  structure.  The  development  of  the  differentiated  tissue  of 
muscles  and  nerves  consists  of  higher  order  complex  structures,  based 
on  more  primitive  structures ;  and,  finally,  function  and  behaviour  of  all 
life,  man  included,  is  due  to  sub-microscopic,  microscopic,  and  macro¬ 
scopic  structure. 

I  may  be  reproached  by  specialists  that,  although  what  I  have  just 
said  may  possibly  be  true,  yet,  actually,  to  make  these  assertions  is,  per¬ 
haps,  premature,  in  1933,  because  we  lack  too  many  details. 

My  answer  is  sharp  and  definite,  and  may  be  considered  a  serious 
scientific  suggestion,  because  it  can  be  made  legitimately  in  this  form: 

1)  All  science  depends  on  human  ‘knowledge'. 

2)  All  human  ‘knowledge'  is  structurally  circular  and  self -reflexive, 
and  so  depends  on  some  conscious  or  unconscious  theory  of  knowledge 
and  undefined  terms. 

3)  Words  are  not  the  things  we  speak  about ;  and,  therefore, 

4)  The  only  possible  connection  between  the  objective  and  un¬ 
speakable  levels  and  words  is  structural;  introducing 

VI.  ON  PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGY 

5)  Structural  analysis  of  languages  as  fundamental;  making 

6)  The  only  possible  content  of  * knowledge’  structural ,  and 

7)  All  science  becomes  a  search  for  the  unknown  structure  of  the 
empirical  world  on  all  levels,  and  the  matching  of  this  unknown  structure 
with  the  potentially  known  structure  of  languages ;  so  that 

8)  All  knowledge  is  hypothetical,  in  which 

9)  The  most  important  facts  must  be  negative.  When  the  structures 
do  not  match,  then  we  learn  something  quite  definite  about  the  empirical 
structures. 

10)  All  predictability  becomes  possible  because  of  similarity  of 
structure ;  and  so  definitely  making 

11)  All  possible  aims  and  quests  of  science  uniquely  structural* 
necessitating 

12)  Unique  methods  of  translation  of  dynamic  into  static,  and  vice 
versa,  in  order  to  cover  the  structural  exigency  of  both  the  dynamic 
world  and  the  static  languages. 

13)  Such  unique  methods  of  translation  are  given  in  the  differential 
calculus  and  four-dimensional  geometries,  in  which 

14)  What  in  a  four-dimensional  language  is  structure  becomes  in 
three-dimensional  language  ‘importing  time’  function;  showing  once 
more  that 

15)  Structural  considerations  are  not  only  a  modern  necessity,  but 
also  the  most  creative  and  helpful  for  the  future  development  of  science 
and  man,  and  justifying  the  above  assertions,  with  the  setback  that 

16)  Full  1933  structural  analysis,  being  one  of  the,  or  perhaps  the, 
highest  abstraction  of  this  date,  the  mastering  of  that  language  may 
present  some  difficulties. 

The  reader  must  be  reminded  (see,  for  details,  Part  VII)  that  the 
terms  structure’,  ‘function’. ,  are  multiordinal  terms  with  many  meanings, 
and  so  that  they  have  no  general  meaning  apart  from  context,  but  have 
definite  meaning  in  each  context.  Without  this  realization  of  the  multi- 
ordmality  of  terms,  the  statement  above  could  not  be  made,  for  it  is  a 
structural  statement  about  languages. 

As  an  example  of  the  immense  and  inherent  importance  of  consid¬ 
erations  of  four-dimensional  order,  the  following  psychological  experi¬ 
ment  for  which  Doctor  Harry  Helson  has  suggested  lately  the  name  of 
Tau  effect,  is  useful.® 

,  1  stunulate  three  spots  of  the  skin  by  touching  them  lightly  with 

the  end  of  a  pencil  in  quick  succession,  and  if  the  distance  between  the 
first  and  the  second  spots  is,  say,  20  mm.,  and  that  between  the  second 
and  the  third  is  10  mm.*  but  the  ‘time’  interval  between  the  second  and 

GKNKRAL  CONSIDERATIONS 

the  third  stimulations  is  twice  as  long  as  that  between  the  first  and  the 
second,  the  distance  between  the  second  and  the  third  spots  will  be  judged 
as  nearly  twice  as  great  as  that  between  the  first  and  second.  Similar 
results  are  obtained  with  other  analysers,  such  as  vision  and  hearing. 
If  we  change  the  conditions  of  the  experiment,  the  results  may  be 
reversed.  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  the  effect  does  not  depend  on 
'knowing',  as  similar  results  happen  when  the  subject  knows  the  condi¬ 
tions  of  the  experiment.  The  last  shows  that  the  experiment  deals  with 
a  physiological  and  neurological  mechanism.  In  general  terms,  if  we 
vary  the  time-interval  in  the  opposite  sense  from  the  space-interval,  the 
latter  will  be  distorted,  showing  once  more  the  structural  fact  that  in 
actual  life  and  experience  we  deal  exclusively  with  the  four-dimensional 
space-time  order,  which,  as  such,  must  have  physiological  and  neuro¬ 
logical  significance,  and  an  adapting  mechanism. 

CHAPTER  XXI 
ON  CONDITIONAL  REFLEXES 

The  conditioned  reflex  is  conventionally  regarded  as  differing  essentially 
trom  the  unconditioned  reflex,  but  this  is  contradicted  by  evidence  drawn 
from  the  development  of  behavior.  (io7)  G.  E.  coghzll 

The  main  experiments  of  Pavlov  were  made  on  dogs,  animals  with 
a  rather  well-developed  nervous  system ;  and  so  most  of  what  he  has  to 
say  is  about  dogs,  although  some  general  physiological  facts  apply  to  all 
the  higher  nervous  systems,  man  included.  In  some  instances;  because 
of  human  complexities,  some  results  must  be  re-interpreted,  structural 
linguistic  re-adjustments  made,  and  some  obscuring,  wrong-in-structure, 
el  ‘psychological’  terms  analysed  and  rejected.  My  linguistic,  structural, 
non~elt  theoretical  revision  leads  to  a  new  and  important  enlargement  of 
the  application  to  man  of  the  Pavlov  experimental  theory  of  ‘conditioned’ 
reflexes.  The  fact  that  these  independent  discoveries  reinforce  and 
support  each  other  is  a  striking  instance  of  the  usefulness  of  theoretical 
researches. 

We  must  take  care  to  notice  and  beware  of  the  differences  in  lan¬ 
guages.  Any  happening  has  as  many  aspects  as  there  are  sciences,  or 
even  human  interests.  Thus,  if  we  speak  about  an  objective  ‘pencil’,  we 
may  speak  about  its  chemistry,  or  methods  of  manufacturing,  its  uses, 
prices,  markets , .  As  the  content  of  knowledge  is  structural,  we  must 
search  empirically  for  structure,  understood  nowadays  always  on  three 
levels  (the  term  being  multiordinal),  the  macroscopic  gross  structure, 
the  microscopic,  and  sub-microscopic  structures. 

When  we  deal  with  life  phenomena,  we  have  also  different  lan¬ 
guages  dealing  with  their  different  aspects.  Thus,  a  biological  language 
would  cover  eventually  the  vital  events  in  general ;  a  physiological  lan¬ 
guage  would  be  narrower  and  cover  the  analysis  of  phenomena  in  an 
organism,  the  function  of  its  organs  and  the  conditions  and  the  mech¬ 
anism  which  determine  these  functions ;  a  neurological  language  would 
be  physiological  as  applied  only  to  the  nervous  system.  The  day  is  not 
distant  when  all  these  problems  will  be  formulated  in  the  language  of 
the  quantum  mechanics. 

A  psycho-logical  language  is  legitimate  only  on  human  levels,  as 
we  never  know,  or  can  know,  what  an  animal  ‘thinks’,  ‘feels’. ,  and  on 
human  levels  it  applies  to  so-called  ‘psychic’  phenomena  only. 

Usually,  one  extremely  fundamental  semantic  fact  is  disregarded ; 
namely,  that  what  on  the  psycho-logical  level  is  objective  and  in  language 
descriptive  to  one  person  (e.g.,  ‘my  toothache’),  is  inferential  to  the  other 

ON  CONDITIONAL  REFLEXES 

person,  and  vice  versa.  The  lack  of  consciousness  of  abstracting  intro¬ 
duces,  by  structural  necessity,  an  identification  of  orders  of  abstractions ; 
namely,  the  confusion  of  descriptions  with  inferences,  and  vice  versa. 
This  makes  it  imperative  to  avoid  psycho-logical  language  as  much  as 
possible.  It  is  also  bad  epistemology  to  use  a  language  which  applies  to  a 
few  individuals  (psycho-logics)  for  describing  functions  which  are  much 
more  general,  and  which,  fundamentally,  apply  to  all  organisms. 

It  is  a  striking  fact  that,  although  physiology  is  a  fairly  old  and  well- 
developed  discipline,  yet  the  purely  physiological  approach  to  the  study 
of  the  brain-functions  is  very  recent,  and,  in  the  main,  has  been  carried 
on  by  Pavlov  and  his  followers.  Pavlov  gives  us  a  simple  yet  profoundly 
true  explanation;  namely,  that  the  higher  nervous  centres  have  never 
been  treated  on  equal  footing  with  other  organs,  or  other  parts  of  the 
nervous  system.  The  activities  of  the  hemispheres  have  been  treated 
from  a  ‘psychological’  point  of  view,  and,  by  analogy,  we  have  ascribed 
to  animals  similar  ‘psychological’  states,  a  remnant  of  primitive  animism. 
As  such  attitudes  have  become  more  and  more  obviously  absurd,  we  have 
drifted  into  the  opposite  absurdity  of  animalism,  ascribing  animal  charac¬ 
teristics  to  man,  forgetting  that  the  human  nervous  system  is  far  more 
complex,  matures  later  than  in  any  animal,  and  is  a  non-additive  affair. 
Naturally,  reasoning  by  such  analogies  must  be  fallacious. 

The  prevalent  complete  disregard  of  the  fact  that  these  issues  are 
linguistic  and  structural  makes  the  advances  in  these  fields  very  slow  and 
halting,  and  only  so-called  ‘geniuses’  are  capable  of  breaking  through 
these  semantic  barriers.  Once  the  linguistic  character  of  the  issues  is 
fully  realized,  the  psycho-logical,  semantic  blockage  is  removed,  freedom 
of  analysis  is  inwardly  established,  and  even  ‘non-geniuses’  will  produce 
important  creative  work.  Indeed,  we  may  find  that  with  this  realization, 
particularly  if  embodied  in  early  education,  the  ‘normal’  man  would  be, 
what  we  call  at  present,  a  ‘genius’. 

This  conclusion  naturally  follows  if  we  abandon  animalistic  analo¬ 
gies  and  face  the  fact  that  high-grade  human  intelligence  happens  to  be 
not  less  ‘natural’  and  inherent  in  the  history  of  evolution  than  any  other 
‘tropism’.  By  eliminating  the  psycho-logical  semantic  blockage  due  to 
copying  animals  in  our  nervous  reactions,  we  may  handle  this  important 
human  function  of  language  properly.  Man  will  function  as  man,  in 
accordance  with  the  structure  of  his  more  complex  nervous  system. 
There  is  no  doubt  at  present  that  some  organisms  called  ‘man’  have  an 
important  function  connected  with  s.r  called  speech ,  perhaps  the  most 
complex  and  involved  and  also  unique  function  evolved  by  this  class  of 
life,  and  which  it  does  not  yet  know  how  to  use.  Biologically  and  physio- 

VI.  ON  PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGY 

logically,  this  misuse  of  a  function  must  be  a  non-survival  tendency  for 
this  class  of  life. 

Sanity  must  be  based  on  methods  for  the  most  efficient  use  of  the 
human  nervous  system,  in  accordance  with  its  structure,  and  will  thus 
bring  about  the  full  working  of  human  capacities,  which  at  present  are 
still  semantically  blocked  by  faulty  handling  of  the  apparatus. 

Before  going  further,  I  will  analyse  and  suggest  the  complete  elim¬ 
ination  from  the  English  language  of  the  term  ‘conditioned’  reflex,  which 
is  structurally  false  to  facts,  and  suggest  in  its  place  the  uniform  use  of 
the  term  ‘conditional’  reflex,  introduced  by  Pavlov  and  used  occasionally 
by  some  English  writers.  I  will  also  suggest  the  elimination  of  a  psycho¬ 
logical  term,  inhibition’,  from  physiology  and  neurology,  in  which  it 
should  have  no  place  at  all.  Such  a  change  in  language  leads  to  new 
