results,  and  also  suggests  new  experiments.  It  is  little  known  and  seldom 
taken  into  consideration  that  long  ago  Locke  was  quite  clear  on  the  point 
that  the  misuse  of  language  has  often  been  taken  for  deep  mysteries  of 
science;  but  Locke,  unfortunately,  did  not  take  into  consideration  struc¬ 
ture,  and  s.r;  so  his  arguments  were,  in  general,  non-operative. 

As  everything  in  this  actual  world  is  structurally  interrelated  with 
everything  else,  we  should  consciously  look  for  interrelations;  in  which 
case  we  have  to  build  special  languages  for  the  eventual  synthesis.  As 
we  must  first  ascertain  empirical  structure,  and  only  then  coin  the  lan¬ 
guages,  obviously  to  start  with  a  descriptive,  impersonal,  non-‘psycho- 
logical  language  of  ordered  events  on  a  given  level  is  most  important 

In  our  case,  we  are  investigating  the  structural  and  semantic  prob¬ 
lems  in  connection  with  language.  We  have  to  accept  the  structural 
facts  as  discovered  by  physicists,  physiologists,  neurologists,  and  other 
scientists,  and  then  build  a  language  similar  in  structure  to  the  empirical 
world.  The  language  in  which  the  present  theoiy  is  formulated  is  a 
physiological  and  neurological  one,  as  it  deals  with  observed  impersonal 
functionings  of  the  organisms  called  ‘man’.  When  we  reach  results  in  a 
physiological  language,  these  have,  naturally  on  the  human  level,  a  psycho¬ 
logical  aspect,  and  perhaps  the  main  importance,  and  even  value,  of  the 
present  work  is  that  it  reaches  the  very  difficult  psycho-logical,  semantic 
level  by  purely  functional  and  easily  controlled  physiological  methods. 

Thus  the  reader  must  translate  for  himself,  as  nobody  else  can  do  it 
for  him,  the  physiological  results  into  his  psycho-logical  feelings  and 
attitudes  and  evoke  the  un-speakable  s.r.  These  must  be  evoked  by  the 
reader,  otherwise  he  will  inevitably  miss  the  point.  For  instance,  if  it  is 
said  that  ‘the  objective  level  is  un-speakable’,  the  reader  should  try  to 
become  entirely  ‘emotionally’  impassive,  outwardly  and  inwardly  silent 

ON  CONDITIONAL  REFLEXES 

about  an  object,  or  a  feeling,  as  whatever  we  may  say  is  not  it .  This, 
obviously,  involves  a  complete  checking  of  affective  responses,  precon¬ 
ceived  ideas*. ,  making  him  an  ‘impartial  observer*.  In  fact,  to  do  this 
successfully  is  something  very  difficult  to  achieve,  requiring  long  seman¬ 
tic  training  with  the  Structural  Differential,  and  usually  involving  a  com¬ 
plete  reversal  of  our  habitual  modes  of  affective  responses. 

Similarly,  when  we  speak  of  ‘natural  order*  or  reversal  of  this 
order,  let  the  reader  try  actually  to  evoke  these  s.rt  and  he  will  find  it  is 
not  so  easy,  as  it  involves  a  completely  new  process  of  re-evaluation.  In 
both  cases,  we  can  gain  physiological,  easily  operating  means  to  re¬ 
educate  the  very  stubborn  semantic  responses,  by  functional  and  ordinal 
methods.  The  difficulties  are  only  serious  with  grown-ups ;  they  present 
no  difficulties  in  the  early  semantic  training  of  infants,  for  whom  this 
training  becomes  a  powerful  preventive  method  against  future  nervous 
disturbances  (limited,  of  course,  to  this  aspect  of  un-sanity). 

Directly  such  a  semantic  re-education  is  accomplished,  the  formerly 
impossible  is  also  performed,  and  ‘human  nature’  has  been  changed. 
Obviously,  the  trouble  has  not  been  with  ‘human  nature*,  but  with  the 
lack  of  physiological  and  educational  means  to  affect  the  psycho-logical 
level  and  to  change  the  s.r .  The  above  applies  to  the  so-called  ‘normal* 
man,  as  well  as  to  the  ‘mentally*  ill.  It  works  with  both  types,  provided 
the  latter  is  in  a  condition  to  be  at  all  accessible  to  approach. 

The  term  ‘nervous  reflex*  was  originated  by  the  mathematician 
Descartes.  Structurally,  it  was  a  genuinely  scientific  notion.  It  implies 
necessity;  namely,  that  a  stimulus  results  in  a  response.  Obviously,  if 
such  were  not  the  case,  an  animal  would  not  be  in  sufficient  correspon¬ 
dence  with  it's  environment  and  could  not  survive.  Thus  an  animal  must 
be  attracted  and  not  repelled  by  food,  it  must  avoid  fire,  and  so  forth.1 
The  term  ‘reflex*  is  usually  used  in  connection  with  A  two-valued 
implications;  this  makes  reflexology  el  and  generally  inadequate  to 
account  for  organic  non-el  responses  in  the  colloidal  sense.  In  a  -system 
based  on  the  oo-valued  semantics  of  probability,  I  prefer  to  avoid  the 
two-valued  implication  and  use  the  term  reaction  instead. 

The  main  function  of  the  nervous  system  is  the  co-ordination  of  all 
activities  of  the  organism  for  its  preservation.  Thus  there  must  be  no 
conflict  between  the  opposing  activities  of  different  parts  of  the  organ¬ 
ism,  and  any  action  must  ultimately  benefit  the  whole.  There  may  be  a 
conflict  of  different  excitations,  but  one  must  finally  dominate  the  others, 
as  otherwise  co-ordination  would  be  impossible. 

If  food  or  some  noxious  material  is  put  into  the  mouth  of  a  dog,  a 
secretion  of  saliva  is  produced,  either  to  alter  the  food  chemically  and 

VI.  UN  PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGY 

help  digestion,  or  to  wash  the  mouth  out  and  eliminate  it.  But  observa¬ 
tion  shows  further  that  other  factors,  not  food  or  noxious  materials 
alone,  may  produce  similar  secretions.  Thus,  for  instance,  the  sight  or 
smell  of  some  such  material,  or  of  the  person  who  usually  administers  it, 
or  even  the  latter  s  footsteps  may  produce  salivary  secretions. 

To  make  the  experiments  as  exact  as  possible,  the  dogs  observed  by 
Pavlov  were  submitted  to  minor  operations.  Among  others,  the  opening 
of  the  salivary  duct  was  transplanted  to  the  outside  of  the  skin,  so  that 
all  secretions  could  be  carefully  and  exactly  collected  and  measured. 

1  he  principle  which  underlies  these  experiments  is  the  observation 
that  if  we  combine  some  hitherto  neutral  stimulus,  such  as  a  definite 
tone,  colour,  or  shape,  with  the  presenting  of  the  food  or  acid,  after  a 
few  trials  tbs  neutral  stimulus  acquires  the  potentiality  of  producing 
similar  secretory  effects  as  the  food  or  acid  itself. 

.  TI“S  fundamental  and  exact  method  of  experimentation  allows  con¬ 
siderable  freedom  in  the  selection  of  neutral  stimuli,  affecting,  as  we 
prefer  the  visual,  or  auditory,  or  tactile,  or  other  nerve  centres  of  the 
animal  We  can  also  control  their  numbers,  intensity,  their  combina- 
tions,  the  order  and  delays  in  their  application , . 

If  food  or  noxious  materials  are  placed  in  the  mouth,  the  secretion 
of  saliva  is  an  almost  automatic  reaction,  owing  to  the  physico-chemical 
action  of  these  materials.  Such  reaction  is  inborn  and  practically  general 
for  a  given  species,  the  nervous  paths  for  such  reactions  being  mostly 
completed  at  birth.  Not  so  with  the  reactions  produced  by  neutral  stimuli, 
which  acquire  the  secretory  characteristics  only  after  some  experiences. 
These  characteristics  are  reactions  acquired  during  individual  life,  and 
the  nervous  paths  and  connections  have  to  be  completed  during  the 
lifetime  of  the  individual.  6 

Thus,  when  puppies  are  shown  meat  or  bread,  which  they  had 
never  eaten  before,  usually  no  salivary  secretion  appears.  Only  after 
eating  meat  and  bread  on  several  occasions  will  the  sight  of  them  produce 
secretions. 

Some  of  the  effects  of  these  acquired  reactions  are  very  strong  and 
lasting  In  some  experiments,  the  dogs  were  given  a  hypodermic  injec¬ 
tion  of  morphine.  The  usual  effect  of  the  drug  is  to  produce  nausea 
with  profuse  secretion  of  saliva,  followed  by  vomiting  and  deep  sleep 
In  further  experimenting,  it  was  found  that  the  preliminaries,  or  even 
seeing  the  experimenter,  without  injection,  was  often  enough  to  produce 
the  effects  of  the  actual  injection  of  the  drug. 

Pavlov  studied  the  nervous  mechanism  of  the  functioning  of  the 
sa  lvary  glands,  not  because  of  any  special  physiological  importance  of 

ON  CONDITIONAL  REFLEXES 

these  glands,  but  because  such  experimenting  was  the  simplest,  and  the 
method  used  allowed  him  to  conduct  the  most  varied  experiments  under 
accurate  control. 

The  experiments  disclosed  an  amazingly  subtle  and  complex  nervous 
mechanism,  probably  typical  for  the  functioning  of  other  glands  of  inter¬ 
nal  secretions.  These  findings,  when  translated  into  a  language  applicable 
to  the  human  level,  disclose  a  great  deal  about  the  nervous  mechanism 
underlying  so-called  ‘associations'  and  other  ‘mental',  relational,  or 
psycho-logical  semantic  manifestations.  Usually,  the  salivary  glands  are 
not  supposed  to  be  as  closely  connected  with  psycho-logical  manifesta¬ 
tions  as  the  thyroid,  the  adrenals,  and  other  glands  are  known  to  be. 
It  is,  therefore,  a  new  and  very  important  general  discovery  of  Pavlov 
that  the  salivary  glands  have  such  intricate  and  far-reaching  nervous 
interconnections. 

The  example  of  the  dog  reacting  to  the  ‘associations'  (relations)  of 
the  experiment  with  morphine  in  a  similar  way  as  to  the  actual  injection 
of  the  drug,  is  a  close  parallel  to  the  example  already  given,  of  the 
patient  who  reproduced  symptoms  of  hay  fever  at  the  sight  of  paper 
roses .  In  this  case,  the  ‘associations'  were  also  uncritical,  compulsory, 
almost  automatic,  of  the  type  found  in  the  animals.  In  fact,  this  state¬ 
ment  is  very  nearly  general,  and  we  shall  find  later  that  most  of  ‘mental' 
ills  follow  neurologically  the  patterns  of  animal  responses,  and  so 
become  pathological  for  man.  This  observation  has  very  far-reaching 
consequences,  to  be  explained  later;  but  we  want  to  emphasize  it  from 
the  beginning,  and  to  stress  the  fact  that  copying  animals  in  our  nervous 
reactions  must  be  detrimental  to  humans. 

The  above  narrows  our  problem  considerably :  we  have  to  discover 
only  the  main  differences  between  the  nervous  responses  of  animals  and 
humans,  and  draw  our  conclusions. 

The  alimentary  reactions  to  food  and  the  mild  defense-reaction  to 
noxious  materials  may  be  roughly  divided  into  two  components,  the 
secretory  and  the  motor.  It  was  found  possible  to  link  another  neutral 
stimulus  to  an  already  acquired  reaction.  Thus,  if  a  dog  was  trained  to 
respond  to  a  bell,  which  was  a  signal  for  food,  he  could  be  trained, 
further,  to  link  a  formerly  neutral  stimulus;  let  us  say,  the  sound  of  a 
buzzer,  with  the  bell,  and  the  bell  with  food.  Such  a  secondary  acquired 
reaction  may  be  called  of  the  second  order .  Naturally,  it  is  very  instruc¬ 
tive  to  find  out  if  these  responses  could  be  extended  to  more  orders. 
Experiments  disclosed  the  important  fact  that,  as  far  as  dogs  and  alimen¬ 
tary  reactions  are  concerned,  it  was  impossible  to  go  beyond  the  second 
order.  However,  when  defense  reactions  were  tested,  it  was  found  that 

VI.  ON  PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGY 

it  was  possible  to  establish  acquired  reactions  of  the  third  order .  But  it 
was  impossible  to  go  beyond  the  third  order,  even  in  these  cases. 

In  our  field,  where  we  have  to  formulate  sharp  differences  between 
the  nervous  responses  of  ‘man*  and  ‘animal*,  we  say  that  animals  stop 
abstracting  or  linking  of  signals  on  some  level,  while  humans  do  not. 
The  latter  abstract  in  indefinitely  higher  orders — at  least  potentially. 

Here  we  encounter  a  fundamental  and  sharp  far-reaching  difference 
between  the  nervous  functioning  of  ‘animal*  and  ‘man*.  This  abstracting 
in  indefinitely  higher  orders  no  doubt  conditions  the  mechanism  of  what 
we  call  human  ‘mentality*.  If  we  stop  this  abstracting  anywhere,  and 
rest  content  with  it,  we  copy  animals  in  our  nervous  processes,  involving 
animalistic  s.r .  As  will  be  shown  later,  this  is  the  actual  case  with  prac¬ 
tically  all  of  us,  owing  to  our  A  education  and  theories.  This  ‘copying 
animals’  in  our  nervous  responses  is,  perhaps,  a  natural  tendency  at  an 
extremely  low  level  of  development ;  but  as  soon  as  we  understand  the 
physiological  mechanism,  we  can  correct  our  education,  with  correspond¬ 
ing  human  semantic  results.  Naturally,  such  ‘copying  animals*  by  humans 
must  be  a  process  of  arrested  development  or  regression.  It  must  be 
pathological  for  man,  no  matter  how  severe  or  how  mild  the  affliction 
may  be.  Various  absolutists,  and  the  ‘mentally*  ill  in  general,  show  this 
semantic  mechanism  clearly. 

The  reactions  can  be  divided  into  two  groups,  those  which  are 
inborn ,  almost  automatic,  almost  unconditional,  rather  few  and  simple, 
belonging  to  the  so-called  ‘species’ ;  and  those  which  are  acquired  during 
individual  life,  allow  a  great  variety  of  complications,  are  conditional  in 
different  degrees,  and  are  acquired  by  the  individual.  Pavlov  suggests 
different  terminologies ;  for  instance,  he  calls  the  one  ‘inborn*,  the  other 
‘acquired* ;  or  as  usually  incorrectly  translated  into  English  as  ‘uncondi¬ 
tioned’  and  ‘conditioned*  respectively.  The  two  last  terms  have  received 
a  scientific  general  acceptance,  yet  I  would  suggest  that  in  the  English 
incorrect  translation  they  are  structurally  unsatisfactory,  and  that  par¬ 
ticularly,  when  applied  to  humans,  they  carry  harmful  implications. 
Structurally,  ‘inborn’  and  ‘acquired*  are  entirely  satisfactory.  Terms  like 
‘conditional*  and  ‘unconditional’  (in  the  original  language  of  Pavlov), 
although  less  satisfactory,  are  more  appropriate,  as  they  do  not  imply 
some  sort  of  ‘cause-lessness*.  In  fact,  the  ‘unconditioned*  salivary  re¬ 
actions  are  conditioned  and  produced  by  the  physico-chemical  effect  of 
the  food,  and  so  to  call  them  ‘unconditioned*  is  structurally  erroneous. 
The  terms  ‘conditional*  and  ‘unconditional*  do  not  have  similar  implica¬ 
tions,  and  carry  others,  as,  for  instance,  the  possibility  of  very  important 

ON  CONDITIONAL  REFLEXES 

degrees  of  conditionality,  establishing  the  oo-valued  character  of  the 
reactions ;  conditional  meaning  non-absolute,  and  non-one-valued. 

For  these  structural  reasons,  I  shall  use  the  terms  ‘inborn’  and 
‘acquired’  or  else  ‘unconditional’  and  ‘conditional’  reactions. 

Under  natural  conditions,  an  animal,  to  survive,  must  respond  not 
only  to  normal  stimuli,  which  bring  immediate  harm  or  benefit,  but  also 
to  different  physical  and  chemical  stimuli,  in  themselves  neutral,  such  as 
waves  of  sound  or  light . ,  which  are  signals  for  animals  and  symbols  for 
man.  The  number  of  inborn  reactions  is  comparatively  small,  and,  alone, 
they  are  not  sufficient  for  the  survival  of  higher  animals  in  their  more 
complex  environment.  Experiments  have  made  this  point  quite  obvious. 
A  completely  decorticated  animal  may  retain  his  inborn  reactions  and 
become  a  kind  of  automatic  mechanism;  but  all  his  subtler  means  of 
adjustment,  owing  to  acquired  reactions,  disappear,  and  if  unaided  he  can 
not  survive.  Thus,  a  decorticated  dog  will  only  eat  when  food  is  intro¬ 
duced  into  his  mouth,  and  would  otherwise  die  of  starvation  though  food 
be  placed  all  around  him. 

Experimental  evidence  seems  to  show  that  all  higher  activities  of 
the  nervous  system,  the  whole  signalizing  apparatus,  which  underlies  the 
formation  and  maintenance  of  the  acquired  conditional  reactions,  depend 
on  the  integrity  of  the  cortex.  Stimuli  which  produce  conditional  re¬ 
actions  are  acting  as  signals  of  benefit  or  danger.  These  signals  are 
sometimes  nominally  ‘simple’,  sometimes  very  complex,  and  the  structure 
of  the  nervous  system  is  such  that  it  can  abstract,  analyse,  and  synthetize 
the  factors  of  importance  for  the  organism,  and  integrate  them  into 
excitatory  complexes.  The  analysing  and  synthetizing  functions,  as  usual, 
overlap,  and  cannot  be  sharply  divided,  both  functions  being  only  aspects 
of  the  manifestation  of  the  activity  of  the  nervous  system  as-a-whole. 
In  general,  one  of  the  most  important  functions  of  the  cerebral  cortex  is 
that  of  reacting  to  innumerable  stimuli  of  variable  significance,  which  act 
as  signals  in  animals  and  symbols  in  humans,  and  give  means  of  very 
subtle  adjustment  of  the  organism  to  the  environment.  In  psycho-logical 
terms,  we  speak  of  ‘associations’,  ‘selection’,  ‘intelligence’. ;  in  mathemat¬ 
ical  terms,  of  relations,  structure,  order.;  in  psychophysiological  terms, 
of  semantic  reactions. 

The  language  of  reactions  is  of  special  interest  because  its  structure 
is  similar  to  the  structure  of  protoplasm  in  general  and  the  nervous  sys¬ 
tem  in  particular.  This  language  can  be  expanded  and  supplemented  by 
the  following  further  structural  observations : 

1)  That  reactions  in  animals  and  humans  exhibit  different  degrees 
of  conditionality ; 

VI.  ON  I'SYCIIOIMIYSIOLOOY 

2)  That  the  signals  and  symbols  may  have  different  orders ,  indicat¬ 
ing  superimposition  of  stimuli ; 

3)  That  animals  cannot  extend  their  responses  to  signals  of  higher 
order  indefinitely ; 

4)  That  humans  can  extend  their  semantic  responses  to  higher 
order  symbols  indefinitely,  and,  in  fact,  have  done  so  through  language 
which  is  always  connected  with  some  response,  be  it  only  repression  or 
some  other  neurotic  or  psychotic  manifestations. 

The  above  extension  is  structurally  fundamental,  because  we  can 
extend  the  vocabulary  of  conditional  reactions  to  humans  in  all  their 
functions.  Without  it,  we  find  ourselves  saddled  with  a  vocabulary  which 
does  not  correspond  in  structure  to  the  well-known  elementary  facts 
concerning  human  responses  to  stimuli,  and  we  relapse  into  the  old 
‘behaviourism’,  which  is  structurally  insufficient. 

The  present  system  is  based  on  such  observations  and  extensions. 
It  was  reached  independently  from  structural  and  physico-mathematical 
considerations.  With  this  structural  verbal  extension,  we  can  easily  be 
convinced  that  everything  that  we  call  ‘education’,  ‘habits’,  ‘learning’. ,  on 
all  levels  is  building  up  acquired  or  conditional  and  s.r  of  different  orders , 
as  one  of  the  differences  between  ‘man’  and  ‘animal’  consists  in  the  fact 
that  humans  can  extend  their  symbolism  and  responses  to  indefinitely 
high  orders,  while  with  animals  this  power  of  abstracting  and  response 
stops  somewhere.  We  establish  here  a  sharp  distinction  between  the  high 
abstractions  ‘man’  and  ‘animal’,  and  so  build  up  a  psychophysiological 
and  structurally  satisfactory  language. 

It  is  obvious  that  the  fundamental  means  which  man  possesses  of 
extending  his  orders  of  abstractions  indefinitely  is  conditioned,  and  con¬ 
sists  in  general  in  symbolism  and,  in  particular,  in  speech.  Words, 
considered  as  symbols  for  humans,  provide  us  with  endlessly  flexible 
conditional  semantic  stimuli,  which  are  just  as  ‘real’  and  effective  for 
man  as  any  other  powerful  stimulus. 

Take,  for  instance,  the  example  of  the  World  War!  Would  the 
men  in  the  trenches  have  endured  at  all  the  horrors  they  had  to  live 
through  if  it  had  not  been  for  words,  and,  neurologically  speaking, 
because  of  the  conditional  s.r  connected  with  words? 

‘If  any  question  why  we  died. 

Tell  them,  because  our  fathers  lied.’ 
said  the  poet  truly,  and  experience  shows  it  is  not  limited  to  the  trenches.2 

In  interpreting  the  experiments  on  animals  as  applied  to  humans,  it 
should  be  remembered  that  some  of  the  experiments  of  Pavlov,  as  they 
stand ,  would  be,  at  the  least,  neurotic  for  man.  The  reason  for  this  is 

ON  CONDITIONAL  REFLEXES 

that  the  higher  abstractions  of  man,  which  are  due  to  the  more  developed 
complexities  of  his  nervous  system,  would  often  make  such  simple  ex¬ 
periments  impossible.  Once  a  conditional  reaction  is  established  with  an 
animal,  no  amount  of  any  sort  of  'intellectual'  persuasion,  or  the  like, 
would  disturb  his  glandular  secretions,  as  the  animal’s  range  of  ‘mean¬ 
ings’  is  very  limited*  These  secretions  can  be  diminished  or  even  abol¬ 
ished  by  other  means,  but  not  by  ‘intellectual’  means  alone.  In  the 
‘normal’  man,  his  ‘knowing’  that  the  sound  of  the  metronome  or  bell  is 
part  of  an  experiment  and  not  a  signal  for  actual  food,  would,  or  should, 
alter  his  nervous  reactions  and  glandular  secretions  and  make  the  experi¬ 
ments  much  more  complex.  The  conditional  reactions  of  the  animals 
have  still  the  element  of  unconditionality .  In  man,  they  may  become  fully 
conditional  and  depend  on  a  much  larger  number  of  semantic  factors 
called  ‘mental’,  ‘psychic’. ,  than  we  find  in  any  animal. 

On  the  human  level,  outside  of  the  experiments  with  the  salivary 
glands,  we  have  in  the  psychogalvanic  reaction  a  most  subtle  semantic 
means  of  experimenting  with  the  effect  of  words  as  connected  with  some 
secretions,  probably  at  least  the  sweat  glands.  Humans  react  to  different 
events  or  words  by  minute  electrical  currents  (among  others)  which  can 
be  registered  by  a  very  sensitive  galvanometer  and  the  curves  photo¬ 
graphed.  It  is  interesting  to  notice  that  so-called  ‘self -consciousness’  dis¬ 
turbs  the  success  of  the  experiments,  or  makes  them  impossible,  at  least 
with  some  individuals .  It  should  be  remembered  that  general  statements 
are  invalidated  if  there  are  any  exceptions. 

In  experiments,  we  are  usually  interested  in  their  success.  When 
analysing  the  oo-valued  degrees  of  conditionality ,  we  are  equally  inter¬ 
ested  in  their  failures,  which  suggest  a  far-reaching  revision  of  the  inter¬ 
pretation  of  our  experimental  data  in  this  field.  Although  some  writers 
say  that  the  reactions  registered  are  ‘beyond  control’  (unconditional), 
this  statement,  in  general,  is  not  correct,  and  should  be  amended  to  *  often 
beyond  control’  (conditional  of  different  degrees).  It  is  impossible  to 
go  into  details  here,  as  the  problems  are  extremely  complex.  In  addition 
to  this,  the  testing  of  degrees  of  conditionality  presents  an  extremely 
wide  new  semantic  held  for  experimentation  which  has  not  yet  been 
attempted.  It  should  be  noted,  however,  in  passing,  that  in  these  experi¬ 
ments  different  types  of  ‘mentally’  ill,  as  well  as  the  ‘healthy’  persons, 
exhibit  different  types  of  curves.8 

When  psycho-logical  events  or  s.r  are  interpreted,  the  difficulties 
become  particularly  acute.  Thus,  we  seldom  discriminate  between  the 
average  and  the  ‘normal’  person.  In  the  animal  world ,  under  natural 
conditions — by  which  is  meant  entirely  without  human  interference — 

VI.  ON  PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGY 

the  survival  conditions  are  two-valued  and  very  sharp.  The  animals 
survive  or  they  die  out.  Because  of  this,  it  could  be  said,  with  regard  to 
the  animal  world,  with  some  sort  of  plausibility,  that  the  average,  with 
a  long  list  of  specifications,  could  be  considered  the  ‘normal’  animal.  We 
usually  enlarge  this  notion  to  humans  and  land  in  fallacies,  particularly 
in  so-called  ‘psychological*  problems,  which  admittedly  are  very  difficult. 

In  general  medical  science,  such  mistakes  are  made  more  seldom. 
No  physician,  studying  a  colony  of  lepers  or  syphilitics,  could  conclude 
that  a  ‘normal*  man  should  be  a  leper  or  a  syphilitic.  He  would  say  that 
probably,  in  a  given  colony,  the  average  person  is  afflicted  with  such 
and  such  a  disease,  and  he  would  keep  as  his  medical  standard  for  desir¬ 
able  health,  a  ‘normal*  man ;  that  is  to  say,  one  free  from  this  disease. 

It  is  true  that  in  the  example  given  above,  outside  of  such  rare 
colonies,  we  have  a  majority  which,  in  respect  to  the  given  disease,  are 
healthy ;  so  we  are  empirically  forewarned  against  fallacies,  although 
existing  theories  of  knowledge  do  not  forewarn  us.  But  the  main  point 
remains  true;  namely,  that  in  human  life  the  average  1933  does  not  mean 
‘normal*,  and  the  standard  for  ‘normal*  will  have  to  be  established  exclu¬ 
sively  by  scientific  research.  In  our  present  work,  we  show  that  the 
average  person  copies  animals  in  his  psycho-logical  and  nervous  pro¬ 
cesses,  exhibits  the  unconditionality  of  nervous  responses,  confuses  orders 
of  abstractions,  reverses  the  natural  order . ,  semantic  symptoms  of  similar 
structure  as  found  in  obviously  ‘mentally*  ill.  Therefore,  the  average 
person  1933  must  be  considered  pathological .  If  we  take  the  animalistic 
average  for  ‘normal*,  and  apply  it  to  man,  we  commit  a  similar  fallacy 
as  that  of  treating  a  colony  of  lepers  as  a  ‘normal*  or  ‘healthy*  group. 

In  conditional  s.r  of  man,  the  average  person  cultivates,  through 
inheritance  and  training  in  A  doctrines,  languages  of  inappropriate  struc¬ 
ture.,  animalistic,  nervous,  and  so  psycho-logical,  s.r.  But  here,  as  in 
general  medicine,  the  average  pathological  situation  should  not  be  con¬ 
sidered  ‘normal*.  Only  a  structural  study  can  disclose  what  with  man 
should  be  considered  ‘normal*.  The  present  system  performs  this  task 
to  a  limited  degree  and  in  various  ways,  among  others,  by  the  revision 
and  the  widening  of  the  reaction  vocabulary  to  a  larger  structural  con¬ 
ditionality,  as  found  in  the,  as  yet,  exceptional  ‘normal*  man,  and  intro¬ 
duces  the  important  notion  of  non-elementalistic  semantic  reactions. 

Because  of  this  ‘average  for  normal*  fallacy,  the  theories  of  ‘con¬ 
ditional  reflexes’  in  man  should  be  thoroughly  revised  and  enlarged  to 
include  non-elementalistic  semantic  reactions ;  and  then  we  should  find 
that  often  what  is  ‘normal*  with  animals  is  quite  pathological  for  man. 
The  semantic  difficulties  are  serious,  because  the  accepted  two-valued 

ON  CONDITIONAL  REFLEXES 

structure  of  language  and  semantic  habits  reflect  the  primitive  myth¬ 
ologies  ;  so  there  is  always  the  danger  of  drifting  either  into  animalism, 
or  into  some  other  sort  of  equally  primitive  mysticism. 

The  net  psycho-logical  result  of  such  a  revision  appears  to  be  that, 
on  structural  grounds,  what  on  human  level  appears  as  desirable,  and,  at 
present,  exceptional — as,  for  instance,  the  complete  conditionality  of 
conditional  and  s.r ,  based  on  the  consciousness  of  abstracting — ought  to 
be  considered  the  rule  for  a  ‘normal*  man.  Then  the  older  animalistic 
generalizations  will  become  invalid  and  reactions  transformed.  But  for 
this  purpose,  and  to  be  able  to  apply  these  considerations  in  practice,  we 
shall  have  to  analyse  ‘consciousness  of  abstracting*  and,  therefore,  ‘con¬ 
sciousness*  which  must  be  defined  in  simpler  terms,  discussed  in  Part  VII. 

When  we  deal  with  ‘mentally*  ill  persons,  the  reactions  which  would 
be  conditional  with  ‘normal*  persons  become,  in  a  sense,  unconditional, 
compulsory,  and  semi-automatic  in  effect,  inwardly  as  well  as  outwardly. 
As  with  animals,  no  amount  of  ‘intellectual*  persuasion  has  any  effect  on 
them,  and  the  reactions,  secretions.,  follow  automatically.  From  the 
physiological  point  of  view,  ‘mental*  ills  in  humans  compare  well  with 
conditional  reactions  in  animals.  It  seems  that  under  such  circumstances 
a  physiological  language  of  different  orders  of  abstractions,  different 
orders  of  conditional  and  s.r  would  be  structurally  satisfactory.  In  such 
a  language,  we  should  pass  from  the  inborn  reactions,  which  exhibit  the 
maximum  of  persistence,  unconditionality,  and  almost  automatic  char¬ 
acter,  to  the  acquired  or  conditional  reactions  tn  animals ,  which  would 
be  called  lower  order  conditional  reactions ,  still,  to  some  extent,  auto¬ 
matic  in  their  working,  and,  finally,  to  the  much  more  flexible,  variable, 
oo-valued  and  potentially  fully  conditional  reactions  in  man ,  which  we 
will  call  conditional  reactions  of  higher  orders  which  include  the  seman¬ 
tic  reactions. 

In  such  a  vocabulary,  the  main  term  ‘reaction*  would  be  retained 
as  a  structural  implication ;  yet  the  degrees  of  conditionality  would  be 
established  by  the  terms  of  ‘lower  order*  or  ‘higher  order*  conditional 
reactions.  Such  a  language  would  have  the  enormous  advantage  of  being 
physiological  and  oo-valued.  Structurally,  it  would  be  in  accordance 
with  what  we  know  from  psychiatry ;  namely,  that  the  ‘mentally*  ill  ex¬ 
hibit  arrested  development  or  regressive  tendencies. 

We  would  say  that  ‘mental*  illness  exhibits  not  only  arrested  devel¬ 
opment  or  regression,  but  we  could  state  definitely  that  the  fully  con¬ 
ditional  (oo-valued)  reactions  of  higher  order  have  not  developed  enough, 
or  have  degenerated  (regression)  into  less  conditional  (few-valued) 
reactions  of  lower  orders  as  found  in  animals.  All  the  ‘phobias*, 

VI.  ON  PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGY 

‘panics',  ‘compulsory  actions',  identifications  or  confusions  of  orders  of 
abstractions . ,  show  a  similar  semantic  mechanism  of  mis-evaluation. 
Although  they  naturally  belong  to  the  so-called  ‘conditional  reactions', 
yet,  being  impervious  to  reason,  they  have  the  one-valued  character  of 
unconditionality,  as  in  animals. 

Similarly  with  the  difference  between  signals  and  symbols.  The 
signal  with  the  animal  is  less  conditional,  more  one-valued,  ‘absolute', 
and  involves  the  animal  in  the  responses  which  we  have  named  condi¬ 
tional  reactions  of  lower  order.  Symbols  with  the  normally  developed 
man  (see  discussion  of  ‘normal'  above)  are,  or  should  be,  oo-valued, 
indefinitely  conditional,  not  automatic ;  the  meanings,  and,  therefore,  the 
situation  as-a- whole,  or  the  context  in  a  given  case,  become  paramount, 
and  the  reactions  should  be  fully  conditional — that  is  to  say,  reactions 
of  higher  order.  In  human  regression  or  undevelopment,  human  symbols 
have  degenerated  to  the  value  of  signals  effective  with  animals,  the  main 
difference  being  in  the  degree  of  conditionality.  Absolutism  as  a  seman¬ 
tic  tendency  in  humans  involves,  of  necessity,  one-  or  few-valued  atti¬ 
tudes,  the  lack  of  conditionality,  and  thus  represents  a  pre-human 
tendency. 

To  what  extent  the  language  of  the  degrees  of  conditionality  is  help¬ 
ful  in  understanding  the  development  of  human  ‘intelligence',  and  why 
a  fully  developed  human  ‘mind'  should  be  related  with  fully  conditional 
reactions  of  higher  order,  can  be  well  illustrated  by  an  example  taken 
quite  low  in  the  scale  of  life. 

