This  example  is  selected  only  because  it  is  simple,  and  illustrates 
an  important  principle  very  clearly.  We  know  that  fishes  have  a  well- 
developed  nervous  system,  do  not  possess  a  differentiated  cerebral  cor¬ 
tex;  but  experiments  show  that  they  can  learn  by  experience.  If  we 
take  a  pike  (or  a  perch)  and  put  it  in  a  tank  in  which  some  minnows, 
its  natural  food,  are  separated  from  it  by  a  glass  partition,  the  pike 
will  dash  repeatedly  against  the  glass  partition  to  capture  the  minnows. 
After  a  number  of  such  dashes  it  abandons  the  attempt.  If  we  then 
remove  the  partition,  the  pike  and  the  minnows  will  freely  swim  together 
and  the  pike  will  not  attempt  to  capture  the  minnows.4 

The  dash  for  capturing  the  minnows  was  a  positive  and  uncondi¬ 
tional,  inborn  feeding  reaction,  unsuited  for  the  environmental  con¬ 
ditions  as  they  happened  to  be  at  that  moment.  The  (perhaps)  painful 
striking  of  the  glass  was  a  negative  stimulus,  which  abolished  the  posi¬ 
tive  reaction — speaking  descriptively — and  established  a  negative  condi¬ 
tional  reaction,  the  result  of  individual  experience,  which,  as  we  observe 
by  the  actions  of  the  fish,  is  not  flexible,  not  adjustable,  and  quite  rigid, 

UN  CONDITIONAL  REFLEXES 

one-valued,  and  semi-unconditional,  or  of  low  degree  of  conditionality, 
because,  when  the  glass  partition  is  removed,  the  pike  swims  freely 
among  the  minnows  without  adjusting  itself  to  the  new  conditions  and 
capturing  the  minnows. 

A  cat  separated  from  a  mouse  by  a  glass  partition  also  stops  dash¬ 
ing  against  the  glass,  but  this  negative  reaction  is  more  conditional.  In 
‘psychological’  terms,  the  cat  is  ‘more  intelligent’,  evaluates  relations  bet¬ 
ter  than  the  fish,  and  when  the  glass  partition  is  removed,  the  cat  cap¬ 
tures  the  mouse  almost  immediately. 

In  this  connection,  an  interesting  experiment  could  be  made,  though 
I  am  not  aware  that  it  has  been  performed;  namely,  to  separate  the 
above  fishes  with  a  wire  screen,  which  would  be  visible  to  the  fishes,  and 
repeat  the  experiments  to  test  if  the  removal  of  a  visible  obstacle  would 
alter  the  outcome  of  the  experiment  or  the  ‘time’  of  the  reactions.  If  the 
‘time’  for  capturing  the  minnows  were  reduced,  this  would  mean  that  the 
conditionality  of  the  reaction  was  increased,  and  so  the  seeing  of  the 
obstacle,  or  the  increased  power  of  abstraction,  would  play  some  role  in 
it.  Even  humans  are  deceived  by  Houdinis.  Are  we  so  ‘superior’  to  the 
‘poor  fish’  ? 

These  problems  of  degrees  of  conditionality  can  also  be  studied  in 
the  life  of  insects,  and  the  works  of  Professor  Wm.  M.  Wheeler,  for 
instance,  furnish  most  instructive  material,  which  we  have  not  space 
to  analyse  here.5 

In  the  process  of  human  evolution  from  the  lowest  savage  to  the 
highest  civilized  man,  it  is  natural  that  we  should  pass  through  a  period 
in  which  the  primitive  doctrines  and  languages  must  be  revised.  The 
newest  achievements  in  science  indicate  that  the  twentieth  century  may 
be  such  a  period.  Even  in  mathematics  and  physics,  to  say  nothing  of 
other  disciplines,  it  is  only  the  other  day  that  the  old  elementalism  and 
two-valued  semantics  were  abandoned.  Obviously,  consciousness  of  ab¬ 
stracting  produces  complete  conditionality  in  our  conditional  higher 
order  reactions,  and  so  must  be  the  foundation  on  which  a  science  of 
man,  or  a  theory  of  sanity  and  human  progress,  must  be  built. 

The  suggested  extension  of  the  reaction  vocabulary  would  allow  us, 
at  least,  to  apply  a  uniform  physiological  language  to  life,  man  included . 
We  should  have  a  general  language  for  life  and  all  activities,  ‘mind’ 
included,  of  a  structure  similar  to  the  known  protoplasmic  and  nervous 
structure,  not  excepting  the  highest  activities.  ‘Mental’  ills  would  be 
considered  as  arrested  development  or  regression  to  one-,  or  few-valued 
semantic  levels ;  sanity  would  be  in  the  other  direction ;  namely,  progres¬ 
sion  conditioned  by  larger  and  larger  flexibility  of  conditional  and  seman- 

Vi.  ON  PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGY 

tic  reactions  of  higher  order,  which,  through  oo-valued  semantics,  would 
help  adjustment  under  the  most  complex  social  and  economic  conditions 
for  man.  The  maximum  of  conditionality  would  be  reached,  let  us  re¬ 
peat,  through  the  consciousness  of  abstracting,  which  is  fundamental 
for  sanity,  and  is  the  main  object  of  the  present  work,  explained  in 
Part  VII. 

It  seems  that  the  aggregate  of  inborn,  almost  unconditional  and 
acquired  or  conditional  reactions  of  different  orders  and  types  constitute 
the  foundation  of  the  nervous  activities  of  humans  and  animals.  The 
mechanism  is  not  an  additive  one.  A  little  bit  of  cortex  ‘added’  involves 
most  far-reaching  differences  of  behaviour  in  life;  in  fact,  the  number 
of  possibilities  probably  follow  the  combinations  of  higher  order. 

Higher  order  combinations  are  constructed  from  groups  which  them¬ 
selves  are  groups.  Thus,  out  of  twenty-six  letters  of  the  English  alpha¬ 
bet,  there  are  probably  trillions  of  pronounceable  combinations  of  letters. 
Sentences  are  groups  of  words  which  are  groups  of  letters,  and  their 
number,  therefore,  exceeds  enormously  the  original  trillions.  Books  are 
combinations  of  sentences,  and,  finally,  libraries  are  combinations  of 
books.  Thus,  a  library  is  a  combination  of  fifth  order,  and  the  number 
of  possible  different  libraries  is  inconceivably  large.  As  a  rule,  we  pay 
little  attention  to  combinations  of  higher  order,  disregarding  the  fact 
that  even  materials  and  the  possible  variety  of  them  have  some  such 
structure. 

To  give  an  intuitive  feel  how  combinations  of  higher  order  increase, 
let  me  quote  Jevons  on  the  simplest  case,  starting  with  2.  ‘At  the  first 
step  w6  have  2;  at  the  next  22,  or  4;  at  the  third,  222,  or  16,  numbers  of 
very  moderate  amount.  Let  the  reader  calculate  the  next  term,  2222,  and 
he  will  be  surprised  to  find  it  leap  up  to  65,536.  But  at  the  next  step 
he  has  to  calculate  the  value  of  65,536  two? s  multiplied  together,  and  it 
is  so  great  that  we  could  not  possibly  compute  it,  the  mere  expression  of 
the  result  requiring  19,729  places  of  figures.  But  go  one  step  more  and 
we  pass  the  bounds  of  all  reason.  The  sixth  order  of  the  powers  of  two 
becomes  so  great,  that  we  could  not  even  express  the  number  of  figures 
required  in  writing  it  down,  without  using  about  19,729  figures  for  the 
purpose/® 

In  actual  life,  the  number  of  possibilities  of  higher  order  combina¬ 
tions  are  limited  by  structural  and  environmental  conditions;  never¬ 
theless,  the  numbers  of  possibilities  which  follow  such  a  rule  increase 
surprisingly  fast. 

CHAPTER  XXII 

ON  'INHIBITION' 

.  .  .  "destructive  lesions  never  cause  positive  effects,  but  induce  a  nega¬ 
tive  condition  which  permits  positive  symptoms  to  appear,"  has  become 
one  of  the  hall-marks  of  English  neurology.  (212)  H.  head 

Excitation  rather  than  inhibition  is  important  in  correlation  because 
from  what  has  been  said  it  appears  that  so  far  as  known  inhibition  is  not 
transmitted  as  such.  The  existence  of  inhibitory  nervous  correlation  is  of 
course  a  familiar  fact,  but  in  such  cases  the  inhibitory  effect  is  apparently 
produced,  not  by  transmission  of  an  inhibitory  change,  but  by  transmission 
of  an  excitation  and  the  mechanism  of  the  final  inhibitory  effect  is  still 
obscure.  (92)  Charles  m.  child 

But  since  inhibition  is  not  a  static  condition  but  a  mode  of  action,  the 
mechanism  of  the  total  pattern  must  be  regarded  as  participating  in  every 
local  reflex.  (107)  G-  E*  coghill 

It  is  highly  probable  that  excitation  and  inhibition,  the  two  functions  of 
the  nerve  cell  which  are  so  intimately  interwoven  and  which  so  constantly 
supersede  each  other,  may,  fundamentally,  represent  only  different  phases 
of  one  and  the  same  physico-chemical  process.  (394)  i.  p.  pavlov 

The  term  ‘unconditional  reflex’  applies  only  under  ‘normal’  or 
‘natural’  conditions,  as  we  know  that  different  drugs,  such  as  ether, 
which  alter  the  conductivity  of  nervous  tissue . ,  can  also  alter  its  irri¬ 
tability.  Similarly,  with  conditional  reactions,  the  introduction  of  degrees 
of  conditionality  becomes  an  important  oo-valued  structural  refinement 
of  language,  depending  on,  and  introducing  explicitly  or  by  implication, 
the  number  of  factors,  the  degrees  of  freedom.,  which  are  observed 
empirically,  and  so  should  have  a  linguistic  and  semantic  parallel. 

If  we  disregard,  for  instance,  the  possibility  of  the  use  of  a  drug . , 
then  the  ‘unconditional’  reactions  are  largely  unconditional.  The  ‘condi¬ 
tional  reflexes’  in  animals  are  a  much  subtler  form  of  adjustment  to  many 
more  factors,  and  if  we  call  them  ‘conditional  of  lower  orders’  we  cover 
structurally  their  limited  conditionality,  which  with  higher  animals  is 
considerable.  For  example,  a  fly  in  the  laboratory  might  disturb  the 
reactions,  but  merely  ‘intellectual’  interference  would  be  ineffective. 
And,  finally,  the  ‘conditional  reactions  of  higher  orders’  in  man  involve 
still  more  factors,  introduce  more  and  new  complexities,  and  necessitate 
that  the  human  reactions  should  be  fully  conditional,  requiring  oo-valued 
semantics.  At  present,  this  is  an  exceptional  occurrence,  although  the 
potentiality  for  such  full  conditionality  is  present  in  the  majority  of  us. 

The  mechanism  of  the  unconditional  reaction  is,  Under  ordinary 
circumstances,  almost  automatic.  It  is  evolved  on  the  background  of 

VI.  ON  I  \S  YC1  IQ  PH  Y  S IOLOG  Y 

general  protoplasmic  characteristics,  combined  with  structural  polarity, 
symmetry . ,  and  is  not  efficient  enough  for  the  survival  of  higher 
organisms. 

Under  more  complex  conditions,  the  adjustment  for  survival  must 
be  more  flexible :  a  similar  direct  stimulation  must,  under  different  con¬ 
ditions,  result  in  different  reactions,  or  different  stimuli,  under  other 
conditions,  produce  similar  reactions,  resulting,  ultimately,  not  only  in 
direct  responses  to  stimuli,  but  also  in  the  equally  important  holding  in 
abeyance  of  the  reaction,  or  even  the  abolishing  of  it.  Let  us  assume 
that  the  direct  response  of  a  cat  to  a  mouse  would  be  clawing  and  chew¬ 
ing.  If  that  given  cat  would  just  claw  and  chew  when  the  mouse  was 
some  distance  away,  I  am  afraid  such  a  cat  would  soon  starve,  for  such 
an  immediate  response  would  not  be  a  survival  response,  and  this  char¬ 
acteristic  could  not  become  hereditary.  The  cats  which  have  survived 
and  perpetuated  their  characteristics  are,  as  a  rule,  different.  When  they 
see,  hear,  or  smell  the  mouse  at  a  distance,  they  flatten  out,  keep  still, 
crouch . ,  and  get  ready,  until  they  are  in  such  a  position  that  a  jump  will 
procure  the  victim,  and  not  merely  frighten  it  away. 

We  see  that,  under  more  complex  conditions,  the  nervous  mechan¬ 
ism  must  produce  not  only  direct  responses  to  the  stimuli  but  also  equally 
important  delays  and  temporal  or  permanent  abolishments  of  these  direct 
responses  to  stimuli. 

Hitherto,  we  have  analysed  the  simplest  reactions  of  a  positive 
character  in  which  a  stimulus  produces  a  direct  arid  obvious  response; 
e.g.,  the  showing  of  the  food  or  the  ringing  of  the  bell  results  in  an 
excitation  in  the  nervous  system  and  the  secretion  from  the  salivary 
glands.  We  are,  however,  acquainted  with  another  type  of  fundamental 
nervous  activity  of  equal  importance.  For  instance,  in  experimenting 
with  the  positive  reactions,  we  must  be  careful  not  to  introduce  any  extra 
stimuli,  as  any  new  stimulus  immediately  excites  an  investigatory  reac¬ 
tion,  and  the  alimentary  conditional  reaction  becomes  temporarily  abol¬ 
ished.  From  our  personal  experience,  we  know  a  large  number  of  stimuli 
which  have  some  such  hindering  effect  on  our  respiration,  circulation, 
locomotion . ,  which  we  describe  as  'paralysed  with  fear’,  'speechless  with 
rage’,  'struck  dumb’,  'stupefied  with  pain’, .  The  diminution,  or  deviation, 
or  the  lack  of  some  function  or  response  on  the  nervous  level  is  usually 
called  ‘inhibition*. 

The  term  ‘inhibition*  is  structurally  a  profoundly  unsatisfactory 
and  a  misleading  psycho-logical  term,  and  should  be  completely  aban¬ 
doned  in  physiology  and  neurology,  although  it  could  be  retained  in 
psycho-logics  and  psychiatry.  This  term  is  in  general  use,  and  the  sug- 

ON  ‘INHIBITION’ 

gestion  of  abandoning  a  term  in  general  use  is  always  hard  to  accept. 
Therefore,  it  will  be  well  to  analyse  it  in  some  detail.  In  this  case,  it 
does  not  matter  if  the  positive  suggestion  of  a  new  term  or  terms  is 
structurally  acceptable ;  the  analysis  of  the  term  ‘inhibition’  shows  clearly 
that  it  has  false  to  fact  implications,  and  so  should  be  rejected  in  neu¬ 
rology  in  any  case. 

This  term  is  a  favorite  word  in  ecclesiastical  and  legal  literature, 
and  means,  in  the  main,  to  forbid,  to  prohibit,  to  hinder,  to  restrain.  It 
is  a  psycho-logical  term;  it  implies  anthropomorphic  ‘free  will*  and 
‘authority’  notions  perfectly  unfit  for  neurological  use.  It  is  not  an 
exaggeration  to  say  that  the  structural  implications  of  this  term  underlie 
the  older  animalistic  prohibitive  and  punitive  education,  legal  and  eccle¬ 
siastical  tendencies,  which,  in  1933,  are  known  to  be  not  only  in  a  larger 
sense  inoperative,  but  positively  harmful.  On  the  human  level,  this  word 
is,  perhaps,  responsible  for  the  fact  that  so  much  about  our  educational 
and  social  methods  is  uncertain  and  often  harmful.  Education  is  a 
process  of  building  conditional  and  s.r  of  different  orders.  If  the  neuro¬ 
logical  terms  dealing  with  conditional  reactions  are  structurally  unsatis¬ 
factory,  our  speculations  which  are  carried  on  in  these  terms  must 
involve  these  false  implications.  When  the  empirical  results  are  unsatis¬ 
factory,  as  they  must  be,  because  of  wrong  structure  of  the  arguments, 
and  a  scrutiny  of  our  argumentation  shows  them  to  be  correctly  fol¬ 
lowing  the  structural  implications  of  the  language  used,  then  we  usually 
blame  ‘human  nature’,  which  is  a  very  unintelligent  excuse,  indeed. 

The  implications  of  the  term  ‘inhibition’  become  a  guidance  for  our 
conduct ;  we  repress  and,  in  consequence,  breed  un-sanity  and  maladjust¬ 
ment.  On  animal  level,  ‘repression’  is  workable,  but,  on  human  levels, 
we  need  a  subtler  regulative  mechanism,  in  accordance  with  the  structure 
of  the  human  nervous  system,  and  this  is  found  in  the  fuller  condition¬ 
ality  of  reactions,  based  upon  consciousness  of  abstracting,  and  involving, 
of  course,  affective  components,  semantic  factors  of  evaluation  which 
regulate  human  impulses  without  the  animalistic  repression.  In  humans, 
the  ‘inhibited’,  repressed  impulses  often  remain  as  internal  excitatory 
factors ;  they  are  not  eliminated  by  some  ‘supernatural’  hocus-pocus,  but 
remain  active,  sometimes  very  active,  semantic  sources  of  internal  excita¬ 
tion,  resulting  in  conflicts  which  generally  have  pathological  results. 

We  are  usually  told  that  ‘inhibition’  plays  an  important  role  in  con¬ 
ditional  reactions.  With  the  introduction  of  the  degrees  of  conditionality, 
the  importance  of  the  possibility  of  altering,  delaying,  or  abolishing  some 
immediate  response  becomes  much  more  accentuated.  Indeed,  it  appears 
that  this  possibility  of  influencing  responses  is  an  important  factor  in  the 

VI.  ON  PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGY 

mechanism  of  conditionality  of  lower  orders,  but  becomes  the  main 
factor  in  establishing  the  degrees  of  conditionality  of  higher  orders. 
Obviously,  the  reactions  become  very  labile,  the  adjustment  to  conditions 
very  subtle,  allowing  the  organism  to  survive  under  the  most  complex 
conditions,  such  as  are  found  in  highly  ‘civilized*  life. 

This  mechanism  is  responsible  not  only  for  human  intelligence,  but 
also  for  all  that  is  constructive  in  so-called  ‘civilization*.  Vice  versa,  for 
survival  in  such  complex  civilization,  one  must  possess  these  fully  con* 
ditional  reactions.  At  this  point,  it  will  suffice  to  mention  that  in  organ¬ 
isms  below  humans,  ‘inhibition*,  which  underlies  the  mechanism  of 
conditionality  of  reactions,  plays  a  most  important  biological  and  sur¬ 
vival  role,  while  on  the  human  level  it  is  the  foundation  on  which  all 
human  s.r ,  ‘intelligence*,  and  desirable  human  characteristics  are  built. 
The  present  theory  introduces  methods  to  make  the  application  of  the 
above  considerations  possible  in  daily  life. 

All  possible  analysis  depends  not  only  on  definitions  of  terms  but 
also  on  undefined  terms ,  which,  outside  of  mathematics,  have  seldom, 
if  ever,  been  investigated,  thus  making  the  structural  assumptions  which 
they  introduce  unconscious.  In  definitions,  we  also  usually  posit  struc¬ 
ture,  though  we  seldom  realize  this  fact.  When  we  approach  the  experi¬ 
mental  side  of  science,  which  is  the  search  for  empirical  structure,  the 
implications  involved  consciously  or  unconsciously  in  the  defined  and 
undefined  terms  play  a  very  important  role,  and  they  direct,  to  a  large 
extent,  our  efforts  and  ingenuity.  This  is  why  we  still  have  so  few 
genuinely  creative  scientists,  although  since  the  psychologically  and 
semantically  liberating  work  of  Einstein,  the  number  of  creative  physi¬ 
cists  of  the  younger  generation  has  increased  surprisingly.  Yet  the 
majority  of  scientists  do  not  realize  to  what  extent  their  s.r  are  influ¬ 
enced  by  the  terms  they  use  and  what  enormous  help  and  creative 
freedom  they  would  have  from  being  conscious  of  the  role  the  structure 
of  language  plays. 

With  this  realization,  before  we  begin  the  constructive  analysis  of 
such  an  important  term  as  ‘inhibition*,  we  must  state  clearly  what  the 
general  biological  presuppositions  which  underlie  such  an  analysis  are. 

The  present  work  is  a  ^-system,  structurally  very  different  from 
the  older  systems,  which  attempts  to  build  a  verbal  system  of  similar 
structure  to  the  empirical  structures,  as  given  by  science  1933.  The 
older  systems  had  also  a  structure  similar  to  the  very  limited  knowledge 
of  empirical  structure  which  our  primitive  ancestors  had.  Hence; 
animism,  anthropomorphism,  ‘psychologism*,  and  the  rest,  and  the  per- 

ON  ‘INHIBITION’ 

sistence  of  such  structural  features  in  science  as  ‘inhibition’  in  neurology, 
‘force’  and  ‘heat’  in  physics . . 

According  to  scientific  standards  of  1933,  there  is,  as  far  as  I  know, 
only  one  biological  system  in  existence  which  can  be  called  modem,  and 
this  is  the  A  biology  of  Professor  C.  M.  Child  (see  Chapter  VIII).  It 
is,  therefore,  necessary  to  accept  this  system,  and  also  the  A  neurology 
of  Professor  Herrick,  which  is  based  on  this  biology. 

Generally,  the  neurologists  tell  us  that  the  structural  aspects  of 
‘inhibition’  are  unknown.  To  a  large  extent,  this  is  true,  although  it  is 
quite  obvious  that  a  * psychological*  term  cannot  shed  any  light  on  its 
physiological  structure.  To  get  glimpses  of  this  mechanism,  we  must 
start  our  analysis  quite  low  in  the  scale  of  life  and  see  what  the  most 
general  characteristics  of  protoplasm  are. 

All  protoplasm  is  irritable.  In  any  undifferentiated  bit  of  proto¬ 
plasm  an  excitation  must  (1933)  spread  in  a  diminishing  gradient, 
establishing,  by  necessity,  a  region  of  highest  excitation  in  contact  with 
the  stimulus,  resulting  in  a  polar  orientation,  with  an  eventual  future 
head-end,  and  establishing  a  physiological  gradient,  long  preceding  the 
appearance  of  any  differentiated  tissue.  The  nervous  system  is  a  later 
outgrowth  of  such  an  oriented  dynamic  field,  and  its  primary  morpho¬ 
logical  and  physiological  characteristics  are,  to  that  extent,  predeter¬ 
mined,  being,  in  the  meantime,  a  joint  phenomenon  of  the  inherent 
characteristics  of  protoplasm,  its  irritability,  conductivity,  and  what  not, 
and  of  its  reaction  to  the  environment.  The  physiological  gradient  is, 
then,  the  simplest  and  the  most  general  primary  reaction  arc  in  a  given 
individual,  and  constitutes  the  physiological  basis  for  the  structural  and 
functional  development  of  all  other  arcs.1 

Amoebas  are  primitive  little  aquatic  animals  of  approximately 
spherical  symmetry  which  have  no  differentiated  organs  at  all ;  yet  they 
show  quite  complex  reactions  and  various  adaptive  activities  to  be  found 
in  higher  animals.  The  amoebas  can  pursue  their  victim,  show  prefer¬ 
ence  for  stimuli,  and  move  away  from  the  prick  of  a  pin,  select  their 
food , .  This  fact  shows  that  protoplasm,  so  little  differentiated,  and,  from 
the  organic  point  of  view,  undifferentiated,  exhibits  both  muscular  as 
well  as  neural  characteristics.  This  fact  is  fundamental.  It  shows  that 
in  colloids  which  happen  to  be  sensitive  and  which  possess  a  special  type 
of  conductivity,  which,  from  a  physico-chemical  point  of  view,  is  only  a 
special  aspect  of  one  mechanism,  there  is  already  present  the  potentiality 
for  any  further  development.  Professor  Child’s  physiological  gradients, 
the  structural  precursors  of  the  nervous  system,  are  a  necessity,  because 
of  the  dynamic  potentialities  of  the  plenum  and  the  necessary  relation 

VI.  ON  PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGY 

to  the  environment,  as  there  is  no  such  thing  as  anything  without  envir¬ 
onment.  The  stimulus,  in  the  meantime,  establishes  structurally  a  func¬ 
tional  polarity  as  a  fundamental  characteristic  of  all,  even  most  primitive, 
protoplasm,  and  as  the  result  of  the  contact  of  sensitive  and  conducting 
colloidal  structures  with  the  environment.2 

In  sponges,  which  have  primitive  muscular  tissue  but  no  nervous 
system,  the  muscular  tissue  exhibits  also  both  characteristics,  combining 
receptive  and  motor  functions,  showing  that  from  the  start  the  supposed 
muscles  are,  in  reality,  neuro-motor  organs.3  The  actinians  have  no 
central  nervous  system.  By  the  aid  of  an  incision,  we  may  produce  in 
them  special  additional  growths  of  tentacles  sometimes  with  a  mouth, 
sometimes  without.  If,  in  the  last  case,  we  place  a  piece  of  food  in  the 
tentacles,  they  will  bend  toward  where  the  mouth  should  be.  If  we  cut 
such  a  tentacle  away  from  the  body,  we  still  find  that  in  contact  with 
food  it  will  bend  in  the  one  direction.  But  here  we  are  dealing  not  only 
with  the  sub-microscopic  dynamic  structure  but  with  macroscopic  struc¬ 
ture,  where  the  irritability  and  the  structure  of  the  peripheral  organs 
determine  the  reaction.4 

When  we  experiment  with  animals  with  a  more  developed  nervous 
system,  such  as  ascidians  or  worms,  we  come  to  new  and  very  instructive 
facts.  Loeb  has  removed  the  ganglion  from  a  number  of  dona  intes - 
tinalis ,  a  large  transparent  ascidian,  which  normally,  when  touched  at 
the  oral  or  aboral  opening,  closes  the  openings,  and  the  whole  animal 
contracts  into  a  small  ball.  It  appears  that  a  few  hours  after  the  operation 
mentioned  they  relax.  If  a  drop  of  water  falls  on  such  an  animal,  the 
characteristic  reaction  appears  again,  showing  that  the  reaction  was  not 
due  to  the  ganglion  but  is  determined  by  the  structure  and  arrangement 
of  the  peripheral  parts  and  the  muscles.  The  nerves  and  the  ganglion 
play  only  the  main  role  as  a  quicker  conductor  for  the  stimulus. 

Even  in  higher  animals  we  find  vestiges  of  such  primitive  general¬ 
ized  mechanisms.  For  instance,  Loeb,  in  his  experiments  in  removing  the 
brain  from  sharks,  found  that,  even  after  death  and  when  signs  of  decom¬ 
position  had  already  begun,  light  produced  a  contraction  of  the  pupils.5 

In  a  decapitated  worm,  practically  all  normal  reactions  are  retained. 
If  we  cut  the  nervous  system  of  a  worm  in  two,  the  two  parts  of  the 
worm  move  in  a  co-ordinated  way  as  long  as  they  are  connected  by  a 
little  bit  of  tissue.  The  experiments  were  carried  further :  a  worm  was 
cut  in  two  completely,  the  two  halves  were  connected  by  a  string,  and 
they  still  moved  In  a  co-ordinated  way,  showing  once  more  that  originally 
the  nervous  system  was  a  specialization  of  general  protoplasmic  charac¬ 
teristics  of  irritability  and  conductivity  and  structure,  which,  at  present. 

ON  ‘INHIBITION* 

are  known  to  be  strictly  interconnected.8  Multiordinal  structure  is  the 
explanation  of  this  behaviour.  Similar  examples  could  be  given  in  great 
numbers,  all  of  which  would  support  the  above  well-established  view. 

Among  the  general  protoplasmic  characteristics  we  do  not  find 
‘inhibition’,  but  only  positive  excitation  and  conductivity.  This  issue  is 
fundamental  and  should  be  taken  as  a  foundation  for  further  analysis. 

If  a  wandering  amoeba  comes  to  an  illuminated  spot,  the  animal 
will  not  remain  in  that  region.  Here  is,  seemingly,  a  new  fact,  and  we 
must  select  the  language  we  want  to  use  in  this  connection.  If  we  follow 
the  old  animism  and  anthropomorphism,  we  could  say  the  animal 
‘knows’. ,  or  that  some  ‘demon*  has  forewarned  it,  or,  with  equal  justi¬ 
fication,  say  that  it  is  an  example  of  ‘internal  inhibition’  or  ‘prohibition*. 
The  introduction  of  such  terms,  of  course,  explains  nothing  physiologi¬ 
cally,  but  simply  multiplies  metaphysical  identifications  on  the  uncon¬ 
scious  yet  false  to  fact  assumption  that  a  word  ‘is*  the  thing  we  are 
talking  about — a  vestige  of  the  primitive  ‘magic  of  words*. 

Loeb  pointed  out  long  ago  that  to  be  forced  to  introduce  animism 
and  anthropomorphism  is  enough  to  neglect  the  analysis  of  an  external 
stimulus.  This  is  true  not  only  in  biology,  physiology,  neurology. ,  but 
also  in  physics.  The  difference  between  the  N  and  $  systems  depends 
on  the  fact  that  Newton  did  not  take  into  consideration  the  character  of 
the  stimulus,  the  finite  velocity  of  the  ray  of  light,  which  is  fundamental 
in  any  observation,  but  that  Einstein  did  take  this  into  consideration. 
The  oo -valued  determinism  (the  restricted  principle  of  uncertainty)  in 
the  newer  quantum  mechanics  depends  on  taking  into  account  the  dis¬ 
turbing  effects  an  ‘observation*  has  on  the  ‘observed*, . 

What  are  the  known  facts  in  the  meantime  ?  Let  us  start  with  the 
character  of  the  stimulus,  light.  We  know,  positively,  that  light  can  be 
considered  a  very  potent  stimulus,  and  so  the  behaviour  of  the  amoeba 
was  a  direct  response  to  this  stimulus.  In  fact,  we  know  a  little  about 
this  mechanism  without  introducing  any  ‘demons*  or  ‘internal  inhibition*. 

The  starfish  of  a  certain  species  has  a  symmetrical  structure  consist¬ 
ing  of  five  arms.  Its  nervous  system  consists  of  a  central  ring  around 
the  mouth  and  peripheral  nerves  radiating  from  the  ring  into  the  arms. 
If  such  an  animal  is  laid  upon  its  back,  it  will  right  itself,  but  it  is  essen¬ 
tial  that  not  all  arms  should  move  simultaneously.  In  a  normal  animal, 
having  five  arms,  usually  three  arms  do  the  work  and  two  of  them 
remain  quiet.  If  we  destroy  the  nervous  connection  between  the  arms, 
this  co-ordination  is  destroyed ;  all  five  arms  begin  to  struggle,  and  the 
starfish  cannot  right  itself,  unless  by  accident.  Should  we  again  invoke 
‘demons*  or  ‘inhibitions’,  or  analyse  the  stimulus-complex  and  its  effect  ? 

VI.  ON  PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGY 

Obviously,  when  the  starfish  is  put  on  its  back,  a  new  stimulus-complex 
is  operating  upon  it,  resulting  in  a  complex  adjustment.7 

As  we  already  know,  any  stimulus  applied  to  a  bit  of  living  proto¬ 
plasm,  because  of  the  colloidal  structure  and  of  the  inherent  irritability 
and  conductivity  of  the  plenum,  produces  a  physiological  gradient, 
establishing,  thus,  some  sort  of  polarity,  symmetry,  relations,  order,  and 
structure,  and  indicating  what  structure  our  language  should  have. 
Again,  no  trace  of  any  ‘inhibition*  or  ‘prohibition*  is  found,  and  on  the 
silent,  un-speakable,  objective  level  everything  happens  the  usual  way, 
without  any  regard  to,  or  respect  for,  our  talking .  Talking  only  becomes 
a  very  genuine  danger  when  on  language  of  primitive  structure  we  build 
our  creeds,  institutions,  rules  of  conduct . ,  and  our  methods  of  investiga¬ 
tion.  In  the  last  case,  our  sciences  are  nearly  as  slow,  halting,  perplexing, 
difficult,  non-co-ordinated,  and,  in  a  larger  sense,  ineffective,  as  our 
creeds  and  institutions  have  proven  to  be.  Our  sciences  may  have  added 
to  our  comfort,  but,  outside  of  psychiatry,  they  have  not  contributed 
much  to  human  happiness. 

As  structure  seems  so  fundamental  and  can  be  discovered  every¬ 
where,  we  should  not  be  surprised  to  find  that  in  structure,  or  perhaps, 
still  better,  in  the  general  structuro-sensitive-conductive  dynamic  com¬ 
plex  with  definite  structure  on  different  levels,  we  shall  find  the  solution 
for  obvious  positive  reactions  of  organisms,  as  well  as  for  the  lack  of 
them. 

It  is  not  possible  or  necessary  to  go  into  further  details  here.  The 
structural  data,  however,  although  they  are  not  particularly  emphasized, 
are  given  in  handbooks  of  physics,  colloidal  chemistry,  chemistry,  bio¬ 
physics,  biochemistry,  biology,  physiology,  neurology , .  At  present,  it  is 
realized  in  science  that  structure  is  of  extreme  importance ;  but,  because 
of  identification,  it  is  not  realized  that  structure  is  the  only  possible 
content  of  science  and  of  all  human  ‘knowledge*.  This  fact,  of  course, 
makes  the  quest  of  science  uniquely  structural.  Because  of  it,  we  come 
to  a  very  far-reaching  general  rule,  that  all  ‘understanding*,  to  be  such, 
must  exhibit  or  assume  structure,  thus  formulating  the  supreme  aim, 
and,  perhaps,  uniquely  indicating  the  only  possible  method,  of  science. 

Two  more  simple  examples  may  be  helpful.  Mnemiopsis  or 
Eucharis  have  swimming  plates  which  beat  rhythmically,  with  consid¬ 
erable  regularity.  When  the  plates  are  stimulated  mechanically,  the 
movement  ceases  in  the  presence  of  sufficient  calcium  salts  in  the  water. 
In  similar  media,  but  containing  no  calcium,  a  mechanical  stimulus  does 
not  stop  the  movement  of  the  plates,  but  just  the  opposite.  It  accelerates 
their  motion,  showing  clearly  that  the  effect  of  direct  stimulation  can 

ON  ‘INHIBITION’ 
