
be  reversed  when  the  structural  relations  are  altered.  Once  more,  no 
‘demons’  and  no  ‘inhibition’.8 

In  higher  animals,  we  usually  find  a  well-developed  symmetry  and 
muscles  of  which  the  activities  oppose  the  results  of  the  activity  of 
other  muscles.  Such  muscles  are  called  antagonists.  If  two  antagonists 
of  equal  strength  are  stimulated  equally,  no  macroscopic  effect  of  the 
stimulation  of  both  muscles  results.  If  one  of  the  antagonists  is  stronger 
than  the  other,  the  macroscopic  effect  of  the  stimulation  of  both  muscles 
results  not  in  some  general  convulsion,  but  in  a  one-sided  action  of  the 
stronger  muscle.  Obviously,  these  results  are  the  necessary  consequence 
of  structure  on  different  levels.  We  had,  in  the  first  case,  a  lack  of 
obvious  macroscopic  reaction,  although  stimulation  was  present  and  did 
its  work.  This  was  due  to  structure. 

It  is  known  that  some  drugs,  such  as  strychnine  or  the  toxin  pro¬ 
duced  by  the  tetanus  bacillus,  produce  a  state  of  general  and  high  irri¬ 
tability  of  the  nervous  system.  The  slightest  stimulus  to  the  surface 
will  produce  a  spasm  which  affects  practically  every  muscle  of  the  body. 
The  pinching  of  the  foot,  instead  of  producing  a  withdrawal,  results  in 
the  rigid  extension  of  the  legs,  arms,  and  back.  The  extension  is  no 
longer  a  co-ordinated  process,  but  is  associated  with  strong  contraction 
of  the  flexors,  the  final  state  of  the  limbs  being  determined  by  the  sur¬ 
passing  strength  of  the  stimulated  extensors.  The  effect  of  the  tetanus 
toxin  is  similar.  In  a  monkey,  under  normal  conditions,  the  electrical 
stimulus  of  a  certain  spot  of  the  cortex  will  produce  the  opening  of  the 
mouth;  similar  stimulation  of  another  spot  will  produce  the  closing  of 
the  jaws.  But,  under  the  effect  of  the  toxin,  the  stimulation  of  any  of 
these  spots  will  produce  the  closure  of  the  jaws,  because  any  attempt  to 
open  the  mouth  will  excite  the  stronger  masseter  muscles  and  effectively 
close  the  mouth.9 

The  above  examples  show  again  that  no  ‘demon’  or  ‘inhibition’  has 
prohibited  the  withdrawal  of  the  foot  or  opening  of  the  mouth,  but  that 
the  excitation  of  stronger  antagonists  is  responsible  for  the  result — or, 
if  we  wish,  for  the  lack  of  results.  All  of  which  is  obviously  structural. 

All  the  above  discussions  and  examples — and  they  could  be  ex¬ 
panded  and  extended  to  fill  volumes — show  clearly:  (1)  That  in  the 
structurally  more  complex  organisms  the  process  of  co-ordination  and 
adjustment  to  more  and  more  complex  environmental  conditions,  leading 
to  wider  activities  and  fuller  conditionality  of  reactions,  is  partially  based 
— to  the  extent  of  one-half,  or  even  more — on  the  lack  of  direct  response 
to  a  stimulus,  leading  to  delayed  action  and  involving  the  four-dimen¬ 
sional  order,  all  of  this  being  a  function  of  the  entirely  general  charac- 

VI.  ON  PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGY 

teristics  of  protoplasm  ;  namely,  its  structure,  excitability,  and  conductivity 
(the  last  two  characteristics  being  also  a  result  of  sub-microscopic  struc¬ 
ture)  without  the  intervention  of  ‘demons*  or  of  ‘inhibition’ ;  (2)  that 
in  every  case  there  is  an  excitation ,  no  matter  whether  the  result  is  a 
positive  or  a  negative  reaction,  or  whether  we  can,  at  present,  trace  it 
in  detail. 

As  Professor  Herrick  says :  ‘On  this  view  of  the  situation  the  sup¬ 
posed  inhibitory  effect  of  the  cerebral  cortex  resolves  itself  into  a  differ¬ 
ential  dynamogenic  cortical  influence.  This  is  partly  specific  and  phasic, 
acting  upon  particular  subcortical  functional  systems  while  these  are  in 
process  and  tending  to  depress  all  conflicting  activities  either  by  with¬ 
drawing  available  nervous  energy  from  their  apparatus  of  control  or  by 
equal  activation  of  agonist  and  antagonist  systems  with  resulting  stasis. 
It  is  partly  a  general  and  tonic  activation  or  reinforcement  of  all  lower 
reflex  systems.  Upon  removal  of  the  visual  cortex  the  specific  phasic 
activation  of  learned  reactions  is  abolished.  Upon  removal  of  the  entire 
cortex  the  general  tonic  cortical  effect  is  abolished.  The  operation  has 
not  stimulated  inhibitory  fibers,  as  some  have  supposed ;  it  has  removed 
the  sources  of  tonic  activation  which  normally  are  always  operating.* 10 

‘The  cerebral  cortex  from  its  inception  exerts  more  or  less  inhibi¬ 
tory  influence  upon  subcortical  functions.  In  the  simpler  learning 
processes  of  rats  there  seems  to  be  a  differential  activation  of  some  key 
factor  of  a  subcortical  learning  process  .  .  .  which  in  effect  draws  off  all 
available  cortical  energy,  leaving  other  and  irrelevant  sensori-motor 
processes  relatively  enfeebled  so  that  they  are  subordinated.  The  effect 
is  the  same  as  if  a  specific  inhibitory  action  were  exerted  by  the  cortex 
upon  the  inappropriate  movements  ...  It  may  be  suggested,  further,  that 
all  inhibition  is  in  reality  a  differential  activation,  the  mechanism  being  in 
some  cases  simply  the  “drainage**  phenomenon  .  .  .  and  in  other  cases  this 
effect  supplemented  by  positive  activation  of  two  antagonistic  motor 
mechanisms  so  that  their  interference  blocks  all  reactions  of  non-adaptive 
sorts.*11 

In  these  statements  of  Professor  Herrick,  we  find  a  language  of 
similar  structure  to  the  known  facts.  The  terms  of  differential  dynamo¬ 
genic  cortical  influence  and  differential  activation  cover  all  known  facts, 
and  may  cover  future  facts,  because  the  terms  are  structurally  very 
flexible,  and  will  always  allow  us  to  enlarge  our  knowledge  of  the 
mechanism  of  the  so  fundamental  differential  activation . 

The  difficulty  in  eliminating  the  term  ‘inhibition*  and  suggesting  a 
new  physiological  term  to  take  its  place  is  considerable,  because  this  term 
is  used  in  many  different  forms  and  meanings.  The  term  ‘inhibit’  is 

ON  ‘INHIBITION’ 

used  in  its  various  forms  as  a  substantive,  an  adjective,  a  verb,  an 
adverb,  sometimes  as  a  psycho-logical  term,  sometimes  as  a  physiological 
one,  yet  never  carrying  physiological  implications,  but  always  psycho¬ 
logical  and  anthropomorphic  ones  connected  with  its  origin  and  standard 
use.  It  was  introduced  into  science  when  physiology  and  neurology  were 
in  their  infancy,  and  so  were  still  under  the  influence  of  primitive  ani¬ 
mism  and  anthropomorphism. 

The  term,  because  of  its  character,  is  not  scientifically  descriptive. 
It  does  not  suggest  functional,  actional,  directional,  or  other  structural 
implications,  but  suggests  notions  irrelevant  to  science  connected  with  its 
origin  and  standard  use,  making  it  a  far-fetched  inferential  term,  the 
use  of  which  must  retard  the  advances  of  these  sciences. 

Once  we  introduce  a  physiological  term  with  physiological  and, 
therefore,  structural  implications,  our  expressions  will  have  to  be  re¬ 
shaped  to  make  the  use  of  the  term  possible.  Such  re-wording  will 
always  carry  quite  definite  structural  implications,  which,  in  turn,  sug¬ 
gest  further  experiments  in  the  search  for  stfucture  and  so  have  a 
creative  character,  not  to  be  disregarded.  Thus,  as  we  have  already  seen, 
the  term  of  ‘degrees  of  conditionality’  suggested  further  experiments 
and  the  revision  of  older  data. 

This  statement  is  quite  general  and  may  be  summed  up  as  follows : 
The  introduction  of  a  new  structural  term  may:  (1)  eliminate  the 
improper  implications  of  the  older  terms;  (2)  introduce  new  and  cre¬ 
ative  implications  which  suggest  the  need  of  verification  and  so  lead  to 
new  experiments. 

At  this  point,  I  suggest  a  term  which  may  be  useful  and  will,  per¬ 
haps,  be  acceptable  for  scientific  use.  As  the  fundamental  character  of 
‘inhibition’  seems  to  be  ‘differential  activation’,  the  term  to  be  coined 
should  possess  two  main  structural  implications :  ( 1 )  it  should  be  direc¬ 
tional,  or  indicate  the  sense  of  the  reaction,  and  (2)  it  should  imply 
activation. 

We  find  such  a  term  in  ‘negative  excitation’,  ‘negative  stimulation’, 
‘negative  activation’,  ‘negative  phase’. ,  and  it  is  possible  to  extend  the  use 
of  this  term  by  making  as  many  compound  terms  as  we  need. 

If  possible,  we  should  have  terms  which  help  us  to  keep  on  one 
level  of  analysis,  and  so  automatically  prevent  us  from  confusing  levels, 
since  modern  science  always  deals,  at  least  in  principle,  with  not  less 
than  three  levels,  the  macroscopic,  the  microscopic,  and  the  sub-micro¬ 
scopic,  thus  making  confusion  quite  easy.  If  we  call  the  positive  effect 
of  a  stimulation  on  the  macroscopic  level  ‘positive’,  any  other  stimulation 
which  might  fail  to  produce  the  positive  effect  on  this  level,  or  which 

VI.  ON  PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGY 

might  counteract  it,  would  be  negative.  The  implication  would  remain 
that  there  was  some  excitation,  but  that  it  did  not  produce  the  effect 
which  we  had  called  positive.  Structurally,  such  a  term  would  be  satis¬ 
factory,  especially  as  it  would  help  us  to  keep  on  one  level  of  analysis 
and  not  confuse  the  main  levels  through  verbal  structure. 

Such  a  language  would  help  us  to  study  the  mechanism  of  ‘differ¬ 
ential  activation’,  and  would  catry  helpful  implications.  If  any  cases 
appeared  in  which  this  term  did  not  cover  the  field,  either  the  term  could 
be  enlarged,  keeping  the  implications,  or  the  statements  should  be  altered 
so  as  to  be  expressible  by  such  terms.  The  last  would  always  prove  to 
carry  interesting  implications,  suggesting  experiments. 

In  the  processes  going  on  in  the  nervous  system,  there  is  no  occa¬ 
sion  for  the  application  of  terms  like  ‘prohibition1  or  ‘inhibition’.  There 
is  no  standstill  in  these  sub-microscopic  processes,  though  the  manifesta¬ 
tion  on  the  macroscopic  levels  can  be  either  of  a  positive  or  of  a  negative 
character.  On  the  sub-microscopic  levels,  there  is  a  nervous  excitation 
which  often  stimulates* antagonistic  processes.,  with  results  which  are 
not  always  obvious. 

The  implication  of  the  term  ‘negative  excitation’,  although  limited, 
is  structurally  correct  in  1933.  Without  going  into  full  detail  here,  I 
merely  suggest  a  few  considerations.  First  of  all,  the  term  preserves  its 
main  implication;  namely,  that  of  excitation,  ‘negative’  suggesting  that 
this  excitation  takes  an  opposite  course  to  the  positive  one.  If,  for  in¬ 
stance,  a  positive  excitation  produces,  let  us  say,  the  activities  of  the 
salivary  glands,  a  negative  excitation  in  this  respect  will  not  produce 
them  but  will  produce  other  activities,  such  as,  for  instance,  an  investiga¬ 
tory  reaction.  With  a  negative  excitation,  there  is  an  excitation,  but  it 
produces  different  results.  There  is  no  possibility  of  stopping  or  pro¬ 
hibiting  or  inhibiting  nervous  activities,  short  of  death  as-a- whole  or 
destruction  in  parts;  but  only  a  possible  deviation  of  activities,  owing  to 
enormous  possibilities  in  establishing  nervous  connections,  endlessly 
subtle  dynamogenic  effects , . 

In  some  instances,  ‘inhibition’  might  be  regarded  as  a  form  of 
nervous  exhaustion;  but  such  a  notion  cannot  always  be  structurally 
correct,  as  there  is  much  evidence  at  hand  that  ‘inhibition’  spreads  to 
other  cortical  elements  which  were  not  functionally  exhausted,  or  that 
it  can  be  counteracted  by  some  new  excitation.  ‘Inhibition’  thus  pre¬ 
serves  its  active  character.  The  origin  of  ‘inhibition’  is  also  very  instruc¬ 
tive,  and  a  mass  of  experimental  data  shows  that  it  can  be  produced 
experimentally.  Among  other  ways,  it  can  be  produced  by  very  weak, 
very  strong,  or  unusual  stimuli,  but  stimuli ,  anyway .  As  a  rule,  any 

ON  ‘INHIBITION’ 

extra  nervous  excitation  in  the  central  nervous  system  manifests  itself 
at  once,  either  in  diminishing,  or  in  completely  abolishing  (temporarily, 
at  least)  the  conditional  reflexes  prevailing  at  the  date.12  If  we  find  that 
exhaustion  is,  in  some  instances,  the  structurally  correct  term,  there  is 
no  reason  why  we  should  not  use  it,  instead  of  using  a  psycho-logical 
term  of  ‘inhibition’,  on  neurological  levels. 

That  the  terminology  of  positive  and  negative  excitation  is  struc¬ 
turally  appropriate  finds  its  further  support  in  the  so-called  ‘disinhibi- 
tion\  Thus,  an  ‘inhibition’  of  an  ‘inhibition’  reverses  the  neural  process 
prevailing  at  a  given  ‘time’  and  becomes  a  positive  excitatory  one.  In 
our  language,  because  of  structural  considerations,  we  should  say  that 
‘disinhibition’  should  be  labelled  as  ‘negative  excitation  of  second  degree ’, 
resulting  in  a  positive  excitation.  If  we  were  to  ‘inhibit’  ‘disinhibition’, 
we  should  have,  again,  ‘inhibition’, .  With  the  new  terminology,  it  would 
be  a  negative  excitation  of  the  third  degree,  which  would  give  negative 
results,  and  a  general  rule  could  be  established,  in  complete  accordance 
with  the  mathematical  language  in  which  the  even  degrees  of  a  negative 
excitation  would  have  positive  characteristics  and  the  uneven  would 
remain  negative  (‘inhibitory’). 

Such  a  language  would  not  just  borrow  ‘by  analogy’  some  mathe¬ 
matical  features.  Once  we  take  structure  into  consideration, — and  lin¬ 
guistic  issues  represent  an  adjustment  of  structure — when  a  systematic 
analogy  is  found,  it  has  always  structural  implications  which  should  be 
used  for  testing  structure.  There  can  be  no  serious  objection  to  the 
statement  that  mathematics  is,  at  present,  a  limited  language  of  which 
the  structure  in  1933  is  similar,  or  the  most  similar  we  have,  to  the 
known  structure  of  the  world  and  our  nervous  system.  The  use  of 
such  language  must  be  always  desirable,  as  it  is  a  test  of  structure  and 
so  leads  to  further  discoveries  of  the  unknown  structure  of  this  world. 
To  the  best  of  my  knowledge,  the  above  is  a  novel,  very  general,  struc¬ 
tural  use  of  mathematics  considered  as  a  prototype  of  languages.  Our 
emphasis  is  now  on  the  structure  of  mathematics,  and  not  on  the  numeri¬ 
cal  solutions  of  equations,  the  possibility  and  usefulness  of  which  is 
precisely  due  to  the  fact  that  equations  express  relatedness,  and  so 
necessarily  give  us  structural  glimpses. 

From  a  structural  and  linguistic  point  of  view,  the  historical  devel¬ 
opment  of  mathematics  shows  that  it  is  a  first  successful  attempt  to 
develop  a  language  with  a  structure  similar  to  the  empirical  structures, 
and  shows  the  ideal  conditions  of  producing  languages. 

When  we  had  only  positive  numbers,  we  could  add  two  and  three 
and  make  five,  we  could  subtract  two  from  three  and  have  the  remainder 

VI.  ON  PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGY 

one,  but  we  could  not  subtract  three  from  two.  Yet  the  structure  of 
this  world  is  such  that  a  further  development  in  the  structure  of  the 
language  was  imperative.  Thus,  if  an  object  moves  in  a  given  direction 
with  the  velocity  two  feet  per  second,  and  some  external  factor  imparts 
to  it  a  velocity  of  three  feet  per  second  in  the  opposite  direction,  the 
original  direction  of  motion  will  be  reversed,  and  the  object  will  move 
with  the  velocity  of  one  foot  per  second  in  the  opposite  direction.  Or, 
to  give  another  example,  some  one  has  two  units  of  money  and  he  buys 
something  which  costs  three  units  of  money.  He  is  then  in  debt  one  unit. 

Such  facts  necessitated  the  introduction  of  negative  numbers  and 
so  made  subtraction  always  possible.  If  the  motion  in  one  direction  or 
the  amount  of  money  in  our  pocket  was  called  ‘plus  two'  units,  and  we 
subtract  from  it  three  units,  the  results  were  ‘minus  one’,  meaning  a 
conventional  reversal  of  direction,  or  sense,  for  motion,  or  a  debt, 
instead  of  a  possession,  for  money. 

Experimental  facts  of  division  again  necessitated  the  expansion  of 
this  language.  Thus,  fractions  were  introduced  so  as  always  to  allow 
of  linguistic  division.  The  ‘imaginary*  number,  ^ / — i,  was  intro¬ 

duced  to  allow,  in  all  cases,  the  extraction  of  roots  , .  For  a  long  ‘time*,  the 
number  t  —  \/ — 1  was  considered  almost  mystical,  but,  of  late,  when 
a  physicist  or  an  engineer  finds  it  in  his  equations,  it  is  almost  an  un¬ 
mistakable  indication  for  him  to  look  for  some  wave-motion  in  the  world. 
More  extended  observation  of  the  empirical  world  and  structure  required 
further  structural  adjustment  of  our  languages. 

In  the  vector  calculus  we  have  the  so-called  scalar  product  which 
obeys  the  ordinary  laws  of  multiplication  and  a.b  ***b.a  where  the  order 
of  the  factors  is  of  no  importance^  The  vector  product  does  not  follow 
these  rules,  as  the  order  becomes  important;  thus,  in  a  vector  product, 
a.b  =  — b.a.  In  the  newer  quantum  mechanics,  to  account  structurally 
for  the  experiments,  still  newer  numbers  were  introduced.  Instead  of 
the  old  arithmetical  qp  =  pq  or  qp  —  pq  —  0,  we  introduce  new  numbers 

where  qp  —  pq  — _ ^  .1. 

27T 

It  is  very  significant  that  a  similar  linguistic  evolution  appears  jus¬ 
tifiable  in  the  case  of  the  function  of  the  nervous  system  in  general  and 
in  the  structure  and  function  of  the  conditional  reactions  in  particular. 
As  experience  and  theory  show,  the  fundamental  structures  and  func¬ 
tions  we  find  in  life  are  not  ‘plus*  affairs,  but  represent  some  higher- 
degree  functions  of  a  non-additive  character.  The  typical  functioning 
of  the  human  nervous  system  (time-binding)  is  represented  by  an  ex¬ 
ponential  function  of  ‘time*.13  Now  we  see  that  the  reversal  of  the  sign 

ON  'INHIBITION* 

of  negative  excitation  also  follows  exponential  rules,  and  experiments 
show  that  the  change  in  order  of  abstractions  which,  by  necessity,  must 
be  passing  from  even  to  uneven  numbers  of  orders  or  vice  versa,  also 
reverses  the  sign  of  the  reaction  (see  Part  VII). 

In  the  case  of  positive  excitation,  there  is  also  a  structural  parallel 
with  the  newer  languages  of  mathematics,  but  we  do  not  need  to  analyse 
it  here,  because  the  foundation  of  the  more  flexible,  adjustable  responses 
begins  with  a  negative  effect ;  and,  in  this  case,  the  language  I  suggest 
is  fully  justified  without  further  explanations.  The  neurological  im¬ 
portance  of  ‘consciousness  of  abstracting*  is  based  precisely  on  the  fact 
that  it  automatically  involves  a  fraction  of  a  second  of  psycho-logical 
delay,  and  thus  is  fundamentally  based  on,  and  introduces  in  training, 
a  wholesome  ‘inhibition*. 

We  come  thus  to  a  weighty  structural  conclusion  that  the  funda¬ 
mental  processes  of  the  nervous  system  are  not  only  non-plus  processes 
but  that  they  follow  the  exponential  rules  of  signs.  As  soon  as  we 
realize  that  from  a  structural  point  of  view  ‘structure’  and  ‘function* 
are  only  different  types  of  language  in  which  to  speak  about  two  aspects 
of  what  is  going  on,  on  the  silent  un-speakable  level,  and  that  on  this 
level  these  two  aspects  can  never  be  divided ,  we  must  also  build  a  non-el 
language.  Such  a  language  is  found  in  dynamic  structure,  out  of  which 
arises  function,  and  even  macroscopically  relatively  enduring  structures 
as  special  aspects,  and  the  exponential  character  of  the  fundamental 
activities  of  the  nervous  system  becomes  a  necessity. 

In  modern  mathematics  numbers  can  be  interpreted  as  operators . , 
which,  in  our  case,  suggests  great  freedom  of  structural  use,  and  widens 
the  application  of  these  notions. 

To  put  the  problems  as  simply  as  possible :  all  the  more  subtle  forms 
of  adjustment  in  organisms,  ‘intelligence*,  so-called  ‘civilization*,  our 
‘ethics*,  ‘happiness*. ,  and,  finally,  sanity ,  which  is  the  evidence  of  seman¬ 
tic  adjustment  or  proper  evaluation  on  human  levels,  are  based  on  the 
neurological  interplay,  the  number,  and  multi-dimensional  order  of 
superimposed  (not  added)  positive  and  negative  excitations.  The  posi¬ 
tive,  or  the  direct  and  obvious,  responses  are  the  more  primitive ;  the 
negative,  resulting  in  not  always  obvious  consequences,  are  the  result  of 
further  structural  complexities,  which  reach  their  culmination  in  the 
normally  developed  highly  cultured  man. 

Such  indefinitely  superimposed  negative  excitations  are  found 
physiologically  in  the  hierarchy  of  higher  and  higher  orders  of  abstrac¬ 
tions,  which  are  able  to  reverse  the  sign  of  the  s.r ,  and  so,  structurally, 
make  these  considerations  extremely  workable  and  neurologically  sound, 

VI.  ON  PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGY 

and  justify  their  introduction  and  use.  This  accounts  for  the  fact  that 
what  was  evaluated  as  tragic  or  painful,  or  joyful,  or  shameful . ,  to  one 
generation  or  culture,  does  not  seem  so  to  another.  Our  personal  dif¬ 
ficulty  usually  is  that,  at  present,  we  copy  animals  in  the  relative  un¬ 
conditionality  of  our  responses,  because  we  are  not  acquainted  with  this 
semantic  mechanism.  We  are  not  prepared  to  change  in  one  single 
generation  the  sign  from  a  minus  to  a  plus,  or  vice  versa,  without  a 
great  amount  of  struggle  and  semantic  discomfort. 

Now,  such  discomforts  are  usually  harmful  to  the  human  nervous 
system,  but  the  structural  understanding  of  this  mechanism  helps  us  to 
eliminate  these  semantic  pains,  and  so  leads  toward  nervous  balance 
and  sanity. 

It  seems  that  the  neurological  mechanism  operating  in  this  connec¬ 
tion  is  similar  to  the  one  formulated  by  Pavlov,  thus :  Two  facts  relat¬ 
ing  to  the  central  nervous  activities  stand  out  clearly.  The  first  is  that 
the  extraneous  stimulus  acting  on  the  positive  phase  of  the  reflex 
inhibits,  and  acting  on  the  negative  phase  dis-inhibits,  in  either  case, 
therefore,  reversing,  the  nervous  process  prevailing  at  the  time.  The 
second  is  that  the  inhibitory  process  is  more  labile  and  more  easily 
affected  than  the  excitatory  process,  being  influenced  by  stimuli  of 
much  weaker  physiological  strength.'14 

Negative  reactions  or  ‘inhibition’  must  be  interpreted  as  the  neuro¬ 
logical  foundation  of  ‘human  mentality’,  and  the  result  of  external  and 
internal  stimulations.  Because  of  structural  interrelations,  the  main  fac¬ 
tor  of  building  human  ‘mentality’  and  developing  internal  ‘inhibition’ 
must  be  more  labile  and  must  be  influenced  by  stimuli  of  much  weaker 
physiological  strength. 

This  explains  also  why  the  solution  of  our  problems  in  education, 
social  life.,  must  be  not  the  animalistic  external  ‘inhibition’  alone,  but 
must  become,  in  the  main,  special  internal  ‘inhibition’,  effective  and  yet 
harmless  to  the  individual  nervous  system.  All  of  us  possess  this  most 
general  nervous  mechanism.  The  problem  is  to  discover  the  means  to 
operate  it.  We  shall  see  later  that  in  consciousness  of  abstracting  we 
find  a  workable  semantic  solution,  allowing  an  automatic  change  of  sign 
of  the  reaction.  It  should  be  recalled  here  that  all  stimuli  and  all 
responses  are  complex,  the  word  ‘simple’  being  structurally  false  to  facts. 
On  the  human,  and  particularly  on  the  linguistic  level,  it  is  practically 
never  possible  to  ascertain  an  ‘absolute’  order  of  abstraction,  or  the 
degree  or  order  of  an  excitation.  These  are  often  the  results  of  racial 
time-binding,  and  extremely  complex,  nervous  processes,  and  every 
superimposition  of  a  new  neurological  process  (not  addition)  may  fun- 

ON  ‘INHIBITION’ 

damentally  alter  the  whole  character  of  the  s.r  and  reverse  the  sign.  In 
negative  excitations,  the  passing  from  one  degree  to  another  changes  the 
sign  of  the  reaction.  In  practice,  we  are  only  interested  in  two  neigh¬ 
bouring  levels  of  abstractions  or  in  two  neighbouring  degrees  of  negative 
excitation,  simply  because  these  involve,  by  necessity,  a  passing  from 
an  even  to  an  uneven  degree  or  vice  versa — in  both  cases  reversing  the 
sign  of  the  s.r. 

The  general  organismal  adjusting  mechanism  of  the  ‘investigatory 
reaction’  responds  positively  to  a  new  stimulus,  but  with  very  important 
survival  value  acts  negatively  on  established  positive  conditional  reactions 
in  animals.  It  is,  at  present,  much  weakened  and  often  ineffective  with 
man,  resulting  in  non-survival,  non-adjustment  and  ‘mental’  ills  for 
man.  It  is  a  well-established  fact  that  different  stimuli  either  interfere 
with  each  other,  resulting  in  modified  behaviour,  or  reinforce  each  other 
and  have  cumulative  effects.  On  the  human  level,  different  ‘mental’ 
factors  play  the  role  of  internal  positive  or  negative  excitatory  semantic 
complexes,  which,  because  of  verbal  conditions  (and  all  doctrines  are 
always  connected  with  an  affective  background),  may  reinforce  a  given 
stimulus,  thus  making  its  physiological  effect  variable  and  of  different 
strength.  Under  such  conditions  a  new  stimulus  does  not  produce  the 
investigatory  reaction  with  all  its  beneficial  results.  This  mechanism 
is,  perhaps,  responsible  for  the  well-known  fact  that  primary  instincts 
with  humans  are,  by  far,  weaker  and  more  variable  than  with  animals ; 
whence  it  comes  that  humans  seldom  know  by  themselves,  without 
science ,  what  is  bejt  for  them . 

We  should  not  be  surprised  to  find  that  under  these  more  complex 
conditions  human  investigatory  reactions  may  be  of  different  types, 
culminating  in  the  typically  human  investigatory  reaction,  which  would 
introduce  the  natural,  yet  more  important,  delay  in  an  immediate  reaction 
to  a  former  stimulus.  We  shall  find,  later,  that  consciousness  of  abstract¬ 
ing  is  such  a  distinctly  human  and  very  useful  investigatory  reaction 
that  on  the  human  complex  semantic  level  brings  relatively  as  much 
benefit  to  the  human  organism  as  it  does  on  the  animal  level  to  animals. 

It  seems  that  the  nervous  mechanisms  of  both  types  are  similar, 
except  for  the  fact  that  on  the  human  levels  we  have  more  factors 
which  are  external  and  internal  stimuli  than  on  the  animal  level.  If  we 
copy  animals  in  our  nervous  processes,  we  are,  in  reality,  worse  off 
than  the  animals,  because,  with  our  more  complicated  nervous  system, 
it  means  for  us  a  pathological  condition. 

CHAPTER  XXIII 

ON  CONDITIONAL  REACTIONS  OF  HIGHER  ORDERS  AND 
PSYCHIATRY 

In  the  dog  two  conditions  were  found  to  produce  pathological  distur¬ 
bances  by  functional  interference,  namely,  an  unusually  acute  clashing  of 
the  excitatory  and  inhibitory  processes,  and  the  influence  of  strong  and 
extraordinary  stimuli.  In  man  precisely  similar  conditions  constitute  the 
usual  causes  of  nervous  and  psychic  disturbances.  (394)  i.  p.  pavlov 

The  fact  that  the  maximum  disturbance  in  the  central  nervous  activity 
does  not  appear  immediately  on  administration  of  the  causative  stimulus, 
but  after  one  or  more  days  has  been  observed  in  many  animals.  (394) 

I.  P.  PAVLOV 

Psychiatrists  will  readily  understand  the  structurally  false  to  facts 
and  harmful  implications  of  the  term  ‘inhibition*  on  the  neurological 
level,  when  they  consider  that  often  ‘pain*,  ‘fright’,  and  different  ‘prohi¬ 
bitions’  and  ‘inhibitions’  on  the  psycho-logical  level  result  in  nervous 
processes  which  are  not  passive,  eliminated  factors,  but  remain  what  they 
were  originally — exciting  semantic  factors  ‘repressed’  on  human  levels — 
and  become  very  active  and  potent  causative  factors  in  many  ‘mental’ 
and  physical  ailments. 

If  the  non-el  point  of  view  and  language  are  seriously  applied,  there 
seems  to  be  no  escape  from  the  conclusion  that  the  future  physician,  on 
perfectly  scientific,  structural,  physico-chemical,  and  colloidal  grounds, 
will  never  attempt  to  divide  the  ‘physical’  from  the  ‘mental’,  and  different 
nervous  processes  now  called  ‘inhibition’  will  come  prominently  to  the 
fore  as  active,  to  be  taken  care  of  and  never  to  be  disregarded. 

That  the  mechanism  of  conditional  reactions  in  animals  bears  an 
astonishing  resemblance  to  the  mechanism  of  ‘mental’  ills  in  humans, 
because  of  the  relative  unconditionality  of  both,  is  exemplified  practically 
throughout  the  whole  work  of  Pavlov,  although  he  did  not  point  out  this 
particular  connection.  As  soon  as  this  is  understood,  we  shall  find  that 
some  of  the  experiments  of  Doctor  Zavadzki,  made  in  Pavlov’s  labora¬ 
tory  twenty- five  years  ago,  disclose  a  neurological  mechanism  which 
underlies  practically  all  psychotherapy,  and  which,  therefore,  appears 
very  important  and.  to  deserve  special  discussion. 

I  do  not  know  the  percentage  of  the  successful  application  of  psy¬ 
chotherapy  of  any  scientific  school,  or  of  extra-medical  cults,  because 
the  many  cases  of  failure  are  very  seldom  recorded.  We  usually  forget, 
or  do  not  realize,  that  the  successful  cases  teach  us,  structurally,  less 
than  the  failures,  because  there  is  always  an  infinity  of  ways  in  which 
we  can  account  for  a  positive  result,  which  is  structurally  entirely  invali- 

CONDITIONAL  REACTIONS  AND  PSYCHIATRY  359 

dated  as  such  by  a  single  failure,  if  the  possibility  of  it  is  not  foreseen 
by  the  structural  flexibility  of  the  general  method. 

From  what  I  gather  (though  I  may  be  mistaken)  of  every  hundred 
patients  who  seek  relief  in  psychotherapy,  fifty  fail  completely.  The 
remaining  fifty  can,  perhaps,  be  divided  into  two  groups ;  the  first  one 
of,  say,  ten,  who  become  entirely  relieved;  the  other  remaining  forty, 
who  improve  in  different  degrees.  The  analysis  in  the  present  work 
may,  perhaps,  explain  why  the  percentage  of  failures  is  so  high.  It  seems 
that  no  school  of  psychotherapists  has  analysed  ‘mental’  ills  from  the 
general  non-el  structural  and  semantic  point  of  view ;  and,  although  the 
physicians  struggle  in  every  case  to  abolish  the  relative  unconditionality 
of  the  reactions,  their  methods  are  neither  neurological,  nor  physiological, 
nor  fundamental  enough. 
