
The  language  used  in  these  scientific  theories  includes  such  terms 
as  ‘conscious’,  ‘unconscious’,  ‘repression’,  ‘inhibition’,  ‘transfer’,  ‘com¬ 
plex*,  .  There  seems  no  doubt  that  some  such  terms  cover  a  few  of  the 
facts  we  know  from  experience  and  observation,  and  that  they  may  be 
structurally  correct  on  the  psycho-logical  level.  The  nervous  mechanism 
involved,  although  discovered  twenty-five  years  ago,  has  not  generally 
attracted  the  attention  of  physicians,  and  the  postulated  theories,  lacking 
neurological  foundations,  are  often  called  ‘far-fetched  speculations’,  a 
fact  which  is  ultimately  harmful  to  the  whole  psychotherapeutic  and 
semantic  hygiene  movement. 

The  ‘psychologists’  and  the  psychiatrists  are  very  much  divided  as 
to  the  role  ‘introspection’  plays.  This  is  due  to  the  confusion  of  the 
orders  of  abstractions.  Animals  may  ‘feel’,  may  ‘suffer’,  but  they  cannot 
describe .  Humans  differ  in  this  respect;  the  given  person  may  feel  pain, 
the  pain  is  very  objective  to  the  given  individual,  and  it  is  not  words 
(objective  level);  but  we  can  describe  it,  this  description  being  valid  on 
the  descriptive  level ,  a  higher  order  abstraction  than  the  objective  level 
(which  is  un-speakable  for  the  given  individual).  If  we  ascribe  this 
process  to  others,  this  is  no  longer  a  description  but  an  inference,  or  a 
still  higher  order  abstraction,  which  statements  have  to  be  verified  by 
averaging.  Scientifically  (1933),  psycho-logics  are  impossible  without 
the  description  of  internal  processes,  and,  therefore,  some  ‘introspection’, 
so  that  the  United  States  Behaviourism  becomes  a  very  naive  discipline. 
The  Behaviourists  mean  well,  methodologically,  without  realizing  fully 
what  scientific  methodology  is.  They  completely  condemn  ‘introspection’, 
yet  they  continually  use  it.  Consciousness  of  abstracting  solves  the  rid¬ 
dles  of  pro-  or  anti-behaviouristic  attitudes,  because,  when  we  are  fully 

VI.  ON  PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGY 

conscious  of  abstracting,  we  should  never  confuse  description  with  infer¬ 
ence,  neurologically  processes  of  different  order. 

Any  discipline,  to  be  a  ‘science’,  must  start  with  the  lowest  abstrac¬ 
tions  available ;  which  means  descriptions  of  some  objective,  unspeakable 
level.  In  human  psycho-logics,  ‘introspection’  is  the  only  possible  descrip¬ 
tive  level,  all  other  methods  being  inferential. 

The  experiments  of  Doctor  Zavadzki  were  conducted  to  investigate 
the  mechanism  of  the  so-called  ‘delayed  reflexes’.  Speaking  roughly,  in 
experiments  in  which  the  interval  between  the  conditional  stimulus  and 
the  reinforcement  by  food  or  acid  is  short,  say,  one  to  five  seconds,  the 
salivary  secretion  follows  nearly  immediately  after  the  application  of  the 
conditional  stimulus.  If  the  delay  between  the  two  is  longer,  say,  several 
minutes,  the  appearance  of  salivary  secretions  is  also  delayed,  the  length 
of  this  delay  being  proportional  to  the  length  of  the  interval  between 
the  two  stimuli. 

In  these  experiments  there  were  two  phases :  the  one  in  which  the 
conditional  stimulus  has  apparently  no  effect;  the  other  in  which  the 
conditional  stimulus  becomes  effective.  The  investigation  was  continued 
to  discover  what  becomes  of  the  excitation  due  to  the  conditional  stimu¬ 
lus  during  its  apparent  inactivity. 

New  experiments  finally  disclosed  an  astonishing  mechanism.  A 
tactile  stimulation  was  used  for  three  minutes  as  a  conditional  stimulus 
for  acid,  and  reinforced,  as  usual,  by  the  application  of  acid,  and  a 
stable,  delayed  conditional  reaction  was  obtained.  But  when  a  perfectly 
neutral  stimulus,  say,  the  sound  of  a  metronome  or  a  noiselessly  rotating 
object,  never  connected  with  any  alimentary  stimulation,  was  superim¬ 
posed  upon  the  original  conditional  stimulus,  immediately  a  copious 
secretion  of  saliva,  together  with  the  motor  reactions  peculiar  to  a  given 
stimulus,  were  obtained. 

W e  see  that  the  excitatory  process  in  the  nervous  system  existed  all 
the  time  in  a  concealed,  non-manifest  form  and  was  released  by  an  extra 
and  neutral  stimulus* 

Similar  experiments  show  clearly  that  the  structure  and  function 
of  the  central  nervous  system  is  such  that  some  stimulations  can  be 
concealed  and  become  macroscopically  seemingly  inactive,  giving  no 
obvious  manifestation  or  response,  yet  preserving  their  active  exciting 
characteristics  which,  by  proper  treatment,  can  be  released  at  will.  In 
physics,  we  have  a  similar  phenomenon  in  the  case  of  ‘frozen’  light, 
galvanic  and  storage  batteries,  pear-shaped  drops  of  glass  resulting  from 
melting,  which  explode  when  the  end  is  broken  off,  and  many  others, 
although  probably  the  sub-microscopic  mechanisms  are  different. 

CONDITIONAL  REACTIONS  AND  PSYCHIATRY  361 

It  does  not  take  much  explanation  to  see  that  the  nervous  mechan¬ 
ism  revealed  in  the  experiments  of  Doctor  Zavadzki  accounts  on  human 
levels  for  a  great  many  /mental*  manifestations,  including  ‘recall*,  ‘un¬ 
conscious',  ‘repression*,  ‘complexes*. ,  and  allowing  a  further  generaliza¬ 
tion,  that  a  slight  nervous  disturbance  of  ‘recall’,  in  the  sense  of  negative 
unconditionality,  may  be  closely  connected  with  a  pathological  semantic 
‘complex’. 

Another  experiment  has  close  connection  with  the  problems  of  the 
human  ‘unconscious’,  ‘repressions*,  and  ‘complexes*.  The  positive  con¬ 
ditional  reactions  were  usually  obtained  by  combining  under  certain 
conditions  a  formerly  neutral  stimulus  with  food  or  with  a  mild  defense 
reaction  to  acid.  If  the  neutral  stimulus  is  not  reinforced,  it  loses  its 
significance  for  the  organism,  no  secretion  is  obtained,  and  it  becomes 
from  this  point  of  view  a  negative  stimulus.  If,  with  a  given  animal,  a 
negative  reaction  is  established,  it  can,  under  certain  conditions,  be 
transformed  into  a  positive  one  by  reinforcement.  In  the  experiment 
we  are  describing,  a  dog  was  used,  with  a  well-established  negative 
alimentary  reaction  to  the  beats  of  the  metronome  at  the  rate  of  sixty 
beats  per  minute,  while  the  rate  of  one  hundred  and  twenty  beats  per 
minute  was  used  as  a  positive  stimulus.  Both  reactions  were  constant  and 
precise.  The  process  of  transformation  from  negative  to  positive  went 
slowly;  after  the  seventeenth  application  with  reinforcement,  a  small 
secretion  of  saliva  was  obtained ;  after  the  twenty-seventh  reinforcement, 
the  secretions  of  saliva  were  already  considerable.  No  definite  disturb¬ 
ances  in  other  positive  reactions  were  observed  except  for  a  tendency  to 
the  equalization  of  strong  and  weak  conditional  stimuli. 

But  the  secretory  reaction  to  the  transformed  stimulus  of  sixty  beats 
did  not  remain  constant,  in  spite  of  reinforcement;  it  diminished,  and 
after  the  thirtieth  application  fell  to  zero.  It  was  noticed,  further,  that 
immediately  after  the  application  of  the  metronome  at  the  rate  of  sixty 
beats  per  minute*  practically  all  the  older  positive  reactions  disappeared. 
After  further  experimenting,  some  of  the  positive  effects  of  the  metro¬ 
nome  at  sixty  returned,  but  its  negative  or  depressing  effect  on  the  posi¬ 
tive  reactions  persisted.  In  all  cases  where  the  metronome  at  sixty  was 
not  used,  all  the  positive  conditional  reactions  maintained  their  strength, 
except  that  the  weaker  stimuli  had  an  inclination  to  produce  lesser  effects 
toward  the  end  of  the  experiment.  Although  the  metronome  at  sixty  or 
one  hundred  and  twenty  produced  salivary  secretions  in  varying  quanti¬ 
ties  when  used  alone,  whenever  the  metronome  was  used  there  fol¬ 
lowed  a  disturbance  of  all  conditional  reactions,  varying  from  complete 
extinction  to  a  diminution  of  secretions.  The  formerly  positive  stimulus 

VI.  ON  PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGY 

of  one  hundred  and  twenty  beats  of  the  metronome  produced  greater  dis¬ 
turbances  than  the  formerly  negative  of  sixty.  Further  experimentation 
disclosed  that  the  disturbance  of  the  cortex  was  profound,  and  that  it 
could  not  withstand  any  kind  of  stronger  stimuli  without  producing  com¬ 
pletely  negative  results.  It  became,  also,  obvious  that  the  maximum 
disturbance  in  the  central  nervous  activity  in  animals  (and  in  man)  does 
not  appear  immediately  after  the  application  of  the  injurious  factor  but 
after  a  delay. 

Since  other  auditory  stimuli  acted  during  these  experiments,  Pavlov 
concludes  that  ‘the  disturbance  must  be  regarded  as  a  result  of  a  strictly 
localized  functional  interference  in  the  acoustic  analyser,  a  chronic  func¬ 
tional  lesion  of  some  circumscribed  part,  the  stimulation  of  which  pro¬ 
duces  an  immediate  effect  upon  the  function  of  the  whole  cortex,  and 
finally  leads  to  a  protracted  pathological  state*,  and,  that  ‘it  is  obvious 
that  the  localized  disturbance  of  the  acoustic  analyser  is  again  the  result 
of  a  clash  between  excitation  and  inhibition*,  which  this  particular 
nervous  system  finds  difficult  to  adjust.2 

These  experiments  were  conducted  upon  a  dog  which  had  served 
in  the  laboratory  for  a  long  time  and  belonged  to  the  type  which  has  a 
very  negatively  excitable  nervous  system.  Experiments  on  dogs  with 
very  positively  excitable  nervous  systems,  although  different  in  details, 
led  to  similar  general  results;  namely,  that  a  clashing  of  the  two 
antagonistic  nervous  processes  led,  usually,  to  a  more  or  less  protracted 
disturbance  of  the  function  of  the  cortex,  in  the  form  of  a  lasting 
predominance  of  one  of  the  processes.8 

Experimenting  on  the  conditional  reactions  in  animals,  such  as  a 
dog,  by  inducing  pathological  states  of  the  nervous  system,  gives  us,  in  a 
simplified  form ,  a  means  to  understand  the  mechanism  which  underlies 
some  of  the  human  ‘mental*  illnesses,  provided  we  realize  the  funda¬ 
mental  fact  that  these  experiments  on  dogs  correspond,  in  their  simpler 
form,  to  ‘mental*  ills,  and  not  to  ‘mental*  health,  in  man.  The  above 
experiments  would  be  impossible  with  a  healthy  person ;  yet  they  depict 
exactly  what  happens  in  the  case  of  ‘mentally*  ill.  The  experiments 
started  with  a  healthy  animal,  and  they  ended  with  a  pathological  case. 
If  similar  experiments  were  undertaken  with  a  healthy  person,  no  patho¬ 
logical  results  would  follow,  owing  to  the  larger  conditionality  of  re¬ 
actions.;  but  similar  pathological  results  are  produced  in  humans  by 
different  means,  the  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions  being  a  standard 
semantic  mechanism  to  bring  about  the  ‘clash*  between  the  positive  and 
negative  excitations  which  the  nervous  system  of  man  cannot  resolve 
so  easily. 

CONDITIONAL  K INACTIONS  AND  PSYCHIATRY  363 

The  experiments  of  Pavlov  disclose,  also,  a  fact  which,  on  human 
levels,  introduces  serious  complications ;  namely,  that  some  animals  have 
highly  excitable  nervous  systems,  and  that  some  have  less  excitable  ones. 
Experiments  conducted  on  some  individuals  produce  one  effect ;  similar 
experiments  performed  on  individuals  with  different  nervous  systems 
produce  different  results.  In  some  instances,  the  nervous  systems  are 
so  sturdy  that  no  disturbances  appear  at  all. 

To  anticipate  a  little :  it  appears  that  under  the  present  linguistic, 
educational,  social,  economic.,  conditions,  nearly  all  of  us  suffer  from 
nervous  and  semantic  disturbances,  produced  by  copying  animals  in  our 
nervous  responses.  This  last  condition  occurs  because  the  larger  con¬ 
ditionality  of  human  responses  has  not  been  taken  into  consideration; 
its  mechanism  is  unknown,  and  we  do  our  best  to  teach  and  enforce  the 
animalistic  responses.  As  yet,  we  have  had  no  physiological  and  simple 
methods  by  which  to  train  in  this  larger  conditionality.  This  is  a  simple 
explanation  of  our  failure.  Only  a  few  of  us  have  such  sturdy  nervous 
systems  that  they  do  not  become  semantically  disturbed  in  any  marked 
degree,  and  these  are  exceptions.  Obviously,  even  an  attempt  to  build  a 
general  theory  dealing  with  these  semantic  problems  may  be  useful, 
for  the  very  mistakes  made  may  serve  others  as  an  incentive  for  further 
enquiries  in  a  field  which  is  practically  unexplored  and  extremely  large. 

In  the  formulation  of  the  present  general  theory,  theoretical  con¬ 
siderations  suggested  necessary  neurological  mechanisms ;  yet  the 
standard  books  on  physiology  and  neurology  did  not  give  enough  data. 
In  the  recent  work  of  Pavlov,  I  found  sufficient  experiments  and  data 
to  illustrate  the  neurological  mechanisms  which  underlie  the  present 
theory.  It  seems  likely  that  the  work  of  Pavlov  and  the  experiments 
described,  together  with  the  theoretical  issues  raised  in  the  present  sys¬ 
tem,  will  be  of  value  to  psycho-logicians  and  psychiatrists,  provided 
that  they  pay  attention  to  the  semantic  non-confusion  of  orders  of 
abstractions,  without  which  it  is  practically  impossible  to  translate  experi¬ 
ments  dealing  with  nervous  responses  of  animals  to  the  human  levels  and 
escape  verbal  fallacies.  The  language  of  the  structure,  as  introduced  in 
the  present  work,  is  essential  in  this  respect ;  in  fact,  the  present  writer 
could  not  have  carried  out  his  analysis  without  it. 

Pavlov  also  suggests  some  applications  to  human  pathological  cases 
which  are  recognized  as  such,  the  average  person  being  assumed  ‘normal* . 
The  present  work  is  an  independent  theoretical  enquiry,  and  the  results 
are  much  more  general,  as  they  show  that  the  general  neurological 
mechanism  allows  an  almost  universal  misuse  of  our  nervous  systems, 
because  of  the  disregard  of  structural,  linguistic,  and  semantic  issues. 

VI.  ON  PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGY 

In  several  chapters,  Pavlov  discusses  a  large  number  of  experiments 
dealing  with  functionally  induced  pathological  states  of  the  nervous 
system,  and  suggests,  also,  some  therapeutic  measures.  He  concludes: 
‘This  .  .  .  and  other  observations  suggest  that  a  gradual  development  of 
internal  inhibition  in  the  cortex  should  be  used  for  re-establishment  of  the 
balance  of  normal  conditions  in  cases  of  an  unbalanced  nervous  system 
...  I  do  not  know  whether  similar  therapeutic  measures  ...  are  applied 
in  human  neuro therapy.’4 

The  above  remark  is  vitally  important;  it  is  not  only  a  result  of  a 
lifetime  of  scientific  work,  but  it  expresses  a  principle  which  is  used, 
without  being  formulated  explicitly ,  all  through  psychotherapy.  In  the 
present  volume,  this  principle  is  not  only  formulated  in  physiological 
terms,  but  is  also  made  the  foundation  of  a  physiological  method  for  its 
semantic  application.  This  method  is  found  in  the  training  and  develop¬ 
ment  of  the  consciousness  of  abstracting  (see  Part  VII),  which,  when 
applied,  not  only  restores  nervous  balance  as  empirically  shown,  but  also 
gives  powerful  preventive  semantic  means  if  used  in  early  education. 

Further  consequences  and  conclusions  are  given  in  Part  VII.  At  this 
point,  we  shall  merely  state  that  the  above  explanations  also  show  why  a 
theory  of  universal  agreement ,  in  the  broadest  sense ;  namely,  agreement 
with  one’s  self,  eliminating  internal  ‘conflict’,  and  with  others,  eliminat¬ 
ing  family,  social,  and  international  conflicts . ,  is  neurologically  not  only 
possible,  but  also  a  necessary  semantic  consequence  of  using  the  human 
nervous  system  in  its  structurally  appropriate  way. 

It  is  well  known  that  the  use  of  the  terms  ‘positive’  and  ‘negative’ 
is  optional;  but  the  opposing  character  of  the  issues  involved  is  not 
optional,  because  these  are  experimental  and  structural.  In  former  days, 
we  not  only  made  our  selection,  and  called  some  issues  positive  and  some 
negative,  but  we  naturally  had  and  have  some  semantic  responses  con¬ 
nected  with  them.  Thus  something  ‘positive’  implied  certainty,  ‘reality’, 
‘truth’,  ‘absolute’.;  something  ‘negative’  implied  the  negation  of  these. 

In  1933,  it  appears  likely  that  we  shall  have  to  revise  in  toto  these 
semantic  orientations,  which  obviously  we  have  been  practicing  since  the 
days  of  savagery. 

What  are  the  facts  ?  Curiously  enough  : 

1 )  The  electricity  which  lights  our  lamps  or  runs  our  dynamos,  we 
call,  in  the  old  language,  ‘negative’  electricity. 

2)  The  numbers  which  are  the  foundation  of  the  most  important 
complex  numbers  in  mathematics  are  formally  based  on  negative 
numbers. 

CONDITIONAL  REACTIONS  AND  PSYCHIATRY  365 

3)  The  foundation  of  so-called  ‘human  mentality'  is  the  ‘negative' 
reaction. 

4)  Because  words  are  never  the  things  we  speak  about,  the  sole 
link  between  languages  and  the  objective  world  being  structural,  the  only 
‘positive’  facts  about  this  world  are  of  the  old  ‘negative’  character. 

5)  Finally,  the  main  difficulty  of  the  /I -system  can  be  found  in  the 
positive  ‘is’  of  identity,  involving  us  in  false  to  fact  evaluation  and 
semantic  disturbances;  on  the  other  hand,  a  ^-system  is  based  on  the 
complete  elimination  of  identity  formulated  as  a  negative  premise  of  the 
‘this  is  not  this’  type  (see  Part  VII). 

At  present,  only  in  technical  mathematics  can  people  behave  seman¬ 
tically  like  ‘gentlemen’.  They  analyse  and  agree ;  no  quarrels  are  possible. 
Linguistic  and  semantic  researches  show  that  the  structure  of  all  lan¬ 
guages  can,  and  must ,  be  made  similar  to  empirical  structures ;  and  then, 
also,  the  rest  of  humans  can,  and  probably  will,  behave  in  a  less  silly  and 
futile  way  than  they  have  done  in  the  past  and  are  doing  in  the  present. 

BOOK  II 

A  GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 
TO  NON-ARISTOTELIAN  SYSTEMS 
AND  GENERAL  SEMANTICS 

Of  all  men,  Aristotle  is  the  one  of  whom  his  followers  have  worshipped 
his  defects  as  well  as  his  excellencies:  which  is  what  he  himself  never  did 
to  any  man  living  or  dead;  indeed,  he  has  been  accused  of  the  contrary 
fault.  (354)  AUGUSTUS  DE  MORGAN 

There  is  one  very  mportant  fact  on  which  we  must  be  in  no  doubt,  and 
that  is  that  for  any  given  deductive  theory  there  is  not  any  one  system 
of  fundamental  notions  nor  any  one  system  of  fundamental  propositions; 
there  are  generally  several  equally  possible,  i.  e.  from  which  it  is  equally 
possible  to  deduce  correctly  all  the  theorems.  .  .  .  This  fact  is  very 
important,  because  it  shows  that  there  are  in  themselves  no  undefinable 
notions  nor  indemonstrable  propositions;  they  are  only  so  relatively  to  a  cer¬ 
tain  adopted  order,  and  they  cease  (at  any  rate  partly)  to  be  such  if  another 
order  is  adopted.  This  destroys  the  traditional  conception  of  fundamental 
ideas  an  fundamental  truthst  fundamental,  that  is  to  say,  absolutely  and 
essentially.  <i2o>  louis  couturat 

In  this  direction  finality  is  not  sought,  for  it  is  apparently  unattainable. 
All  that  we  can  say  is,  in  the  words  of  a  leading  analyst,  “sufficient  unto 
the  day  is  the  rigor  thereof.”  (23)  E.  t.  bell 

In  mathematics  it  is  new  ways  of  looking  at  old  things  which  seem  to  be 
the  most  prolific  sources  of  far-reaching  discoveries.  (23)  e.  t.  bell 

The  first  will  show  us  how  to  change  the  language  suffices  to  reveal 

generalizations  not  before  suspected.  <4i7>  h.  poincar& 

In  sum,  ail  the  scientist  creates  in  a  fact  is  the  language  in  which  he  enunci¬ 
ates  it .  (417)  H.  POINCARES 

This  long  discussion  brings  us  to  the  final  conclusion  that  the  concrete 
facts  of  nature  are  events  exhibiting  a  certain  structure  in  their  mutual 
relations  and  certain  characters  of  their  own.  The  aim  of  science  is  to  ex¬ 
press  the  relations  between  their  characters  in  terms  of  the  mutual  struc¬ 
tural  relations  between  the  events  thus  characterised.  (S73) 

A.  N.  WHITEHEAD 

We  cease  to  seek  resemblances;  we  devote  ourselves  above  all  to  the 
differences,  and  among  the  differences  are  chosen  first  the  most  accentu¬ 
ated,  not  only  because  they  are  the  most  striking,  but  because  they  will  be 
the  most  instructive.  (417)  h.  poincar£ 

The  materialistic  theory  has  all  the  completeness  of  the  thought  of  the 
middle  ages,  which  had  a  complete  answer  to  everything,  be  it  in  heaven 
or  in  hell  or  in  nature.  There  is  trimness  about  it,  with  its  instantaneous 

368  NON-ARISTOTELIAN  (GENERAL  SEMANTICS 

present,  its  vanished  past,  its  non-existent  future,  and  its  inert  matter. 
This  trimness  is  very  medieval  and  ill  accords  with  brute  fact.  (573) 

A.  N.  WHITEHEAD 

The  existence  of  analogies  between  central  features  of  various  theories 
implies  the  existence  of  a  general  theory  which  underlies  the  particular 
theories  and  unifies  them  With  respect  to  those  central  features. 

E.  H.  MOORE 

Neither  the  authority  of  man  alone  nor  the  authority  of  fact  alone  is 
sufficient.  The  universe,  as  known  to  us,  is  a  joint  phenomenon  of  the 
observer  and  the  observed;  and  every  process  of  discovery  in  natural  science 
or  in  other  branches  of  human  knowledge  will  acquire  its  best  excellence 
when  it  is  in  accordance  with  this  fundamental  principle.  (82) 

R.  D.  CARMICHAEL 

It  is  evident  that  if  we  adopt  this  point  of  view  toward  concepts,  namely 
that  the  proper  definition  of  a  concept  is  not  in  terms  of  its  properties  but 
in  terms  of  actual  operations,  we  need  run  no  danger  of  having  to  revise 
our  attitude  toward  nature.  (55)  p.  w.  BRIDGMAN 

To  say  the  facts  are  incomprehensible  is  a  rationalization  of  individual 
ignorance. 

Ignorance,  however,  may  be  no  fault.  It  becomes  so  only  when  the  in¬ 
dividual  permits  himself  to  rationalize  it,  i .  e.,  give  it  a  disguise,  which 
effectually  blocks  him  in  the  utilization  of  his  intelligence,  which  might 
otherwise  solve  the  problem  in  hand.  (24p  smith  ely  jelliffe 

The  symbol  A  is  not  the  counterpart  of  anything  in  familiar  life.  To 
the  child  the  letter  A  would  seem  horribly  abstract;  so  we  give  him  a 
familiar  conception  along  with  it.  “A  was  an  Archer  who  shot  at  a  frog.” 
This  tides  over  his  immediate  difficulty;  but  he  cannot  make  serious  prog¬ 
ress  with  word-building  so  long  as  Archers,  Butchers,  Captains,  dance 
round  the  letters.  The  letters  are  abstract,  and  sooner  or  later  he  has  to 
realise  it.  In  physics  we  have  outgrown  archer  and  apple-pie  definitions 
of  the  fundamental  symbols.  To  a  request  to  explain  what  an  electron 
really  is  supposed  to  be  we  can  only  answer,  “It  is  part  of  the  A  B  C  of 
physics'*.  U4?)  a.  s.  eddington 

No  previous  existing  system  of  thought  had  property  formed  a  working 
hypothesis  to  explain  why  for  this  or  that  individual  it  was  necessary  to 
“go  up  three  steps  or  else  be  constipated,”  “or  to  take  pills  in  multiples  of 
three,”  or  other  analogous  symptoms  which  will  occur  to  the  reader  and 
which  are  found  in  bewildering  profusion  in  all  pathological  cases,  be  they 
hysterias,  or  compulsion  neuroses,  phobias,  schizophrenias,  or  what  not. 
t241)  SMITH  ELY  JELLIFFE 

The  Dormouse  .  .  .  went  on;  “ — that  begins  with  an  M,  such  as  mouse¬ 
traps,  and  the  moon,  and  memory,  and  muchness — you  know  you  say 
things  are  ‘much  of  a  muchness’ — did  you  ever  see  such  a  thing  as  a  draw¬ 
ing  of  a  muchness!” 

“Really,  now  you  ask  me,”  said  Alice,  very  much  confused,  “I  don't 
think—” 

‘  “Then  you  shouldn’t  talk,"  said  the  Hatter.**  lewis  carrolL 

4.1212  What  can  be  shown  cannot  be  said.  (59o>  L.  Wittgenstein 

*  Introduction  to  a  Form  of  General  Analysis.  Yale  Univ.  Press, 

** Alice  in  Wonderland . 

PART  VII 

ON  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

There  should  be  no  theoretical  objection  to  the  hypothesis  of  the  forma¬ 
tion  of  new  physiological  paths  and  new  connections  within  the  cerebral 
hemispheres.  (394)  I.  p.  pavlov 

It  seems  desirable  in  this  place  to  clearly  emphasize  the  fact  that  in  the 
use  of  psychoanalysis  we  are  dealing  solely  with  a  method  for  gaining  data. 
One  occasionally  hears  the  statement  that  psychoanalysis  is  nonsense.  A 
method,  or  a  tool,  is  not  nonsense.  (241)  smith  ely  jelliffe 

It  is  by  means  of  internal  inhibition  that  the  signalizing  activity  of  the 
hemispheres  is  constantly  corrected  and  perfected.  (394)  i.  p.  pavlov 

We  are  dealing  here  with  types  of  associative  reaction  peculiar  to  the 
cortical  system,  correctly  opposed  to  the  unqualified  affective  reactivity 
of  the  thalamus  and  usefully  analysed  by  Head.  (4ii>  henri  pi£ron 

This  example  and  other  observations  suggest  that  a  gradual  development 
of  internal  inhibition  in  the  cortex  shoulabe  used  for  re-establishment  of 
the  balance  of  normal  conditions  in  cases  of  an  unbalanced  nervous  system. 

(394)  I.  P.  PAVLOV 

A  self-satisfied  rationalism  is  in  effect  a  form  of  anti-rationalism.  It 
means  an  arbitrary  halt  at  a  particular  set  of  abstractions.  (57S) 

A.  N.  WHITEHEAD 

.  .  .  the  *  fallacy  of  misplaced  concreteness*  .  ,  .  consists  in  neglecting  the 
degree  of  abstraction  involved  when  an  actual  entity  is  considered  merely 
so  far  as  it  exemplifies  certain  categories  of  thought.  (578) 

A.  N.  WHITEHEAD 

In  the  Garden  of  Eden  Adam  saw  the  animals  before  he  named  them: 
in  the  traditional  system,  children  named  the  animals  before  they  saw 
them.  (575)  A.  N.  WHITEHEAD 

The  negative  judgment  is  the  peak  of  mentality.  (578)  a.  n.  whitehead 

CHAPTER  XXIV 

ON  ABSTRACTING 

...  to  be  an  abstraction  does  not  mean  that  an  entity  is  nothing.  It 
merely  means  that  its  existence  is  only  one  factor  of  a  more  concrete  ele¬ 
ment  of  nature.  (573)  A.  n.  whitehead 

Aristotle,  in  building  his  theories,  had  at  his  disposal,  besides  his 
personal  gifts,  a  good  education  according  to  his  day  and  the  science 
current  in  400-300  b.c.  Even  in  those  days,  the  Greek  language  was  a 
very  elaborate  affair.  Aristotle  and  his  followers  simply  took  this  lan¬ 
guage  for  granted.  The  problems  of  the  structure  of  language  and  its 
effect  on  s.r  had  not  yet  arisen.  To  them,  the  language  they  used  was 
the  (unique)  language.  When  I  use  the  expression  ‘ the  language',  I  do 
not  mean  anything  connected  with  the  language,  as  Greek;  I  mean  only 
the  structure  of  it,  which  was  much  similar  in  the  other  national  lan¬ 
guages  of  this  group.  The  language  Aristotle  inherited  was  of  great 
antiquity,  and  originated  in  periods  when  knowledge  was  still  more 
scanty.  Being  a  keen  observer,  and  scientifically  and  methodologically 
inclined,  he  took  this  language  for  granted  and  systematized  the  modes 
of  speaking.  This  systematization  was  called  ‘logic'.  The  primitive 
structural  metaphysics  underlying  this  inherited  language,  and  expressed 
in  its  structure,  became  also  the  ‘philosophical'  background  of  this  sys¬ 
tem.  The  subject-predicate  form,  the  ‘is'  of  identity,  and  the  elemental- 
ism  of  the  -system  are  perhaps  the  main  semantic  factors  in  need  of 
revision,  as  they  are  found  to  be  the  foundation  of  the  insufficiency  of 
this  system  and  represent  the  mechanism  of  semantic  disturbances,  mak¬ 
ing  general  adjustment  and  sanity  impossible.  These  doctrines  have 
come  down  to  us,  and  through  the  mechanism  of  language  the  semantic 
disturbing  factors  are  forced  upon  our  children.  A  whole  procedure  of 
training  in  delusional  values  was  thus  started  for  future  generations. 

As  the  work  of  Aristotle  was,  at  his  date,  the  most  advanced  and 
'scientific',  quite  naturally  its  influence  was  wide-spread.  In  those  days, 
no  one  spoke  of  this  influence  as  ‘linguistic',  involving  s.r .  Aristotle’s 
work  was,  and  still  is,  spoken  of  as  ‘philosophy',  and  we  speak  mostly 
of  the  influence  of  A  ‘philosophy'  rather  than  of  the  A  structure  of 
language,  and  its  semantic  influence. 

As  we  have  already  seen,  when  we  make  any  proposition  whatsoever 
we  involve  creeds,  or  metaphysics,  which  are  embodied  silently  as  struc¬ 
