tural  assumptions  and  in  our  undefined  terms.  The  use  of  terms  not 

V 1 1.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

definable  in  simpler  terms  at  a  given  date  is  inherent  and  seemingly 
unavoidable. 

When  our  primitive  ancestors  were  building  their  language,  quite 
naturally  they  started  with  the  lowest  orders  of  abstractions,  which  are 
the  most  immediately  connected  with  the  outside  world.  They  estab¬ 
lished  a  language  of  ‘sensations’.  Like  infants,  they  identified  their  feel¬ 
ings  with  the  outside  world  and  personified  most  of  the  outside  events. 

This  primitive  semantic  tendency  resulted  in  the  building  of  a  lan¬ 
guage  in  which  the  ‘is’  of  identity  was  fundamental.  If  we  saw  an  animal 
and  called  it  ‘dog’  and  saw  another  animal  roughly  resembling  the  first, 
we  said,  quite  happily,  ‘it  is  a  dog’,  forgetting  or  not  knowing  that  the 
objective  level  is  un-speakable  and  that  we  deal  only  with  absolute  indi¬ 
viduals,  each  one  different  from  the  other.  Thus  the  mechanism  of 
identification  or  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions,  natural  at  a  very 
primitive  stage  of  human  development,  became  systematized  and  struc¬ 
turally  embodied  in  this  most  important  tool  of  daily  use  called  ‘lan¬ 
guage’.  Having  to  deal  with  many  objects,  they  had  to  have  names  for 
objects.  These  names  were  ‘substantives’.  They  built  ‘substantives’, 
grammatically  speaking,  for  other  feelings  which  were  not  'substantives’, 
(‘colour’,  ‘heat’,  ‘soul’,.).  Judging  by  the  lower  order  abstractions,  they 
built  adjectives  and  made  a  completely  anthropomorphised  world-picture. 
Speaking  about  speaking,  let  us  be  perfectly  aware  from  the  beginning 
that,  when  we  make  the  simplest  statement  of  any  sort,  this  statement 
already  presupposes  some  kind  of  structural  metaphysics.  The  early 
vague  feelings  and  savage  speculations  about  the  structure  of  this  world, 
based  on  primitive  insufficient  scientific  data,  was  influencing  the  building 
of  the  language.  Once  the  language  was  built,  and,  particularly,  systema¬ 
tized,  these  primitive  structural  metaphysics  and  s.r  had  to  be  projected 
or  reflected  on  the  outside  world — a  procedure  which  became  habitual 
and  automatic. 

Was  such  a  language  structurally  reliable  and  safe  ?  If  we  investigate, 
we  can  easily  become  convinced  that  it  was  not.  Let  us  take  three  pails 
of  water ;  the  first  at  the  temperature  of  10°  centigrade,  the  second  at 
30°,  and  the  third  at  50°.  Let  us  put  the  left  hand  in  the  first  pail  and 
the  right  in  the  third.  If  we  presently  withdraw  the  left  hand  from  the 
first  pail  and  put  it  in  the  second,  we  feel  how  nicely  warm  the  water  in 
the  second  pail  is.  But,  if  we  withdraw  the  right  hand  from  the  third 
pail  and  put  it  in  the  second,  we  notice  how  cold  the  water  is.  The 
temperature  of  the  water  in  the  second  pail  was  practically  not  different 
in  the  two  cases,  yet  our  feelings  registered  a  marked  difference.  The 
difference  in  the  ‘feel’  depended  on  the  former  conditions  to  which  our 

ON  ABSTRACT! N(i 

hands  had  been  subjected.  Thus,  we  see  that  a  language  of  ‘senses'  is 
not  a  very  reliable  language,  and  that  we  cannot  depend  on  it  for  general 
purposes  of  evaluation. 

How  about  the  term  ‘dog’  ?  The  number  of  individuals  with  which 
any  one  is  directly  acquainted  is,  by  necessity,  limited,  and  usually  is 
small.  Let  us  imagine  that  someone  had  dealt  only  with  good-natured 
‘dogs’,  and  had  never  been  bitten  by  any  of  them.  Next  he  sees  some  ani¬ 
mal  ;  he  says,  ‘This  is  a  dog’ ;  his  associations  (relations)  do  not  suggest 
a  bite ;  he  approaches  the  animal  and  begins  to  play  with  him,  and  is 
bitten.  Was  the  statement  ‘this  is  a  dog'  a  safe  statement?  Obviously 
not.  He  approached  the  animal  with  semantic  expectations  and  evalua¬ 
tion  of  his  verbal  definition,  but  was  bitten  by  the  non-verbal,  un-speakable 
objective  level,  which  has  different  characteristics. 

Judging  by  present  standards,  knowledge  in  the  days  of  Aristotle 
was  very  meagre.  It  was  comparatively  easy  2300  years  ago  to  sum¬ 
marize  the  few  facts  known,  and  so  to  build  generalizations  which 
would  cover  those  few  facts. 

If  we  attempt  to  build  a  ^-system,  1933,  can  we  escape  the  difficul¬ 
ties  which  beset  Aristotle  ?  The  answer  is  that  some  difficulties  are  avoid¬ 
able,  but  that  some  are  inherent  in  the  structure  of  human  knowledge, 
and  so  cannot  be  entirely  evaded.  We  can,  however,  invent  new  methods 
by  which  the  harmful  semantic  effect  of  these  limitations  can  be  success¬ 
fully  eliminated. 

There  is  no  escape  from  the  fact  that  we  must  start  with  undefined 
terms  which  express  silent,  structural  creeds  or  metaphysics.  If  we  state 
our  undefined  terms  explicitly,  we,  at  least,  make  our  metaphysics  con¬ 
scious  and  public,  and  so  we  facilitate  criticism,  co-operation , .  The  mod¬ 
ern  undefined  scientific  terms,  such  as  ‘order’,  for  instance,  underlie  the 
exact  sciences  and  our  wider  world-outlook.  We  must  start  with  these 
undefined  terms  as  well  as  the  modern  structural  world-outlook  as  given 
by  science,  1933.  That  settles  the  important  semantic  point  of  our  struc¬ 
tural  metaphysics.  It  need  hardly  be  emphasized  that  in  a  human  class  of 
life,  where  creeds  are  characterized  by  having  dates,  they  should  always 
be  labelled  with  this  date.  For  sanity,  the  creeds  utilized  in  1933  should 
be  of  the  issue  of  1933. 

Now  as  to  the  structure  of  our  language.  What  structure  shall  we 
give  to  our  language?  Shall  we  keep  the  old  structure,  with  all  its  primi¬ 
tive  implications  and  corresponding  s.r,  or  shall  we  deliberately  build  a 
language  of  new  structure  which  will  carry  new  modern  implications 
and  s.r?  There  seems  to  be  only  one  reasonable  choice.  For  a  ^-system, 
we  must  build  a  new  language.  We  must  abandon  the  ‘is’  of  identity,  to 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

say  the  least.  We  have  already  seen  that  we  have  an  excellent  substitute 
in  an  actional,  behaviouristic,  operational,  functional  language.  This  type 
of  language  involves  modem  asymmetrical  implications  of  ‘order’,  and 
eliminates  the  ‘is’  of  identity,  which  always  introduces  false  evaluation. 

To  these  fundamental  starting  points,  we  must  add  the  principle 
that  our  language  should  be  of  non-el  structure.  With  these  minimum 
semantic  requirements,  we  are  ready  to  proceed. 

Let  us  take  any  object  of  ordinary  experience,  let  us  say  the  one  we 
usually  call  a  ‘pencil’,  and  let  us  briefly  analyse  our  nervous  relationship 
to  it.  We  can  see  it,  touch  it,  smell  it,  taste  it . ,  and  use  it  in  different 
ways.  Is  any  of  the  relationships  just  mentioned  an  ‘all-embracing’  one, 
or  is  our  acquaintance  through  any  of  them  only  partial ?  Obviously,  each 
of  these  means  provides  an  acquaintance  with  this  object  which  is  not 
only  partial,  but  is  also  specific  for  the  nerve  centres  which  are  engaged. 
Thus,  when  we  look  at  the  object,  we  do  not  get  odor  or  taste  stimuli, 
but  only  visual  stimuli , . 

If  the  object  we  call  ‘pencil*  were  lying  on  the  surface  of  this  paper 
and  we  were  to  look  at  it  along  the  surface  of  the  paper  in  a  perpendicu¬ 
lar  direction  to  its  length,  it  would  generally  be  seen  as  an  elongated 
object,  pointed  at  one  end.  But,  if  we  were  to  observe  it  along  the  plane 
of  the  paper  at  right  angles  to  our  former  direction,  it  would  be  seen  as 
a  disk.  This  illustration  is  rough,  but  serves  to  show  that  the  acquain¬ 
tance  derived  through  any  specific  means  (e.g.,  vision)  is  also  partial  in 
another  sense ;  it  varies  with  the  position . ,  of  any  specified  observer, 
Smith,  or  a  camera. 

Furthermore,  any  given  means  provides,  for  different  observers, 
different  acquaintances.  Thus,  vision  shows  the  pencil  to  one  observer, 
Smith,  as  a  pointed  rod,  and  to  another  observer,  Jones,  as  a  disk.  Feel¬ 
ing,  through  other  receptors,  is  just  as  dependent  upon  many  conditions ; 
and  different  observers  receive  different  impressions.  This  is  well  illus¬ 
trated  by  the  familiar  tale  of  the  five  blind  men  and  the  elephant. 

Because  of  differences  in  sensitivity  in  the  receptors  of  Smiths  and 
Browns  (partial  colour-blindness,  astigmatism,  far-sightedness.,),  any 
given  means  of  acquaintance  (e.g.,  vision)  gives  to  different  observers 
different  reports  of  the  one  object.  The  acquaintance  is  thus  personal 
and  individual. 

Again,  the  reports  received  through  particular  channels  are  influ¬ 
enced  by  the  kind  of  reports  that  have  already  come  through  that  channel. 
To  one  who  has  not  seen  trees  frequently,  a  spruce  and  a  balsam  are  not 
seen  to  be  different.  They  are  just  ‘evergreens’.  With  better  educated 
seeing,  this  individual  later  differentiates,  perhaps,  four  kinds  of  spruce. 

ON  ABSTRACTING 

Because  of  this  factor  of  experience,  the  response  of  each  individual  to 
similar  external  stimuli  is  individual.  We  can  only  agree  on  colours, 
shapes,  distances.,  by  ignoring  the  fact  that  the  effect  of  the  'same’ 
stimulus  is  different  in  different  individuals.  Besides  that,  we  have  no 
accurate  means  of  comparing  our  impressions. 

The  ‘time’  factor  enters,  in  that  we  cannot  become  acquainted  with 
our  pencil  on  all  sides  at  once .  Nor  can  we  observe  the  outer  form  and 
the  inner  structure  at  the  ‘same  time*.  We  may  even  neglect  to  examine 
the  inner  structure  entirely.  Even  more  important  is  the  fact  that  all  our 
means  together  give  us  only  a  partial  and  personal  acquaintance  with  the 
‘pencil*.  Continually  we  invent  extra-neural  means  which  reveal  new 
characteristics  and  finer  detail.  Nor  is  this  process  ever  completed.  No 
one  can  ever  acquire  a  ‘complete*  acquaintance  with  even  so  simple  an 
object  as  a  pencil.  The  chemistry,  the  physics,  the  uses  of  the  varieties .  , 
offer  fields  of  acquaintance  that  can  be  extended  indefinitely.  Nature  is 
inexhaustible;  the  events  have  infinite  numbers  of  characteristics,  and 
this  accounts  for  the  wealth  and  infinite  numbers  of  possibilities  in  nature. 

I  used  the  word  ‘acquaintance*  deliberately,  because  it  seems  vague, 
and,  as  yet,  el  gambling  on  words  have  not  spoiled  this  term.  I  had  to 
avoid  the  el  terms  ‘senses*  and  ‘mind*  as  much  as  possible  in  this  analysis. 
If  we  recall  the  example  of  paper  roses  in  the  case  of  hay  fever,  we 
shall  realize  that  the  terms  ‘senses*  and  ‘mind*  are  not  reliable,  particu¬ 
larly  in  humans.  As  a  further  instance,  we  have  but  to  remember  the 
experiment  with  newspaper  headlines,  also  cited  earlier. 

We  become  better  acquainted  with  the  object  by  exploring  it  in 
manifold  ways,  and  building  for  ourselves  different  pictures,  all  partial, 
and  supplied  by  direct  or  indirect  contact  with  different  nerve  cen¬ 
tres.  In  these  explorations,  different  nerve  centres  supply  their  specific 
responses  to  the  different  stimuli.  Other  higher  nerve  centres  summarize 
them,  eliminate  weaker  details,  and  so,  gradually,  our  acquaintance 
becomes  fuller  while  yet  remaining  specific  and  partial ,  and  the  semantic 
problems  of  evaluation,  meanings,  begin  to  be  important. 

If  we  try  to  select  a  term  which  would  describe  structurally  the 
processes  which  are  essential  for  our  acquaintance  with  the  object,  we 
should  select  a  term  which  implies  ‘non-allness*  and  the  specificity  of 
the  response  to  the  stimuli. 

If  we  pass  from  such  a  primitive  level  to  a  level  of  1933,  and 
enquire  what  we  actually  know  about  an  object  and  the  structure  of  its 
material,  we  find  that  in  1933  we  know  positively  that  the  internal  struc¬ 
ture  of  materials  is  very  different  from  what  we  gather  by  our  rough 
‘senses*  on  the  macroscopic  level.  It  appears  of  a  dynamic  character  and 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OE  TIME-BINDING 

of  an  extremely  fine  structure,  which  neither  light,  nor  the  nerve  centres 
affected  by  light,  can  register. 

What  we  see  is  structurally  only  a  specific  statistical  mass-effect  of 
happenings  on  a  much  finer  grained  level.  We  see  what  we  see  because 
we  miss  all  the  finer  details.  For  our  purpose,  it  is  usually  enough  to 
deal  only  with  sight;  this  simplifies  writing,  and  the  comments  made 
apply  to  all  other  'senses’,  though  perhaps  in  different  degrees. 

In  1933,  in  our  human  economy,  we  have  to  take  into  account  at 
least  three  levels.  The  one  is  the  sub-microscopic  level  of  science,  what 
science  ‘knows*  about  ‘it*.  The  second  is  the  gross  macroscopic,  daily 
experience  level  of  rough  objects.  The  third  is  the  verbal  level. 

We  must  also  evaluate  an  important  semantic  issue;  namely,  the 
relative  importance  of  these  three  levels.  We  know  already  that  to 
become  acquainted  with  an  object,  we  must  not  only  explore  it  from  all 
possible  points  of  view  and  put  it  in  contact  with  as  many  nerve  centres 
as  we  can,  as  this  is  an  essential  condition  of  ‘knowing*,  but  we  must 
also  not  forget  that  our  nerve  centres  must  summarize  the  different  par¬ 
tial,  abstracted,  specific  pictures.  In  the  human  class  of  life,  we  find  a 
new  factor,  non-existent  in  any  other  form  of  lif e ;  namely,  that  we  have 
a  capacity  to  collect  all  known  experiences  of  different  individuals.  Such 
a  capacity  increases  enormously  the  number  of  observations  a  single 
individual  can  handle,  and  so  our  acquaintance  with  the  world  around, 
and  in,  us  becomes  much  more  refined  and  exact.  This  capacity,  which 
I  call  the  time-binding  capacity,  is  only  possible  because,  in  distinction 
from  the  animals,  we  have  evolved,  or  perfected,  extra-neural  means  by 
which,  without  altering  our  nervous  system,  we  can  refine  its  operation 
and  expand  its  scope.  Our  scientific  instruments  record  what  ordinarily 
we  cannot  see,  hear,.  Our  neural  verbal  centres  allow  us  to  exchange 
and  accumulate  experiences,  although  no  one  could  live  through  all  of 
them  ;  and  they  would  be  soon  forgotten  if  we  had  no  neural  and  extra- 
neural  means  to  record  them. 

Again  the  organism  works  as-a- whole.  All  forms  of  human  activi¬ 
ties  are  interconnected.  It  is  impossible  to  select  a  special  characteristic 
and  treat  it  in  a  delusional  el  ‘isolation*  as  the  most  important.  Science 
becomes  an  extra-neural  extension  of  the  human  nervous  system.  We 
might  expect  the  structure  of  the  nervous  system  to  throw  some  light  on 
the  structure  of  science ;  and,  vice  versa,  the  structure  of  science  might 
elucidate  the  working  of  the  human  nervous  system. 

This  fact  is  very  important,  semantically,  and  usually  is  not  suffi¬ 
ciently  emphasized  or  analysed  enough.  When  we  take  these  undeniable 
facts  into  account,  we  find  the  results  already  reached  to  be  quite  natural 

ON  ABSTRACTING 

and  necessary,  and  we  understand  better  why  an  individual  cannot  be 
considered  entirely  sane  if  he  is  wholly  ignorant  of  scientific  method  and 
structure,  and  so  retains  primitive  s.r. 

For  a  theory  of  sanity,  all  three  levels  are  important.  Our  'senses* 
react  as  they  do  because  they  are  united  as-a-whole  in  one  living  struc¬ 
ture,  which  has  potentialities  or  capacities  for  language  and  science. 

If  we  enquire  what  we  do  in  science,  we  find  that  we  'observe* 
silently  and  then  record  our  observations  verbally .  From  a  neurological 
point  of  view,  we  abstract  whatever  we  and  the  instruments  can ;  then 
we  summarize ;  and,  finally,  we  generalize,  by  which  we  mean  the 
processes  of  abstracting  carried  further. 

In  our  'acquaintance*  with  daily  objects,  we  do  substantially  a  similar 
thing.  We  abstract  whatever  we  can,  and,  according  to  the  degree  of 
intelligence  and  information  we  have,  we  summarize  and  generalize. 
From  the  psychophysiological  point  of  view,  the  ignorant  is  neurologically 
deficient.  But  to  'know*  or  to  'believe*  something  which  is  false  to  facts 
is  still  more  dangerous  and  akin  to  delusions,  as  psychiatry  and  daily 
experience  teach  us.1  It  is  a  neurological  fallacy  to  treat  science  in 
'isolation*  and  disregard  its  psychophysiological  role. 

In  the  building  of  our  language,  a  similar  neurological  process 
becomes  evident.  If  we  were  to  see  a  series  of  different  individuals, 
whom  we  might  call  Smith,  Brown,  Jones . ,  we  could,  by  a  process  of 
abstracting  the  characteristics,  segregate  the  individuals  by  sizes  or 
colours . ;  then,  by  concentration  on  one  characteristic  and  disregarding 
the  others,  we  could  build  classes  or  higher  abstractions,  such  as  ‘whites*, 
'blacks*, .  Abstracting  again,  with  rejection  of  the  colour  difference . ,  we 
would  finally  reach  the  term  'man*.  This  procedure  is  general. 

Anthropological  studies  show  clearly  how  the  degree  of  'culture' 
among  primitive  peoples  can  be  measured  by  the  orders  of  the  abstrac¬ 
tions  they  have  produced.  Primitive  languages  are  characterized  particu¬ 
larly  by  an  enormous  number  of  names  for  individual  objects.  Some 
savage  races  have  names  for  a  pine  or  an  oak . ,  but  have  no  'tree*,  which 
is  a  higher  abstraction  from  'pines*,  'oaks*, .  Some  other  tribes  have  the 
term  'tree*,  but  do  not  have  a  still  higher  abstraction  'woods*.  It  does 
not  need  much  emphasis  to  see  that  higher  abstractions  are  extremely 
expedient  devices.  There  is  an  enormous  economy  which  facilitates 
mutual  understanding  in  being  able  to  be  brief  in  a  statement  and  yet 
cover  wider  subjects. 

Let  us  consider  a  primitive  statement  'I  have  seen  treei*,  followed 
by  a  description  of  the  individual  characteristics  'I  have  seen  tree2\  with 
minute  individual  description . ,  where  treei,  tree2 . ,  stand  for  names  of 

VII.  T1IK  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

the  individual  trees.  If  an  event  of  interest  had  happened  in  a  place 
where  there  were  a  hundred  trees,  it  would  take  a  long  while  to  observe 
fairly  well  the  individual  trees  and  still  longer  to  give  an  approximate 
description  of  them.  Such  a  method  is  non-expedient,  fundamentally 
endless ;  the  mechanism  is  cumbersome,  involves  many  irrelevant  charac¬ 
teristics  ;  and  it  is  impossible  to  express  in  a  few  words  much  that  might 
be  important .  Progress  must  be  slow;  the  general  level  of  development 
of  a  given  race  or  individual  must  be  low.  It  should  be  noticed  that  the 
problem  of  evaluation  enters,  at  once  implying  many  most  important 
psycho-logical  and  semantic  processes.  Similar  remarks  apply  to  the 
abstracting  of  infants,  ‘mentally*  deficient  grown-ups,  and  some  ‘men¬ 
tally*  ill. 

Indeed,  as  the  readers  of  my  Manhood  of  Humanity  already  know, 
the  ‘human  class  of  life*  is  chiefly  differentiated  from  ‘animals*  by  its 
rapid  rate  of  progress  through  the  rapid  rate  of  accumulation  of  past 
experiences.  This  is  possible  only  when  expedient  means  of  communi¬ 
cation  are  established ;  that  is,  when  higher  and  higher  orders  of  abstrac¬ 
tions  are  worked  out. 

All  scientific  ‘laws*,  and  other  generalizations  of  higher  order  (even 
single  words),  are  precisely  such  methods  of  expediency,  and  represent 
abstractions  of  very  high  order.  They  are  uniquely  important  because 
they  accelerate  progress  and  help  the  further  summarizing  and  abstract¬ 
ing  of  results  achieved  by  others.  Naturally,  this  process  of  abstracting 
has  also  unique  practical  consequences.  When  chemical  ‘elements*  were 
‘permanent*  and  ‘immutable*,  our  physics  and  chemistry  were  much 
undeveloped.  With  the  advent  of  higher  abstractions,  such  as  the  monis¬ 
tic  and  general  dynamic  theories  of  all  ‘matter*  and  ‘electricity*,  unitary 
field  theories.,  the  creative  freedom  of  science  and  the  control  over 
‘nature’  have  increased  enormously  and  will  increase  still  more. 

Psychiatry  also  seems  to  give  data  indicating  that  ‘mental*  illnesses 
are  connected  either  with  arrested  development  or  with  regression  to 
phylogenetically  older  and  more  primitive  levels,  all  of  which,  of  course, 
involves  lower  order  abstractions.  From  the  point  of  view  of  a  theory  of 
sanity,  a  sharp  differentiation  between  ‘man*  and  ‘animal*  becomes  im¬ 
perative.  For  with  ‘man*,  the  lack  of  knowledge  of  this  difference  may 
lead  to  the  copying  of  animals,  which  would  involve  semantic  regression 
and  ultimately  become  a  ‘mental*  illness. 

Although  organisms  have  had  acquaintance  with  objects  for  many 
hundreds  or  thousands  of  millions  of  years,  the  higher  abstractions 
which  characterize  ‘man’  are  only  a  few  hundreds  of  thousands  of  years 
old.  As  a  result,  the  nervous  currents  have  a  natural  tendency  to  select 

ON  ABSTRACTING 

the  older,  more  travelled,  nervous  paths.  Education  should  counteract 
this  tendency  which,  from  a  human  point  of  view,  represents  regression 
or  under-development. 

By  now  we  know  how  important  it  is  for  a  ^-system  to  abandon 
the  older  implications  and  adopt  an  actional,  behaviouristic,  operational, 
or  functional  language.  On  the  neurological  level,  what  the  nervous  sys¬ 
tem  does  is  abstracting,  of  which  the  summarization,  integration . ,  are 
only  special  aspects.  Hence,  I  select  the  term  abstracting  as  fundamental. 

The  standard  meaning  of  ‘abstract*,  ‘abstracting*  implies  ‘selecting’, 
‘picking  out*,  ‘separating*,  ‘summarizing*,  ‘deducting*,  ‘removing*,  ‘omit¬ 
ting*,  ‘disengaging*,  ‘taking  away’,  ‘stripping*,  and,  as  an  adjective,  not 
‘concrete*.  We  see  that  the  term  ‘abstracting*  implies  structurally  and 
semantically  the  activities  characteristic  of  the  nervous  system,  and  so 
serves  as  an  excellent  functional  physiological  term. 

There  are  other  reasons  for  making  the  term  ‘abstracting*  funda¬ 
mental,  which,  from  a  practical  point  of  view,  are  important.  A  bad 
habit  cannot  be  easily  eliminated  except  by  forming  a  new  semantic 
counter-reaction.  All  of  us  have  some  undesirable  but  thoroughly  estab¬ 
lished  linguistic  habits  and  s.r  which  have  become  almost  automatic, 
overloaded  with  unconscious  ‘emotional*  evaluation.  This  is  the  reason 
why  new  ‘non-systems*  are,  in  the  beginning,  so  extremely  difficult  to 
acquire.  We  have  to  break  down  the  old  structural  habits  before  we  can 
acquire  the  new  s.r.  The  E  geometries  or  the  N  systems  are  not  any 
more  difficult  than  the  older  systems  were.  Perhaps  they  are  even  simpler. 
The  main  semantic  difficulty,  for  those  accustomed  to  the  old,  consists 
in  breaking  the  old  structural  linguistic  habits,  in  becoming  once  more 
flexible  and  receptive  in  feelings,  and  in  acquiring  new  s.r .  Similar 
remarks  apply  in  a  more  marked  degree  to  a  ^-system.  The  majority  of 
us  have  very  little  to  do  directly  with  E  or  El  systems  (although  indirectly 
we  all  have  a  good  deal  to  do- with  them).  But  all  of  us  live  our  imme¬ 
diate  lives  in  a  human  world  still  desperately  A .  Hence  a  ^-system,  no 
matter  what  benefits  it  may  give,  is  much  handicapped  by  the  old  semantic 
blockages. 

In  building  such  a  system,  this  natural  resistance  or  persistence  of 
the  old  s.r  must  be  taken  into  consideration  and,  if  possible,  counter¬ 
acted.  One  of  the  most  pernicious  bad  habits  which  we  have  acquired 
‘emotionally*  from  the  old  language  is  the  feeling  of  ‘allness’,  of  ‘con¬ 
creteness’,  in  connection  with  the  ‘is’  of  identity  and  elementalism.  One 
of  the  main  points  in  the  present  ^-system  is  first  to  remove  entirely 
from  our  s.r  this  ‘allness*  and  ‘concreteness*,  both  of  which  are  struc¬ 
turally  unjustified  and  lead  to  identification,  absolutism,  dogmatism,  and 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

other  semantic  disturbances.  Usually,  the  term  'abstract'  is  contrasted 
with  'concrete',  which  is  connected  with  some  vague  feeling  of  'allness\ 
By  making  the  functional  term  abstracting  fundamental,  we  establish  a 
most  efficient  semantic  counter-reaction  to  replace  the  older  terms  which 
had  such  vicious  structural  implications.  Indeed,  it  is  comparatively  easy 
to  accept  the  term  ‘abstractions  of  different  orders',  and  any  one  who 
does  so  will  see.  how  much  clarity  and  how  much  semantic  balance  he 
will  automatically  acquire. 

From  a  non-el  point  of  view,  the  term  'abstracting'  is  also  very 
satisfactory.  The  structure  of  the  nervous  system  is  in  ordered  levels, 
and  all  levels  go  through  the  process  of  abstracting  from  the  other  levels. 

The  term  implies  a  general  activity,  not  only  of  the  nervous  system 
as-a-whole,  but  even  of  all  living  protoplasm,  as  already  explained.  The 
characteristic  activities  of  the  nervous  system,  such  as  summarizing, 
integrating . ,  are  also  included  by  implication. 

If  we  wish  to  use  our  terms  in  the  strictly  non-el  way,  we  must 
abandon  the  older  division  of  ‘physiological  abstractions',  which  implies 
'body',  and  of  ‘mental  abstractions',  which,  in  turn,  implies  ‘mind',  both 
taken  in  an  el  way.  We  can  easily  do  that  by  postulating  abstractions  of 
different  orders.  We  should  notice  that  the  above  use  of  the  term 
‘abstracting'  differs  from  the  old  usage.  The  semantic  difference  is  in 
uniting  all  the  abstractions  our  nervous  system  performs  under  the  one 
term,  and  in  distinguishing  between  different  abstractions  by  the  order 
of  them,  which  is  functionally,  as  well  as  structurally,  justified. 

The  term  ‘first  order  abstractions’  or  ‘abstractions  of  lower  order' 
does  not  distinguish  between  ‘body'  and  ‘mind'.  Practically,  it  corres¬ 
ponds  roughly  to  ‘senses'  or  immediate  feelings,  except  that  by  implica¬ 
tion  it  does  not  eliminate  ‘mind\  Neither  does  the  term  ‘abstractions  of 
higher  orders’  eliminate  ‘body'  or  ‘senses’,  although  it  corresponds 
roughly  to  ‘mental’  processes. 

From  the  point  of  view  of  ‘order’,  the  term  ‘abstracting’  has  a  great 
deal  in  its  favor.  We  have  seen  what  serious  structural  and  semantic 
importance  the  term  ‘order’  has,  and  how  the  activity  of  the  nervous 
system  has  to  be  spoken  of  in  terms  of  order.  If  we  establish  the  term 
‘abstracting’  as  fundamental  for  its  general  semantic  implications,  we  can 
easily  make  the  meanings  more  definite  and  specific  in  each  case  by 
having  ‘abstractions  of  different  orders'. 

We  have  seen  also  that  the  terms  we  select  should  involve  environ¬ 
ment  by  implication:  it  is  not  difficult  to  see  that  the  term  ‘abstracting* 
implies  ‘abstracting  from  something'  and  so  involves  the  environment 
as  an  implication. 

ON  ABSTRACTING 

The  term  ‘abstractions  of  different  orders’  is,  in  this  work,  as 
fundamental  as  the  term  ‘time-binding’  was  in  the  author’s  earlier 
Manhood  of  Humanity.  Hence,  it  is  impossible  to  be  comprehensive 
about  it  at  this  stage ;  more  will  be  forthcoming  as  we  proceed. 

But  we  have  already  come  to  some  important  semantic  results.  We 
have  selected  our  structural  metaphysics,  and  decided  that  in  1933  we 
should  accept  the  metaphysics  of  1933,  which  is  given  exclusively  by 
science.  We  have  decided  to  abandon  the  false  to  facts  ‘is*  of  identity 
and  to  use,  instead,  the  best  available  language;  namely,  an  actional, 
behaviouristic,  functional,  operational  language,  based  on  ‘order’.  And, 
finally,  we  have  found  a  term  which  is  functionally  satisfactory  and  has 
the  correct  structural  and  neural  implications,  and  which  represents  a 
non-el  term,  and  of  which  the  meanings  can  be  expanded  and  refined 
indefinitely  by  assigning  to  them  different  orders. 

In  passing  on  to  the  general  scientific  outlook,  similar  structural 
remarks  upon  a  non-el  point  of  view  apply,  and  are  semantically  of 
importance.  Because  of  the  non-el  character  of  the  work  of  the  writers 
on  the  Einstein  and  new  quantum  theories,  much  use  is  made  of  this 
material  in  the  present  work.  There  is  a  marked  structural,  methodo¬ 
logical,  and  semantic  parallelism  between  all  modern  non-el  strivings, 
which  are  extremely  effective  psycho-logically.  More  material  on  this 
subject  is  given  in  Parts  IX  and  X. 

Now,  returning  to  the  analysis  of  the  object  which  we  called  ‘pencil’, 
we  observe  that,  in  spite  of  all  ‘similarities’,  this  object  is  unique,  is 
different  from  anything  else,  and  has  a  unique  relationship  to  the  rest  of 
the  world.  Hence,  we  should  give  the  object  a  unique  name .  For¬ 
tunately,  we  have  already  become  acquainted  with  the  way  mathema¬ 
ticians  manufacture  an  endless  array  of  individual  names  without  unduly 
expanding  the  vocabulary.  If  we  call  the  given  object  ‘pencil/,  we 
could  call  another  similar  object  ‘pencil2’, .  In  this  way,  we  produce 
individual  names,  and  so  cover  the  differences .  By  keeping  the  main 
root  word  ‘pencil’,  we  keep  the  implications  of  daily  life,  and  also  of 
similarities.  The  habitual  use  of  such  a  device  is  structurally  and  seman- 
lically  of  extreme  importance.  It  has  already  been  emphasized  repeatedly 
that  our  abstracting  from  physical  objects  or  situations  proceeds  by  miss¬ 
ing,  neglecting,  or  forgetting,  and  that  those  disregarded  characteristics 
usually  produce  errors  in  evaluation,  resulting  in  the  disasters  of  life. 
If  we  acquire  this  extensional  mathematical  habit  of  using  special 
names  for  unique  individuals,  we  become  conscious,  not  only  of  the 
similarities,  but  also  of  the  differences,  which  consciousness  is  one  of  the 

VII.  TIIK  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

mechanisms  for  helping  the  proper  evaluation  and  so  preventing  or 
eliminating  semantic  disturbances. 

So  we  now  have  before  us  a  unique  object  which  we  call  by  a 
unique  name  ‘pencili'.  If  we  enquire  what  science  1933  has  to  say  about 
this  object,  we  find  that  this  object  represents  structurally  an  extremely 
complex,  dynamic  process.  For  our  purpose,  which  is  intuitive ,  it  is  of 
little  importance  whether  we  accept  the  object  as  made  up  of  atoms  and 
the  atom  as  made  up  of  whirling  electrons . ,  or  whether  we  accept  the 
newer  quantum  theory,  as  given  in  Part  X,  according  to  which  the  atom 
