is  formulated  in  terms  of  ‘electrons'  but  the  ‘electron'  is  the  region 
where  some  waves  reinforce  each  other,  instead  of  being  a  ‘bit'  of  some¬ 
thing.  It  is  of  no  importance  from  our  point  of  view  whether  the  atoms 
are  of  a  finite  size  or  whether  they  extend  indefinitely  and  are  noticeable 
to  us  only  in  the  regions  of  reinforcement  of  the  waves.  Naturally,  this 
last  hypothesis  has  a  strong  semantic  appeal,  since  it  would  account, 
when  worked  out,  for  many  other  facts,  such  as  ‘fulness’,  in  a  non-el 
language ;  but  probably  it  would  necessitate  a  postulation  of  some  sub- 
electronic  structures. 

What  is  important  for  our  s.r  is  that  we  realize  the  fact  that  the 
gross  macroscopic  materials  with  which  we  are  familiar  are  not  simply 
what  we  see,  feel . ,  but  consist  of  dynamic  processes  of  some  extremely 
fine  structure;  and  that  we  realize  further  that  our  ‘senses'  are  not 
adapted  to  register  these  processes  without  the  help  of  extra-neural 
means  and  higher  order  abstractions. 

Let  us  recall,  in  this  connection,  the  familiar  example  of  a  rotary 
fan,  which  is  made  up  of  separate  radial  blades,  but  which,  when  rotat¬ 
ing  with  a  certain  velocity,  gives  the  impression  of  a  solid  disk.  In  this 

case  the  ‘disk'  is 
not  ‘reality*,  but  a 
nervous  integration, 
or  abstraction  from 
the  rotating  blades. 
We  not  only  see  the 
‘disk'  (b)  where 
there  is  no  disk, 
but,  if  the  blades 
rotate  fast  enough, 
we  could  not  throw 
sand  through  them, 
as  the  sand  would  be  too  slow  to  get  through  before  being  struck  by  one 
of  the  blades. 

Fig.  la  Fig.  lb 

ON  ABSTRACTING 

The  ‘disk*  represents  a  joint  phenomenon  of  the  rotating  blades  (a) 
and  of  the  abstracting  power  of  our  nervous  system,  which  registers 
only  the  gross  macroscopic  aspects  and  slow  velocities,  but  not  the  finer 
activities  on  subtler  levels.  We  cannot  blame  ‘the  finite  mind'  for  the 
failure  to  register  the  separate  blades,  because  physical  instruments  may 
behave  similarly.  For  instance,  the  illustrations  (a)  and  ( h )  are  photo¬ 
graphs  of  a  small  fan  which  I  use  -in  lectures,  and  the  photographic 
camera  also  missed  the  rotating  blades  and  registered  only  a  ‘disk',  in 
Fig.  lb. 

Something  roughly  similar  may  be  assumed  for  our  purpose  as 
going  on  in  what  we  usually  call  ‘materials’.  These  are  composed  of 
some  dynamic,  fine-grained  processes,  not  unlike  the  ‘rotating  blades’  of 
our  example ;  and  what  we  register  is  the  ‘disk’,  be  it  a  table  or  a  chair 
or  ourselves. 

For  a  similar  reason,  we  may  assume  that  we  cannot  put  our  finger 
through  a  table,  as  our  finger  is  too  thick  and  too  slow,  and  that,  for 
some  materials,  it  takes  X-rays  to  be  agile  enough  to  penetrate. 

The  above  analogies  are  helpful  for  our  purpose  only,  but  are  over¬ 
simplified  and  should  not  be  taken  as  a  scientific  explanation. 

This  neural  process  seems  to  be  very  general,  and  in  all  our  daily 
experiences  the  dynamic  fine  structures  are  lost  to  our  rough  ‘senses’. 
We  register  ‘disks’,  although  investigation  discovers  not  ‘disks’,  but 
rotating  ‘blades’.  Our  gross  macroscopic  experience  is  only  a  nervous 
abstraction  of  some  definite  order. 

As  we  need  to  speak  about  such  problems,  we  must  select  the  best 
language  at  our  disposal.  This  ought  to  be  non-el  and,  structurally,  the 
closest  to  facts.  Such  a  language  has  been  built,  and  is  to  be  found  in 
the  differential  and  four-dimensional  language  of  space-time,  and  in  the 
new  quantum  mechanics.  In  practice,  it  is  simple  to  ascribe  to  every 
‘point  of  space’  a  date,  but  it  takes  some  training  to  get  this  s.r.  The 
language  of  space-time  is  non-el.  To  the  new  notion  of  a  ‘point’  in 
‘space-time’,  such  a  ‘point’,  always  having  a  date  associated  with  it  and 
hence  never  identical  with  any  other  point,  the  name  of  ‘point-event*,  or 
simply  ‘event’,  has  been  given. 

How  to  pass  from  point-events  to  extended  macroscopic  events  is  a 
problem  in  mathematical  ‘logic’.  Several  quite  satisfactory  schemes  have 
been  given,  into  the  details  of  which  we  do  not  need  to  enter  here.  As 
the  non-el  structure  of  the  language  of  space-time  appears  different  from 
the  older  el  language  of  ‘space’  and  ‘time’,  quite  obviously  the  old  term 
‘matter’,  which  belonged  to  the  descriptive  apparatus  of  ‘space’  and 
‘time’,  should  be  abandoned  also,  and  the  ‘bits’  of  materials  we  dealt  with 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

should  be  referred  to  by  structurally  new  terms.  In  fact,  we  know  that 
the  old  term  'matter*  can  be  displaced  by  some  other  term  connected  with 
the  'curvature*  of  'space-time*. 

There  is  on  record  a  striking  example  of  what  the  structure  of  a 
form  of  representation  means.  In  a  paper  printed  in  the  Proceedings  of 
the  National  Academy  of  Science,  February,  1926,  Professor  G.  Y. 
Rainich,  the  mathematician,  tried -to  introduce  'mass*  into  space-time, 
the  terms  belonging  to  forms  of  representation  of  different  structure. 
He  succeeded,  but  at  the  price  of  splitting  space-time  into  the  original 
space  and  time.  This  is,  as  far  as  my  knowledge  goes,  the  first  proof  of 
how  intimately  a  form  of  representation  is  inwardly  and  structurally 
interconnected.  This  fact  is  of  extraordinary  semantic  importance  for 
psycho-logicians  and  psychiatrists,  who  always  study  symbolism  of  some 
sort.  It  would  be  of  great  interest  to  have  such  problems  worked  out 
by  them. 

As  abstracting  in  many  orders  seems  to  be  a  general  process  found 
in  all  forms  of  life,  but  particularly  in  humans,  it  is  of  importance  to  be 
clear  on  this  subject  and  to  select  a  language  of  proper  structure.  As 
we  know  already,  we  use  one  term,  say  'apple*,  for  at  least  four  entirely 
different  entities;  namely,  (1)  the  event,  or  scientific  object,  or  the 
sub-microscopic  physico-chemical  processes,  (2)  the  ordinary  object  manu¬ 
factured  from  the  event  by  our  lower  nervous  centres,  (3)  the  psycho¬ 
logical  picture  probably  manufactured  by  the  higher  centres,  and  (4)  the 
verbal  definition  of  the  term.  If  we  use  a  language  of  adjectives  and 
subject-predicate  forms  pertaining  to  'sense*  impressions,  we  are  using 
a  language  which  deals  with  entities  inside  our  skin  and  characteristics 
entirely  non-existent  in  the  outside  world.  Thus  the  events  outside  our 
skin  are  neither  cold  nor  warm,  green  nor  red,  sweet  nor  bitter . ,  but 
these  characteristics  are  manufactured  by  our  nervous  system  inside  our 
skins,  as  responses  only  to  different  energy  manifestations,  physico¬ 
chemical  processes , .  When  we  use  such  terms,  we  are  dealing  with  char¬ 
acteristics  which  are  absent  in  the  external  world,  and  build  up  an 
anthropomorphic  and  delusional  world  non-similar  in  structure  to  the 
world  around  us.  Not  so  if  we  use  a  language  of  order,  relations,  or 
structure,  which  can  be  applied  to  sub-microscopic  events,  to  objective 
levels,  to  semantic  levels,  and  which  can  also  be  expressed  in  words.  In 
using  such  language,  we  deal  with  characteristics  found  or  discovered  on 
all  levels  which  give  us  structural  data  uniquely  important  for  knowledge. 
The  ordering  on  semantic  levels  in  the  meantime  abolishes  identification. 
It  is  of  extreme  importance  to  realize  that  the  relational.,  attitude  is 
optional  and  can  be  applied  everywhere  and  always,  once  the  above- 

UN  AHSTKACTINt; 

mentioned  benefits  are  realized.  Thus,  any  object  can  be  considered  as  a 
set  of  relations  of  its  parts . ,  any  ‘sense’  perception  may  be  considered  as 
a  response  to  a  stimulus . ,  which  again  introduces  relations , .  As  relations 
are  found  in  the  scientific  sub-microscopic  world,  the  objective  world, 
and  also  in  the  psycho-logical  and  verbal  worlds,  it  is  beneficial  to  use 
such  a  language  because  it  is  similar  in  structure  to  the  external  world 
and  our  nervous  system;  and  it  is  applicable  to  all  levels.  The  use  of 
such  a  language  leads  to  the  discovery  of  invariant  relations  usually 
called  ‘laws  of  nature*,  gives  us  structural  data  which  make  the  only 
possible  content  of  ‘knowledge*,  and  eliminates  also  anthropomorphic, 
primitive,  and  delusional  speculations,  identifications,  and  harmful  s.r. 

CHAPTER  XXV 

ON  THE  STRUCTURAL  DIFFERENTIAL 

You  cannot  recognise  an  event;  because  when  it  is  gone,  it  is  gone  .  .  . 
But  a  character  of  an  event  can  be  recognised.  .  .  .  Things  which  we  thus 
recognise  I  call  objects.  (573)  A.  N.  whitehead 

When  there  is  a  judgment  of  identity  or  difference,  it  is  because  a  par¬ 
ticular  associative  reaction  of  the  second  order  is  occurring,  conditioned 
by  the  primary  reaction,  whether  the  same  or  different;  this  is  a  gain  in 
perceptive  knowledge.  (4ii)  henri  pi£ron 

To  some  extent,  the  practice  of  thinking,  deciding,  feeling,  appreciating, 
and  sympathizing  molds  the  personality  of  the  thinker.  Presumably,  the 
stable  patterns  of  cortical  association  are  changed  by  the  performance  of 
these  acts  just  as  on  a  lower  plane  muscles  are  changed  by  systematic 
exercises.  (222)  c.  judson  herrick 

Experimental  analysis  of  the  memory  of  forms  insusceptible  of  symbolic 
schematization  has  convinced  me  of  the  great  importance  of  ocular  kinaes- 
thesia  and  the  small  part  played  by  visualization  in  nearly  all  individuals, 
with  the  general  illusion  of  really  visual  representations,  a  very  strong 
illusion,  especially  when  symbolic  and  verbal  schematization  is  possible. 
Ideas  which  are  substituted  for  visual  representation,  and  play  tne  same 
part,  are  easily  mistaken  for  it.  <4ii)  henri  pi£ron 

The  eyes  of  the  dog  give  to  him  sometimes  a  more  intelligent  expression 
than  that  of  his  master,  and  there  is  no  doubt  that  he  uses  them  to  very 
good  advantage;  but  they  are  not  our  eyes.  (221)  c.  judson  herrick 

Before  I  recapitulate,  in  the  form  of  a  structural  diagram,  what 
has  been  said  in  the  previous  chapter,  I  must  explain  briefly  the  use  of 
the  term  ‘event’.  The  introduction  of  new  terms  in  a  language  always 
represents  initial  difficulties  to  the  student.  It  is  always  advisable,  if 
only  possible,  to  introduce  terms  which  are  structurally  close  to  our 
daily  experience.  At  present,  in  physics,  we  have  a  dual  language ;  one 
of  ‘space-time*,  in  which  ‘matter*  is  connected  somehow  with  its  ‘curva¬ 
ture*,  the  other  of  the  quanta.  The  structure  of  both  languages  is  quite 
different,  and  at  present  scientists  have  not  succeeded  in  translating  one 
language  into  the  other.  Einstein,  in  his  latest  unified  field  theory,  has 
succeeded,  by  the  introduction  of  new  notions,  in  amalgamating  the 
electromagnetic  phenomena  with  the  general  theory  of  relativity;  but 
even  this  new  language  does  not  include  the  quantum  theory.  For  my 
purpose,  it  is  important  to  amalgamate  both  languages  as  an  intuitive  pic¬ 
torial  device,  which,  from  a  technical  point  of  view,  still  awaits  formula¬ 
tion.  As  the  ‘space-time*  continuum  is  the  closest  to  our  daily  experience, 
I  accept  the  language  of  ‘events*  as  fundamental  and  add  only  a  few 

ON  THE  STRUCTURAL  DIFFERENTIAL 

pictorial  notions  taken  from  the  quantum  theory.  There  is  no  doubt  that 
the  day  is  not  far  off  when  the  unified  field  theory  will  be  extended  to 
include  the  new  quantum  theory,  and  so  this  anticipation  does  not 
appear  illegitimate. 

If  we  take  something,  anything,  let  us  say  the  object  already  re¬ 
ferred  to,  called  ‘pencil1,  and  enquire  what  it  represents,  according  to 
science  1933,  we  find  that  the  ‘scientific  object'  represents  an  ‘event’,  a 
mad  dance  of  ‘electrons',  which  is  different  every  instant,  which  never 
repeats  itself,  which  is  known  to  consist  of  extremely  complex  dynamic 
processes  of  very  fine  structure,  acted  upon  by,  and  reacting  upon,  the 
rest  of  the  universe,  inextricably  connected  with  everything  else  and 
dependent  on  everything  else.  If  we  enquire  how  many  characteristics 
( m.o )  we  should  ascribe  to  such  an  event,  the  only  possible  answer  is 
that  we  should  ascribe  to  an  event  infinite  numbers  of  characteristics,  as 
it  represents  a  process  which  never  stops  in  one  form  or  another; 
neither,  to  the  best  of  our  knowledge,  does  it  repeat  itself. 

In  our  diagram,  Fig.  1,  we  indicate  this  by  a  parabola  (A),  which 
is  supposed  to  extend  indefinitely,  which  extension  we  indicate  by  a 
broken  off  line  (B).  We  symbolize  the  characteristics  by  small  circles 
(C),  the  number  of  which  is  obviously  indefinitely  great. 

Underneath,  we  symbolize  the  ‘object’  by  the  circle  (O),  which  has 
a  finite  size.  The  characteristics  of  the  object  we  also  denote  by  similar 
little  circles  (C').  The  number  of  characteristics  which  an  object  has 
is  large  but  finite,  and  is  denoted  by  the  finite  number  of  the  small 
circles  (C). 

Then  we  attach  a  label  to  the  object,  its  name,  let  us  say  ‘pencil ', 
which  we  indicate  in  our  diagram  by  the  label  (L).  We  ascribe,  also, 
characteristics  to  the  labels,  and  we  indicate  these  characteristics  by  the 
little  circles  (C"). 

The  number  of  characteristics  which  we  ascribe  by  definition  to  the 
label  is  still  smaller  than  the  number  of  characteristics  the  object  has. 
To  the  label  ‘pencil/  we  would  ascribe,  perhaps,  its  length,  thickness, 
shape,  colour,  hardness , .  But  we  would  mostly  disregard  the  accidental 
characteristics,  such  as  a  scratch  on  its  surface,  or  the  kind  of  glue  by 
which  the  two  wooden  parts  of  the  objective  ‘pencil'  are  held  together, . 
If  we  want  an  objective  ‘pencil'  and  come  to  a  shop  to  purchase  one, 
we  say  so  and  specify  verbally  only  these  characteristics  which  are  of 
particular  immediate  interest  to  us. 

It  is  clear  that  the  object  is  often  of  interest  to  us  for  some  special 
characteristics  of  immediate  usefulness  or  value.  If  we  enquire  as  to  the 
neurological  processes  involved  in  registering  the  object,  we  find  that  the 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIM K- BINDING 

Fig.  1 

ON  THK  STRUCTURAL  1)1  IT  LKKNT1 AL  3W) 

nervous  system  has  abstracted,  from  the  infinite  numbers  of  sub-micro¬ 
scopic  characteristics  of  the  event,  a  large  but  finite  number  of  macro¬ 
scopic  characteristics.  In  purchasing  a  ‘pencil’  we  usually  are  not 
interested  in  its  smell  or  taste.  But  if  we  were  interested  in  these 
abstractions,  we  would  have  to  find  the  smell  and  the  taste  of  our  object 
by  experiment. 

But  this  is  not  all.  The  object  represents  in  this  language  a  gross 
macroscopic  abstraction,  for  our  nervous  system  is  not  adapted  for 
abstracting  directly  the  infinite  numbers  of  characteristics  which  the  end¬ 
lessly  complex  dynamic  fine  structure  of  the  event  represents.  We  must 
consider  the  object  as  a  ‘first  abstraction’  (with  a  finite  number  of  char¬ 
acteristics)  from  the  infinite  numbers  of  characteristics  an  event  has. 
The  above  considerations  are  in  perfect  accord  not  only  with  the  func¬ 
tioning  of  the  nervous  system  but  also  with  its  structure.  Our  nervous 
system  registers  objects  with  its  lower  centres  first,  and  each  of  these 
lower  specific  abstractions  we  call  an  object.  If  we  were  to  define  an 
object,  we  should  have  to  say  that  an  object  represents  a  first  abstrac¬ 
tion  with  a  finite  number  of  m.o  characteristics  from  the  infinite  num¬ 
bers  oi  m.o  characteristics  an  event  has. 

Obviously,  if  our  inspection  of  the  object  is  through  the  lower 
nervous  centres,  the  number  of  characteristics  which  the  object  has  is 
larger  (taste,  smell . ,  of  our  pencili)  than  the  number  of  characteristics 
which  we  need  to  ascribe  to  the  label.  The  label,  the  importance  of  which 
lies  in  its  meanings  to  us,  represents  a  still  higher  abstraction  from  the 
event,  and  usually  labels,  also,  a  semantic  reaction. 

We  have  come  to  some  quite  obvious  and  most  important  structural 
conclusions  of  evaluation  of  the  non-el  type.  We  see  that  the  object 
is  not  the  event  but  an  abstraction  from  it,  and  that  the  label  is  not  the 
object  nor  the  event,  but  a  still  further  abstraction.  The  nervous  process 
of  abstracting  we  represent  by  the  lines  (N),  (N').  The  characteristics 
left  out ,  or  not  abstracted,  are  indicated  by  the  lines  (B'),  (B"). 

For  our  semantic  purpose,  the  distinction  between  lower  and  higher 
abstractions  seems  fundamental ;  but,  of  course,  we  could  call  the  object 
simply  the  first  order  abstraction,  and  the  label,  with  its  meanings,  the 
second  order  abstraction,  as  indicated  in  the  diagram. 

If  we  were  to  enquire  how  this  problem  of  abstracting  in  different 
orders  appears  as  a  limiting  case  among  animals,  we  should  select  a  defi¬ 
nite  individual  with  which  to  carry  on  the  analysis.  For  our  analysis,  which 
is  deliberately  of  an  extensional  character,  we  select  an  animal  with  a 
definite,  proper  name,  corresponding  to  ‘Smith’  among  us.  Such  an 
animal  suggests  itself  at  once  on  purely  verbal  grounds. 

VJ1.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

It  is  the  one  we  call  ‘Fido’.  Practically  all  English  speaking  people 
are  acquainted  with  the  name  ‘Fido’.  Besides,  most  of  us  like  dogs  and 
are  aware  of  how  ‘intelligent’  they  are. 

Investigations  and  experimenting  have  shown  that  the  nervous 
system  of  a  Fido  presents,  in  structure  and  function,  marked  similarities 
to  that  of  a  Smith.  Accordingly,  we  may  assume  that,  in  a  general  way, 
it  functions  similarly.  We  have  already  spoken  of  the  event  in  terms 
of  recognition;  namely,  that  we  can  never  recognize  an  event,  as  it 
changes  continually.  Whitehead  points  out  the  fundamental  difference 
between  an  event  and  an  object  in  terms  of  recognition ;  namely,  that 
an  event  cannot  be  recognized,  and  that  an  object  can  be  recognized. 
He  defines  the  object  as  the  recognizable  part  of  the  event.  The  use  of 
this  definition  helps  us  to  test  whether  Fido  has  'objects’.  Since  experi¬ 
ments  show  that  Fido  can  recognize,  we  have  to  ascribe  to  Fido  objects 
by  definition.  If  we  enquire  what  the  objects  of  Fido  represent,  the 
structure  and  function  of  his  nervous  system,  which  are  very  similar  to 
ours,  would  suggest  that  Fido’s  objects  represent,  also,  abstractions  of 
some  low  order,  from  the  events.  Would  his  objects  appear  the  ‘same’ 
as  ours?  No.  First  of  all,  the  abstractions  from  events  which  we  call 
objects  are  not  the  ‘same’,  even  when  abstracted  by  different  individuals 
among  humans.  An  extreme  example  of  this  can  be  given  in  that  lim¬ 
ited  form  of  colour-blindness  which  is  called  Daltonism,  when  an  object 
which  appears  green  to  most  persons  appears  red  to  the  certain  few 
who  suffer  from  this  disease.  There  is,  at  present,  no  doubt  that  the 
nervous  abstractions  of  all  organisms  are  individual,  not  only  with  each 
individual,  but  at  different  'times’  with  one  individual,  and  differ,  also, 
for  these  higher  groups  (abstractions)  which  we  call  species.  We  can 
infer  how  the  world  appears  to  a  particular  organism  only  if  its  nervous 
structure  is  quite  similar  to  our  own.  With  species  widely  separated 
neurologically,  such  inferences  are  entirely  unjustified.  So,  on  general 
grounds,  the  'objects’  of  Fido  are  not  the  'same’  as  ours ;  on  neurologi¬ 
cal  grounds,  they  appear  only  similar.  In  daily  experience,  we  know  that 
we  should  have  difficulty  in  recognizing  our  own  glove  among  a  thou¬ 
sand,  but  Fido  could  perform  this  detection  for  us  much  better.  So  the 
'same’  glove  must  have  been  registered  in  the  nervous  system  of  Fido 
differently  from  the  way  it  has  been  in  ours. 

We  indicate  this  similarity  of  the  human  object  (O*)  and  the  ani¬ 
mal  object  (Oa)  by  making  the  circle  (Oa)  smaller,  and  emphasize  the 
difference  between  the  objects  by  differently  spacing  the  holes  represent¬ 
ing  the  characteristics.  Whether  we  call  the  objects  (O*)  and  (Oa) 
'first  order’  abstractions  or  '100th  order’  abstractions,  or  simply  'lower 

ON  TIIK  STRUCTURAL  I )1  FFKKKNT1AI 

Fig.  2 

order*  abstractions,  is  mainly  optional.  There  is  no  neurological  doubt 
that  all  'objects’  represent  low  order  abstractions  and  the  use  of  a  num¬ 
ber  to  indicate  the  order  is  simply  a  matter  of  convention  and  con¬ 
venience.  If  we  were  to  start  with  the  simplest  living  cell,  we  might 
ascribe  to  its  abstractions  the  term  'first  order*  abstractions.  If  we  were 
to  survey  in  this  way  all  known  forms  of  life,  we  might  ascribe  to  Fido 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

and  Smith  very  large  numbers  as  their  orders  of  abstractions.  But  this 
is  unnecessary,  as  we  shall  presently  see. 

We  note  that  Fido  dpes  abstract  from  events,  at  any  rate,  in  lower 
orders,  ‘has  objects’  (Oa)  which  he  can  recognize.  The  question  is, 
does  he  abstract  in  higher  orders  ?  We  might  answer  that  he  does  within 
certain  limits.  Or,  we  might  prefer  to  take  the  limits  of  his  abstracting 
capacities  for  granted  and  to  include  them  all  as  lower  order  abstractions. 
For  the  sake  of  convenience  and  simplicity,  we  select  the  last  method  and 
say  that  he  does  not  abstract  in  higher  orders.  In  our  schematic  repre¬ 
sentation,  we  shall  discover  some  very  important  differences  between 
the  abstracting  capacities  of  humans  and  animals,  and  so  we  introduce 
here  only  as  much  complexity  as  we  need.  As  animals  have  no  speech, 
in  the  human  sense,  and  as  we  have  called  the  verbal  labelling*  of  the 
object  ‘second  order  abstraction’  we  say  that  animals  do  not  abstract  in 
higher  orders. 

If  we  compare  our  diagram  and  what  it  represents  with  the  well- 
known  facts  of  daily  life,  we  see  that  Smith’s  abstracting  capacities  are 
not  limited  to  two  orders,  or  to  any  V  orders  of  abstractions. 

In  our  diagrams,  the  label  (L)  stands  for  the  name  which  we 
assigned  to  the  object.  But  we  can  also  consider  the  level  of  the  first 
label  (L)  as  a  descriptive  level  or  statement.  We  know  very  well  that 
Smith  can  always  say  something  about  a  statement  (L),  on  record. 
Neurologically  considered,  this  next  statement  (Li)  about  a  statement 
(L)  would  be  the  nervous  response  to  the  former  statement  (L)  which 
he  has  seen  or  heard  or  even  produced  by  himself  inside  his  skin.  So  his 
statement  (L*),  about  the  former  statement  (L),  is  a  new  abstraction 
from  the  former  abstraction.  In  my  language,  I  call  it  an  abstraction 
of  a  higher  order.  In  this  case,  we  shall  be  helped  by  the  use  of  num¬ 
bers.  If  we  call  the  level  (L)  an  abstraction  of  second  order ,  we  must 
call  an  abstraction  from  this  abstraction  an  abstraction  of  third  order , 
(Li).  Once  an  abstraction  of  third  order  has  been  produced,  it  becomes, 
in  turn,  a  fact  on  record,  potentially  a  stimulus,  and  can  be  abstracted 
further  and  a  statement  made  about  it,  which  becomes  an  abstraction  of 
the  fourth  order  (L2).  This  process  has  no  definite  limits,  for,  when¬ 
ever  statements  of  any  order  are  made,  we  can  always  make  a  statement 
about  them,  and  so  produce  an  abstraction  of  still  higher  order.  This 
capacity  is  practically  universal  among  organisms  which  we  call 
‘humans*.  Here  we  reach  a  fundamental  difference  between  ‘Smith* 

*In  the  present  system  the  terms  ‘label’,  ‘labelling’.,  are  always  connected  with 
their  meanings,  and  so,  for  simplicity,  from  now  on  the  reference  to  meanings 
will  be  omitted. 

ON  THE  STRUCTURAL  DIFFERENTIAL 

Fig.  3 

The  Structural  Differential 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

and  ‘Fido’.  Fido’s  power  of  abstracting  stops  somewhere ,  although  it 
may  include  a  few  orders.  Not  so  with' ‘Smith* ;  his  power  of  abstracting 
has  no  known  limit  (see  Part  VI). 

Perhaps  the  reader  is  semantically  perplexed  by  the  unfamiliarity 
of  the  language  of  this  analysis.  It  must  be  granted  that  the  introduction 
of  any  new  language  is  generally  perplexing,  and  it  is  justified  only  if 
the  new  language  accomplishes  something  structurally  and  semantically 
which  the  old  languages  did  not  accomplish.  In  this  case,  it  has  brought 
us  to  a  new  sharp  distinction  between  ‘man*  and  ‘animal*.  The  number 
of  orders  of  abstractions  an  ‘animal’  can  produce  is  limited.  The  number 
of  orders  of  abstractions  a  ‘man*  can  produce  is,  in  principle,  unlimited . 

Here  is  found  the  fundamental  mechanism  of  the  ‘time-binding* 
power  which  characterizes  man,  and  which,  allows  him,  in  principle,  to 
gather  the  experiences  of  all  past  generations.  A  higher  order  abstrac¬ 
tion,  let  us  say,  of  the  n- (-1  order,  is  made  as  a  response  to  the  stimulus 
of  abstractions  of  the  «th  order.  Among  ‘humans*  the  abstractions  of 
high  orders  produced  by  others,  as  well  as  those  produced  by  oneself 
are  stimuli  to  abstracting  in  still  higher  orders.  Thus,  in  principle,  we 
start  where  the  former  generation  left  off.  It  should  be  noticed  that,  in 
the  present  analysis,  we  have  abandoned  the  structurally  el  methods  and 
language,  and  the  whole  analysis  becomes  simple,  although  non^familiar 
because  it  involves  new  non-el  s.r. 

The  preceding  explanation  justifies  my  former  statement  that  the 
ascribing  of  absolute  numbers  to  the  orders  of  abstractions  of  /animal* 
and  of  ‘man*  is  unnecessary.  In  our  diagram  we  could  ascribe  as  many 
orders  of  abstractions  to  the  animal  as  we  please  ;  yet  we  should  have 
to  admit,  for  the  structural  correctness  of  description  of  experimental 
facts,  that  the  ‘animal’s’  power  of  abstracting  has  limits,  while  the  num¬ 
ber  of  orders  of  abstractions  a  ‘man*  can  produce  has  no  known  limits. 

From  an  epistemological  and  semantic  point  of  view,  there  is  an 
important  benefit  in  this  method.  In  this  language,  we  have  discovered 
sharp  verbal  and  analytical  methods,  in  terms  of  the  non-el  ‘orders  of 
abstractions*,  by  which  these  two  ‘classes  of  life’,  or  these  two  high 
abstractions,  can  be  differentiated.  The  terms  ‘animal*  and  ‘man*  each 
represent, a  name  for  an  abstraction  of  very  high  order,  and  not  a  name 
for  an  objective  individual.  To  formulate  the  difference  between  these 
‘classes*  becomes  a  problem  of  verbal  structural  ingenuity  and  methods , 
as  in  life  we  deal  only  with  absolute  individuals  on  the  un-speakable, 
objective  levels.  In  our  diagram,  we  could  hang  on  the  ‘animal*  object 
as  many  levels  of  labels,  which  stand  for  higher  order  abstractions,  as 

ON  THE  STRUCTURAL  DIFFERENTIAL 

we  please ;  yet  somewhere  we  would  have  to  stop ;  but  with  ‘man'  we 
could  continue  indefinitely. 

This  sharp  difference  between  ‘man’  and  ‘animal’  may  be  called  the 
1 horizontal  difference?.  The  habitual  use  of  our  hands  in  showing  these 
different  horizontal  levels  is  extremely  useful  in  studying  this  work,  and 
it  facilitates  greatly  the  acquiring  of  the  structurally  new  language  and 
corresponding  s.r.  The  solution  of  the  majority  of  human  semantic 
difficulties  (evaluation),  and  the  elimination  of  pathological  identifica¬ 
tion,  lie  precisely  in  the  maintenance,  without  confusion,  of  the  sharp 
differentiation  between  these  horizontal  levels  of  orders  of  abstractions. 

Let  us  now  investigate  the  possibility  of  a  sharp  ‘vertical  differ¬ 
ence \  We  have  already  come  to  the  conclusion  that  Fido  abstracts 
objects  from  events,  and  that,  if  his  nervous  system  is  similar  to  ours, 
his  lower  order  abstractions  are  similar  to  ours.  Here  we  may  ask  the 
question:  Does  Fido  ‘know’,  or  can  he  ‘know’,  that  he  abstracts?  It 
seems  undeniable  that  Fido  does  not  ‘know’  and  cannot  ‘know/  that 
he  abstracts,  because  it  takes  science  to  ‘know*  that  we  abstract,  and 
Fido  has  no  science.  It  is  semantically  important  that  we  should  be 
entirely  convinced  on  this  point.  We  do  not  argue  about  the  kind  of 
‘knowledge’  animals  may  have  or  about  the  relative  value  of  this  ‘knowl¬ 
edge’  as  compared  with  ours.  Science  was  made  possible  by  the  human 
nervous  system  and  the  invention  of  extra-neural  means  for  investiga¬ 
tion  and  recording,  which  animals  lack  entirely.  Whoever  claims  that 
animals  have  science  should,  to  say  the  least,  show  libraries  and  scientific 
laboratories  and  instruments  produced  by  animals. 

We  see  that,  although  Fido  has  abstracted,  he  not  only  does  not 
‘know’  but  cannot  ‘know’  that  he  abstracts,  as  this  last  ‘knowledge’  is 
given  exclusively  by  science,  which  animals  do  not  have.  In  this  con¬ 
sciousness  of  abstracting,  we  find  a  most  important  ‘ vertical  difference ’ 
between  Smith  and  Fido .  The  difference  is  sharp  again. 

If,  in  our  diagram,  Fig.  4,  we  ascribe  to  Fido  more  horizontal 
orders  of  abstractions,  let  us  say  two,  (Hi)  and  (H2),  nevertheless,  the 
‘animal’  stops  somewhere.  This  extended  diagram  illustrates  that  ‘man’ 
is  capable  of  abstracting  in  higher  and  higher  orders  indefinitely.  In 
this  diagram,  we  symbolize  the  fact  that  Fido  does  not  and  cannot 
‘know’  that  he  abstracts,  by  not  connecting  the  characteristics  of  his 
