object  (Oa)  by  lines  (An)  with  the  event  (E).  Without  science ,  we 
have  no  event;  Fido’s  gross  macroscopic  object  (Oa)  represents  ‘all’ 
that  he  ‘knowsf  or  cares  about .  We  see  that  the  vertical  difference  (Vi) 
formulated  as  consciousness  of  abstracting  for  Smith  appears  sharp,  and 
completely  differentiates  Fido  from  Smith.  In  it,  we  find  the  semantic 

VII.  Till':  MKCHANISM  OF  T1MK-HINDING 

,VX» 

Pvent  t 

Fig.  4 

mechanism  of  all  proper  evaluation,  based  on  non-identification  or  the 
differentiation  between  orders  of  abstractions,  impossible  with  animals. 

In  this  diagram  we  have  introduced  more  objects,  because  each 
individual  abstracts,  in  general,  from  an  event  different  objects,  in  the 
sense  that  they  are  not  identical  in  every  respect.  We  must  be  aware 
continuously  that  in  life  on  the  un-speakable  objective  level  we  deal 
only  with  absolute  individuals,  be  they  objects,  situations,  or  s.r .  The 
vertical  stratification  not  only  gives  us  representation  for  the  sharp 
difference  between  ‘man’  and  ‘animal’,  but  also  allows  us  to  train  our 
s.r  in  the  absolute  individuality  of  our  objects  and  those  of  different 
observers,  and  for  the  differences  between  their  individual  abstractions. 
What  has  been  said  here  applies  equally  to  all  first  order  effects  on  the 
objective  level,  such  as  immediate  feelings , . 

The  present  theory  can  only  be  fully  beneficial  when  the  reader 
acquires  in  his  system  the  habitual  feeling  of  both  the  vertical  and  the 
horizontal  stratifications  with  which  identification  becomes  impossible. 

ON  THE  STRUCTURAL  DIFFERENTIAL  $)7 

In  the  experiments  of  Doctor  Philip  S.  Graven  with  the  'mentally*  ill, 
training  in  the  realization  of  this  stratification  has  either  resulted  in 
complete  recovery  or  has  markedly  improved  the  conditions  of  the 
patient. 

The  diagram  is  used  in  two  distinct  ways.  One  is  by  showing  the 
abstracting  from  the  event  to  the  object,  and  the  applying  of  a  name  to 
the  object.  The  other  is  by  illustrating  the  level  of  statements  which 
can  be  made  about  statements.  If  we  have  different  objects,  and  label 
them  with  different  names,  say,  Alt  A2,  A3  .  .  .  An,  we  still  have  no 
proposition.  To  make  a  proposition,  we  have  to  accept  some  undefined 
relational  term,  by  which  we  relate  one  object  to  the  other.  The  use  of 
this  diagram  to  illustrate  the  levels  or  orders  of  statements  implies  that 
we  have  selected  some  metaphysics  as  expressed  in  our  undefined  rela¬ 
tional  terms.  We  should  be  fully  aware  of  the  difference  between  these 
two  uses  of  the  one  diagram  for  the  structural  illustration  of  two  aspects 
of  one  process. 

If  we  enquire:  What  do  the  characteristics  of  the  event  represent? 
We  find  that  they  are  given  only  by  science  and  represent  at  each  date 
the  highest,  most  verified,  most  reliable  abstractions  ‘Smith*  has 
produced. 

Theory  and  practice  have  shown  that  the  points  illustrated  by  the 
above  structural  diagrams  have  a  crucial  semantic  significance,  as,  with¬ 
out  using  them,  it  is  practically  impossible  to  train  ourselves  or  others 
and  to  accomplish  the  psychophysiological  re-education.  For  this  reason, 
the  diagrams  have  been  produced  for  home  and  school  use,  separately, 
in  the  simplified  form  illustrated  in  Fig.  5.  This  structural  diagram  is 
called  the  ‘Anthropometer*  or  the  ‘Structural  Differential*,  as  it  illus¬ 
trates  the  fundamental  structural  difference  between  the  world,  and  so 
the  environment,  of  the  animal  and  man.  If  we  live  in  such  a  very 
complex  human  world,  but  our  s.r ,  owing  to  wrong  evaluation,  are 
adjusted  only  to  the  simpler  animal  world,  free,  to  say  the  least,  from 
man-made  complications,  then  adjustment  and  sanity  for  humans  is 
impossible.  Our  s.r  are  bound  to  follow  the  simpler  animalistic  patterns, 
pathological  for  man .  All  human  experience,  scientific  or  otherwise, 
shows  that  we  still  copy  animals  in  our  nervous  reactions,  trying  to 
adjust  ourselves  to  a  world  of  fictitious,  simple  animal  structure,  while 
actually  we  live  in  a  world  of  very  complex  human  structure  which  is 
quite  different.  Naturally,  under  such  conditions,  which,  ultimately, 
turn  out  to  be  delusional,  human  adjustment  is  impossible  and  results  in 
false  evaluations,  animalistic  s.r ,  and  the  general  state  of  un-sanity. 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

Fig.  5 

The  Structural  Differential 

ON  THE  STRUCTURAL  D1  FI*' EKKNT1AL 

Any  one  who  will  work  out  the  present  analysis  with  the  aid  of  the 
Differential  will  find  clearly  that  the  majority  of  human  difficulties,  the 
preventable  or  curable  ‘mental’  or  semantic  disturbances  included,  are 
due  to  this  fatal  structural  error,  resulting  in  false  evaluation  due  to 
identification  or  lack  of  differentiation. 

The  Structural  Differentials  are  manufactured  in  two  forms:  (1) 
in  a  printed  map-like  scroll  for  hanging  on  the  walls  or  black-board ;  (2) 
in  relief  form  with  detachable  labels.  As  the  main  problem  is  to  train 
and  re-educate  the  semantic  psychophysiplogical  reactions  in  non-iden¬ 
tity,  the  relief  form  is  the  most  effective  because  of  the  freely  hanging 
strings,  detachable  labels.,  which  give  means  to  engage  more  nerve 
centres  in  the  training.  I  shall  describe  the  latter  type  in  some  detail. 

For  the  event  we  have  a  parabola  in  relief  (E),  broken  off  to  indi¬ 
cate  its  limitless  extension.  The  disk  (O*)  symbolizes  the  human  object ; 
the  disk  (Oa)  represents  the  animal  object.  The  label  (L)  represents 
the  higher  abstraction  called  a  name  (with  its  meaning  given  by  a  defini¬ 
tion).  The  lines  (An)  in  the  relief  diagram  are  hanging  strings  which 
are  tied  to  pegs.  They  indicate  the  process  of  abstracting.  The  free 
hanging  strings  (B»)  indicate  the  most  important  characteristics  left  out, 
neglected,  or  forgotten  in  the  abstracting.  The  Structural  Differentials 
are  provided  with  a  number  of  separate  labels  attached  to  pegs.  These 
are  hung,  one  to  the  other,  in  a  series,  and  the  last  one  may  be  attached 
by  a  long  peg  to  the  event,  to  indicate  that  the  characteristics  of  the 
event  represent  the  highest  abstractions  we  have  produced  at  each  date. 
The  objective  level  is  not  words,  and  cannot  be  reached  by  words  alone . 
We  must  point  our  Unger  and  be  silent,  or  we  shall  never  reach  this 
level .  Our  personal  feelings,  also,  are  not  words,  and  belong  to  the  objec¬ 
tive  level. 

The  whole  of  the  present  theory  can  be  illustrated  on  the  Struc¬ 
tural  Differential  by  the  childishly  simple  operation  of  the  teacher  point¬ 
ing  a  finger  to  the  event  and  then  to  the  object,  saying  This  is  not  this’ 
and  insisting  on  silence  on  the  pupil’s  part.  One  should  continue  by 
showing  with  the  finger  the  object  and  the  label,  saying  again  This  is  not 
this’,  insisting  on  silence  on  the  objective  level ;  then,  showing  the  first 
and  the  second  label,  saying  again  This  is  not  this’, . 

In  a  more  complex  language,  one  would  say  that  the  object  is  not 
the  event,  that  the  label  is  not  the  un-speakable  object,  and  that  a  state¬ 
ment  about  a  statement  is  not  the  ‘same’  statement,  nor  on  one  level.  We 
see  and  are  made  to  visualize  that  the  ^-system  is  based  on  the  denial 
of  the  fis*  of  identity,  which  necessitates  the  differentiation  of  orders  of 
abstractions. 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

The  little  word  ‘to  be'  appears  as  a  very  peculiar  word  and  is,  per¬ 
haps,  responsible  for  many  human  semantic  difficulties.  If  the  anthro¬ 
pologists  are  correct,  only  a  few  of  the  primitive  peoples  have  this  verb. 
The  majority  do  not  have  it  and  do  not  need  it,  because  all  their  s.r  and 
languages  are  practically  based  on,  and  involve,  literal  identification.1  In 
passing  from  the  primitive  stage  of  human  society  to  the  present  slightly 
higher  stage,  which  might  be  called  the  infantile  stage,  or  infantile 
period,  too  crude  identification  was  no  longer  possible.  Languages  were 
built,  based  on  slightly  modified  or  limited  identification,  and,  for  flexibil¬ 
ity,  the  ‘is*  of  identity  was  introduced  explicitly.  Although  very  little 
has  been  done  in  the  structural  analysis  of  languages  in  general,  and 
of  those  of  primitive  peoples  in  particular,  we  know  that  in  the  Indo- 
European  languages  the  verb  ‘to  be1,  among  others,  is  used  as  an  auxil¬ 
iary  verb  and  also  for  the  purpose  of  positing  false  to  facts  identity. 
With  the  primitive  prevalent  lack  of  consciousness  of  abstracting,  and 
the  primitive  belief  in  the  magic  of  words,  the  s.r  were  such  that  words 
were  identified  with  the  objective  levels.  Perhaps  it  is  not  too  much  to 
say  that  the  primitive  ‘psychology '  peculiarly  required  such  a  fundamen¬ 
tal  identity.  Identity  may  be  defined  as  ‘absolute  sameness  in  all  respects’ 
which,  in  a  world  of  ever-changing  processes  and  a  human  world  of 
indefinitely  many  orders  of  abstractions,  appears  as  a  structural  impos¬ 
sibility.  Identity  appears,  then,  as  a  primitive  ‘over-emotional’  generaliza¬ 
tion  of  similarity,  equality,  equivalence,  equipollence . ,  and,  in  no  case, 
does  it  appear  in  fact  as  ‘absolute  sameness  in  all  respects’.  As  soon  as 
the  structurally  delusional  character  of  identity  is  pointed  out,  it  becomes 
imperative  for  sanity  to  eliminate  such  delusional  factors  from  our 
languages  and  s.r.  With  the  advent  of  ‘civilization’,  the  use  of  this  word 
was  enlarged,  but  some  of  the  fundamental  primitive  implications  and 
psycho-logical  semantic  effects  were  preserved.  If  we  use  the  ‘is’  at  all, 
and  it  is  extremely  difficult  to  avoid  entirely  this  auxiliary  verb  when 
using  languages  which,  to  a  large  extent,  depend  on  it,  we  must  be  par¬ 
ticularly  careful  not  to  use  ‘is’  as  an  identity  term. 

In  1933,  the  amount  of  knowledge  we  have  about  the  primitive 
peoples  is  considerable.  Anthropologists  have  gathered  an  enormous  num¬ 
ber  of  descriptive  facts,  on  which  they  practically  all  agree,  but  the 
several  schools  of  anthropology  differ  widely  as  to  the  interpretation  of 
these  facts.  Roughly  speaking,  the  British  school  tries  to  interpret  the 
facts  from  the  point  of  view  of  ascribing  to  the  primitives  the  deficient 
‘psychology’  and  ‘logic’  of  the  white  man.  The  French  and  Polish 
schools  avoid  these  unjustified  tendencies,  and  attempt  to  reconstruct  the 
original  primitive  ‘psychologies'  and  ‘logics’  which  could  be  responsible 

ON  Tll!C  STRUC  TURAL  DIFFERENTIAL 

for  the  developments,  or  the  lack  of  developments,  of  the  primitive 
peoples.  All  schools  accept,  as  yet,  the  existing  el  ‘psychologies’  and  two¬ 
valued  A  ‘logic’  as  the  standard,  normal,  and,  perhaps,  even  as  the  final 
disciplines  for  an  adult  human  civilization.  No  school  suspects  that  an 
A  stage  of  civilization  appears  to  be  built,  to  a  large  extent,  on  the 
slightly  refined  primitive  identifications  which  produced  only  an  infantile 
period  of  human  development.  They  do  not  suspect  that  a  future  A 
society  may  differ  as  greatly  from  the  present  A  society  as  the  latter 
differs  from  the  primitive  society. 

In  my  work,  I  prefer  to  follow  the  French  and  Polish  schools  of 
anthropology,  as  it  seems  to  me  that  these  schools  are  freer  from  seman¬ 
tic  identification  and  aristotelianism  than  the  others. 

In  1933,  it  seems,  beyond  doubt,  that  if  any  single  semantic  charac¬ 
teristic  could  be  selected  to  account  for  the  primitive  state  of  the  indi¬ 
viduals  and  their  societies,  we  could  say,  without  making  too  great  a 
mistake,  that  it  would  be  found  in  identification ,  understood  in  the  more 
general  sense  as  it  is  used  in  the  present  work.  There  is  very  little  doubt, 
at  present,  that  different  physico-chemical  factors,  environment,  climate, 
kind  of  food,  colloidal  behaviour,  endocrine  secretions . ,  are  fundamental 
factors  which  condition  the  potentialities,  as  well  as  the  behaviour,  of  an 
organism.  It  is  equally  certain  that,  as  an  end-result,  these  physico¬ 
chemical  factors  are  connected  with  definite  types  of  s.r.  It  is  known  that 
the  reverse  is  also  true ;  namely,  that  s,r  affect  colloidal  behaviour,  endo¬ 
crine  secretions,  and  metabolism.  The  exact  type  of  dependence  is  not 
known,  because  too  little  experimenting  on  humans  has  been  made.  The 
present  analysis  is  conducted  from  the  semantic  point  of  view,  and  its 
results,  no  matter  how  far-reaching,  are  limited  to  this  special  aspect. 

Simple  analysis  shows  that  identification  is  a  necessary  condition 
which  underlies  the  reactions  of  animals,  of  infants,  and  of  primitives. 
If  found  in  ‘civilized’  grown-ups,  it  equally  indicates  some  remains  of 
earlier  periods  of  development,  and  can  always  be  found  in  the  analysis 
of  any  private  or  public  difficulties  which  prevent  any  satisfactory  solu¬ 
tion.  Identification  in  a  slightly  modified  form  represents,  also,  the  very 
foundation  of  the  ^-system  and  those  institutions  which  are  founded 
on  this  system. 

Mathematics  gives  us  practically  the  only  linguistic  system  free 
f  rom  pathological  identifications,  although  mathematicians  use  this  term 
uncritically.  The  more  identification  is  eliminated  from  other  sciences, 
the  more  the  mathematical  functional  semantics  and  method  are  applied, 
and  the  further  a  given  science  progresses. 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

The  best  we  know  in  1933  is  that  the  general  structure  of  the  world 
was  not  different  in  prehistoric  times  from  what  we  find  it  today.  We 
have  no  doubt  that  the  materials  in  great  antiquity  consisted  of  mole¬ 
cules,  molecules  of  atoms,  and  atoms  of  electrons  and  protons . ,  or  what¬ 
ever  else  we  shall  be  able  to  discover  some  day.  We  have  no  doubt  that 
blood  was  circulating  in  the  higher  animals’  and  humans,  that  vitamins 
exhibited  very  similar  characteristics  as  today,  that  different  forms  of 
radiant  energy  influenced  colloidal  behaviour. ,  .,  regardless  of  whether 
or  not  the  given  animal,  primitive  man  or  infant  ‘knew*  or  ‘knows’  about 
them. 

How  about  the  primitive  physical  needs  and  wants  of  an  animal, 
a  primitive  man,  and  an  infant?  Besides  all  mystical  and  mythological 
reasons  for  identification,  the  structural  facts  of  life  necessitated  identi¬ 
fication  on  this  level  of  development.  Without  modern  knowledge,  what 
a  hungry  animal,  primitive  man,  or  an  infant  ‘wants’  ‘is’  an  ‘object’,  say, 
called  an  ‘apple’.  He  would  ‘define’  his  ‘apple’  the  best  he  could  as  to 
shape,  colour,  smell,  taste , .  Was  this  what  his  organism  needed  ?  Ob¬ 
viously  not.  We  could,  at  present,  produce  an  undigestible  synthetic 
apple  which  would  satisfy  his  eventual  objective  definitions ;  he  might 
eat  it,  many  such  ‘apples’,  and  eventually  die  of  hunger.  Is  an  abundant 
and  pleasant  diet  free  from  unsuspected  and  unseen  ‘vitamins’  satisfac¬ 
tory  for  survival  ?  Again,  no !  Thus,  we  see  clearly  that  what  the  organ¬ 
ism  needed  for  survival  were  the  physico-chemical  processes,  not  found 
in  the  ‘ordinary  object’,  but  exclusively  in  the  ‘scientific  object’,  or  the 
event.  Here  we  find  the  age  old  and  necessary,  on  this  early  level, 
identification  of  the  ordinary  object  with  the  scientific  object.  This  form 
of  identification  is  extremely  common  even  in  1933,  and,  to  a  large  extent, 
responsible  for  our  low  development,  because,  no  matter  what  we  ‘think* 
or  feel  about  an  object,  an  object  represents  only  an  abstraction  of  low 
order,  only  a  general  symbol  for  the  scientific  object ,  which  remains 
the  only  possible  survival  concern  of  the  organism.  But,  obviously,  such 
identification,  being  false  to  facts,  can  never  be  entirely  reliable.  If 
any  one  fancies  that  he  deals  with  ‘ultimate  reality’,  yet  that  m.o  reality 
represents  only  a  shadow  cast  by  the  scientific  object;  he  begins,  with 
experience,  to  distrust  the  object  and  populates  his  world  with  delusional 
mysticism  and  mythologies  to  account  for  the  mysteries  of  the  shadow. 

As  any  organism  represents  an  abstracting  in  different  orders  pro¬ 
cess,  which,  again,  the  animal,  the  primitive  man,  and  the  infant  cannot 
know,  they,  by  necessity,  identify  different  orders  of  abstractions.  Thus, 
names  are  identified  with  the  un-speakable  objects,  names  for  action 
with  the  un-speakable  action  itself,  names  for  a  feeling  with  the  un- 

ON  Til K  STRUCTURAL  DIKFKRKNTIAL 

Hpoakablc  feelings  themselves , .  By  confusing  descriptions  with  inferences 
and  descriptive  words  with  inferential  words,  the ‘judgements*,  ‘©pinions*, 
'beliefs’,  and  similar  s.r ,  which  represent  mostly,  if  not  exclusively, 
inferential  semantic  end-products,  are  projected  with  varying  pathologi¬ 
cal  intensity  on  the  outside  world.  By  this  method  pre-‘logicaT  primitive 
semantic  attitudes  were  built.  Mere  similarities  were  evaluated  as  iden¬ 
tities,  primitive  syllogisms  were  built  of  the  type:  ‘stags  run  fast,  some 
Indians  run  fast,  some  Indians  are  stags’.  It  is  common  to  find  among 
primitive  peoples  a  kind  of  ‘logic’  based  on  the  post  hoc ,  ergo  propter 
hoc  (after  this  and,  therefore,  because  of  this)  fallacy  which  obviously 
represents  an  identification  of  an  ordinal  description  with  an  inference. 
The  ‘question  begging  epithets’,  which  exercise  a  tremendous  semantic 
influence  on  primitive  and  immature  peoples  and  represent  a  semantic 
factor  in  many  primitive  as  well  as  modern  taboos,  are  also  based  on 
such  confusions  of  orders  of  abstractions. 

Identification  is  one  of  the  primitive  characteristics  which  cannot 
be  eliminated  from  the  animal  or  the  infant,  because  we  have  no  means 
to  communicate  with  them  properly.  It  cannot  be  eliminated  from  primi¬ 
tive  peoples  as  long  as  they  preserve  their  languages  and  environments. 
Identification  is  extremely  wide-spread  among  ourselves,  embodied 
strongly  in  the  structure  of  our  inherited  language  and  systems.  To 
change  that  primitive  state  of  affairs,  we  need  special  simple  means,  such 
as  a  ^-system  may  offer,  to  combat  effectively  this  serious  menace  to 
our  s.r .  It  should  never  be  forgotten  that  identification  is  practically 
never  dangerous  in  the  animal  world,  because  unaided  nature  plays  no 
tricks  on  animals  and  the  elimination  by  non-survival  is  very  sharp.  It 
is  dangerous  in  the  primitive  stage  of  man,  however,  as  it  prevents  the 
primitive  man  to  become  more  civilized,  but  under  his  primitive  condi¬ 
tions  of  life  his  dangers  are  not  so  acute.  It  becomes  only  very  danger¬ 
ous  to  the  infant  if  not  taken  care  of,  and  to  the  modern  white  man  in 
the  midst  of  a  very  far  advanced  industrial  system  which  affects  all 
phases  of  his  life,  when  his  s.r  are  left  unchanged  from  the  ages  gone 
by,  and  still  remain  on  the  infantile  level. 

The  present  ^-system  is  not  only  based  on  the  complete  rejection 
of  the  ‘is’  of  identity,  but  every  important  term  which  has  been  intro¬ 
duced  here,  as  well  as  the  Structural  Differential,  is  aimed  at  the  elimina¬ 
tion  of  these  relics  of  the  animal,  the  primitive  man,  and  the  infant  in  us. 

Thus,  the  primitive  ‘mentality’  does  not  differentiate  relations 
enough ;  to  counteract  this,  I  introduce  the  Structural  Differential ,  The 
primitive  identifies ;  I  introduce  a  system  based  on  the  denial  of  the  ‘is’ 
of  identity  ail  through.  The  primitive  man  pays  most  attention  to  what 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OE  TIME-BINDING 

is  conveyed  to  him  through  the  eye  and  the  ear ;  I  introduce  the  Struc¬ 
tural  Differential  which  indicates  to  the  eye  the  stratification  of  human 
knowledge,  which  represents  to  the  eye  the  verbal  denial  of  the  ‘is’  of 
identity.  If  we  identify,  we  do  not  differentiate.  If  we  differentiate, 
we  cannot  identify ;  hence,  the  Structural  Differential. 

The  terms  used  also  convey  similar  processes.  Once  we  have 
order ,  we  differentiate  and  have  orders  of  abstractions.  Once  we 
abstract,  we  eliminate  ‘all ness’,  the  semantic  foundation  for  identifica¬ 
tion.  Once  we  abstract,  we  abstract  in  different  orders,  and  so  we 
order,  abolishing  fanciful  infinities.  Once  we  differentiate,  differen¬ 
tiation  becomes  the  denial  of  identity.  Once  we  discriminate  between 
the  objective  and  verbal  levels,  we  learn  ‘silence’  on  the  un-speak- 
able  objective  levels,  and  so  introduce  a  most  beneficial  neurological 
‘delay*  —  engage  the  cortex  to  perform  its  natural  function.  Once 
we  discriminate  between  the  objective  and  verbal  levels,  structure 
becomes  the  only  link  between  the  two  worlds.  This  results  in  search 
for  similarity  of  structure  and  relations,  which  introduces  the  aggregate 
feeling,  and  the  individual  becomes  a  social  being.  Once  we  differentiate, 
we  discriminate  between  descriptions  and  inferences.  Once  we  discrimi¬ 
nate,  we  consider  descriptions  separately  and  so  are  led  to  observe  the 
facts,  and  only  from  description  of  facts  do  we  tentatively  form  infer¬ 
ences  , .  Finally,  the  consciousness  of  abstracting  introduces  the  general 
and  permanent  differentiation  between  orders  of  abstractions,  intro¬ 
duces  the  ordering,  and  so  stratifications,  and  abolishes  for  good  the 
primitive  or  infantile  identifications.  The  semantic  passing  from  the 
primitive  man  or  infantile  state  to  the  adult  period  becomes  a  semantic, 
accomplished  fact.  It  should  be  noticed  that  these  results  are  accom¬ 
plished  by  starting  with  primitive  means,  the  use  of  the  simplest  terms, 
such  as  ‘this  is  not  this*,  and  by  the  direct  appeal  to  the  primitive  main 
receptors — the  eye  and  the  ear. 

The  elimination  of  the  ‘is*  of  identity  appears  as  a  serious  task, 
because  the  A- system  and  ‘logic*  by  which  we  regulate  our  lives,  and  the 
influence  of  which  has  been  eliminated  only  partially  from  science,  rep¬ 
resent  only  a  very  scholarly  formulation  of  the  restricted  primitive  iden¬ 
tification.  Thus,  we  usually  assume,  following  A  disciplines,  that  the  ‘is* 
of  identity  is  fundamental  for  the  ‘laws  of  thought*,  which  have  been 
formulated  as  follows; 

1)  The  Law  of  Identity:  whatever  is,  is. 

2)  The  Law  of  Contradiction :  nothing  can  both  be  and  not  be. 

3)  The  Law  of  Excluded  Middle:  everything  must  either  be  or 
not  be. 

ON  TIIK  STRUCTURAL  Dl IT'KRKNTI AL 

It  is  impossible,  short  of  a  volume,  to  revise  this  ‘logic’  and  to 
formulate  a  A,  ao-valued,  non-elemcntalistic  semantics  which  would  be 
structurally  similar  to  the  world  and  our  nervous  system;  but  it  must  be 
mentioned,  even  here,  that  the  ‘law  of  identity’  is  never  applicable  to 
processes.  The  ‘law  of  excluded  middle’,  or  ‘excluded  third’,  as  it  is 
sometimes  called,  which  gives  the  two-valued  character  to  A  ‘logic’, 
establishes,  as  a  general  principle,  what  represents  only  a  limiting  case 
and  so,  as  a  general  principle,  must  be  unsatisfactory.  As  on  the  objec¬ 
tive,  un-speakable  levels,  we  deal  exclusively  with  absolute  individuals 
and  individual  situations,  in  the  sense  that  they  are  not  identical,  all 
statements  which,  by  necessity,  represent  higher  order  abstractions  must 
only  represent  probable  statements.  Thus,  we  are  led  to  oo-valued 
semantics  of  probability,  which  introduces  an  inherent  and  general  prin¬ 
ciple  of  uncertainty. 

It  is  true  that  the  above  given  ‘laws  of  thought’  can  and  have  been 
expressed  in  other  terms  with  many  scholarly  interpretations,  but  fun¬ 
damentally  the  semantic  state  of  affairs  has  not  been  altered. 

From  a  non-el  point  of  view,  it  is  more  expedient  to  treat  the 
A -system  on  a  similar  footing  with  the  ^-system;  namely,  to  consider 
the  above  ‘laws  of  thought’  as  postulates  which  underlie  that  system  and 
which  express  the  ‘laws  of  thought*  of  a  given  epoch  and,  eventually, 
of  a  race.  We  know  other  systems  among  the  primitive  peoples  which 
follow  other  ‘laws’,  in  which  identity  plays  a  still  more  integral  part  of 
the  system.  Such  natives  reason  quite  well;  their  systems  are  consistent 
with  their  postulates,  although  these  are  quite  incomprehensible  to  those 
who  try  to  apply  A  postulates  to  them.  From  this  point  of  view,  we 
should  not  discuss  how  ‘true*  or  ‘false’  the  ^-system  appears,  but  we 
should  simply  say  that,  at  a  different  epoch,  other  postulates  seem 
structurally  closer  to  our  experience  and  appear  more  expedient.  Such 
an  attitude  would  not  retard  so  greatly  the  appearance  of  new  systems 
which  will  supersede  the  present  /?-system. 

In  the  present  system,  ‘identification’  represents  a  label  for  the 
semantic  process  of  inappropriate  evaluation  on  the  un-speakable  levels, 
or  for  such  ‘feelings’,  ‘impulses’,  ‘tendencies’,.  As  in  human  life,  we 
deal  with  many  orders  of  abstractions,  we  could  say  in  an  ordinal  lan¬ 
guage  that  identification  originates  or  results  in  the  confusion  of  orders 
of  abstractions.  This  conclusion  may  assume  different  forms:  one  repre¬ 
sented  by  the  identification  of  the  scientific  object  or  the  event  with  the 
ordinary  object,  which  may  be  called  ignorance,  pathological  to  man; 
another,  the  identification  of  the  objective  levels  with  the  verbal  levels, 
which  I  call  objectification ;  a  third,  the  identification  of  descriptions  with 

VII.  TIIIC  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

inferences,  which  I  call  confusion  of  higher  order  abstractions.  In  the 
latter  case,  we  should  notice  that  inferences  involve  usually  more  intense 
semantic  components,  such  as  ‘opinions’,  ‘beliefs’,  ‘wishes’. ,  than  descrip¬ 
tions.  These  inferences  may  have  a  definite,  objective,  un-speakable 
character  and  may  represent,  then,  a  semantic  state  which  is  not  words, 
and  so  objectifications  of  higher  order  may  be  produced. 

When  we  introduce  the  ordinal  language,  we  should  notice  that  under 
known  conditions  we  deal  with  an  ordered  natural  series ;  namely,  events 
first,  object  next;  object  first,  label  next;  description  first,  inferences 
next , .  This  order  expresses  the  natural  importance,  giving  us  the 
natural  base  for  evaluation  and  so  for  our  natural  human  s.r.  If  we 
identify  two  different  orders,  by  necessity,  we  evaluate  them  equally, 
which  always  involves  errors,  resulting  potentially  in  semantic  shocks. 
As  we  deal  in  life  with  an  established  natural  order  of  values  which  can 
be  expressed,  for  my  purpose,  by  a  series  decreasing  in  value :  events  or 
scientific  objects,  ordinary  objects,  labels,  descriptions,  inferences.; 
identification  results  in  a  very  curious  semantic  situation. 

Let  us  assume  that  the  scientifically  established  value  of  any  level 
could  be  expressed  as  100,  and  the  value  of  the  next  as  1.  With  the  con¬ 
sciousness  of  abstracting  we  could  not  disregard,  nor  identify,  these 
values,  nor  forget  that  100  >1.  If  we  confuse  the  orders  of  abstrac¬ 
tions,  this  can  be  expressed  as  the  identification  in  value  and  we  have 
a  semantic  equation:  (I)  100=  100,  or  (2)  1  =  1,  or  any  other  num¬ 
ber,  say  (3)  50  =  50. 

As  we  deal  fundamentally  with  a  natural,  directed  inequality,  say, 
100  >  1,  and,  under  some  semantic  pressure,  ‘want’,  ‘wishful  thinking', 
or  ignorance,  or  lack  of  consciousness  of  abstracting,  or  ‘mental’  ill¬ 
ness  . ,  we  identified  the  two  in  value,  we  produce  in  the  first  and  third 
cases  an  over-ev aluation  oil  the  right-hand  side,  and,  in  the  second  and 
third  cases,  an  twcter-evaluation.  on  the  left-hand  side.  Thus,  on  the 
semantic  level ,  any  identification  of  essentially  different  in  value  differ¬ 
ent  orders  of  abstractions,  appears  as  the  reversal  of  the  natural  order 
of  evaluation,  with  different  degrees  of  intensity.  If  the  natural  order 
of  scientific  evaluation  would  be  100  >  1,  and  we  would  evaluate 
through  identification  as  2  =  2,  or  3  =  3.,  50  =  50 . ,  100  =  100,  we 
would  be  ascribing  twice,  or  three  times,  or  fifty  times,  or  a  hundred 
times . ,  more  delusional  values  to  the  right-hand  side  and  under-evaluate 
the  left-hand  side,  than  the  natural  order  of  evaluation  would  require. 
Nature  exhibits,  in  my  language  and  in  this  field,  an  asymmetrical  rela¬ 
tion  of  ‘more’,  or  ‘less’  inaccessible  to  A  procedure.  Under  the  influence 
of  aristotelianism,  when,  through  identification,  we  ascribe  to  nature 

ON  THR  STRUCTURAL  DfKRKRKNTlAL 

delusional  values,  adjustment  becomes  very  difficult,  particularly  under 
modern  complex  life-conditions. 

The  above  example  indicates  the  degrees  of  intensity  which  we  find 
in  life  in  the  reversal  of  the  natural  order  of  evaluation  through  iden¬ 
tification,  produced  by,  and  resulting  in„  the  lack  of  consciousness  of 
abstracting.  Un-sanity,  which  affects  practically  all  of  us,  represents  the 
reversal  of  lesser  intensity;  the  reversal  of  greater  intensity — the  more 
advanced  ‘mental’  ills. 

We  should  realize  that  experimentally  we  find  in  this  field  a  fun¬ 
damental  difference  in  value,  which,  on  semantic  levels,  can  be  expressed 
as  an  asymmetrical  relation  of  ‘more’  or  ‘less’,  establishing  some  natural 
order.  If  any  one  should  claim  a  natural  ‘identity’,  the  burden  of  proof 
falls  on  him.  If  ‘absolute  sameness  in  all  respects’  cannot  be  found  in 
this  world,  then  such  a  notion  appears  as  false  to  facts,  and  becomes  a 
structural  falsification,  preventing  sanity  and  adjustment.  If  he  accepts 
the  fundamental,  natural  differences  in  value,  but  prefers  to  assume  a 
different  order  of  evaluation  depending  on  his  metaphysics,  be  it  the 
elementalistic  materialism,  or  equally  elementalistic  idealism,  the  seman¬ 
tic  results  are  not  changed,  because  identification  in  the  second  case 
would  also  ascribe  delusional  identity  to  essentially  different  orders  of 
abstractions.  It  should  be  noticed  that  the  A  formulation  applies  equally 
to  the  older  different,  opposite  doctrines  and  renders  them  illegitimate 
on  similar  grounds. 

The  status  of  the  event,  or  the  scientific  object,  is  slightly  more 
complex,  because  the  event  is  described  at  each  date  by  very  reliable, 
constantly  revised  and  tested,  hypothetical ,  structural,  inferential  terms, 
exhibiting  the  peculiar  circularity  of  human  knowledge.  If  we  should 
treat  these  inferential  structures,  not  as  hypothetical,  but  should  identify 
them  semantically  with  the  eventual  processes  on  the  level  of  the  sub- 
microscopic  event,  we  would  have  semantic  disturbances  of  identification. 

I  have  selected  the  above  given  order,  not  only  for  convenience  and 
simplicity,  but  because  of  its  experimental  character.  When  we  identify 
in  values,  we  always  exhibit  in  our  s.r  the  reversed  natural  order,  intro¬ 
