duced  here  on  space-time  structural  and  evaluational  grounds. 

The  above  analysis  represents  a  very  rough  outline,  but  is  sufficient 
for  my  purpose.  Any  attentive  and  informed  reader  can  carry  it  further 
as  far  as  desired.  The  main  point  appears  that  different  orders  of  ab¬ 
stractions  exhibit  different  characteristics,  and  so  any  identification  of 
entities  essentially  different  in  one  or  more  aspects  must  introduce  delu¬ 
sional  semantic  factors.  I  speak  mostly  about  evaluation,  because  evalu¬ 
ation  appears  experimentally  as  an  essential  factor  in  all  s.r  and  can  be 

408  VII.  TI-IE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME- RINDING 

applied  even  profitably  in  those  cases  of  'mental'  illness  where  no  definite 
evaluation  appears,  the  absence  of  evaluation  being  a  form  of  evaluation 
(m.o).  In  training,  it  is  of  utmost  importance  to  eliminate  identification 
entirely,  which  invariably  appears  as  a  delusional  semantic  factor.  To 
achieve  these  ends,  all  and  every  available  means  should  be  employed. 

When  one  studies  carefully  the  older  disciplines,  one  is  amazed 
to  learn  to  what  an  extent  the  recorded  ‘thinkers'  rebelled  against  the 
limitations  and  insufficiencies  of  aristotelianism,  which  system,  naturally, 
became  antiquated  a  short  time  after  its  formulation.  One  is  amazed 
to  find  that  'everything  has  already  been  said',  and  that,  to  a  large  extent, 
these  important,  separated  statements  were  inoperative .  It  is  of  little 
importance  that  some  ‘wise  statements'  had  been  made  by  some  one, 
somewhere,  if  they  had  no  influence  on  the  great  masses  of  the  race. 
The  reason  for  this  tremendous  public  waste  of  private  efforts  is  that 
aristotelianism,  with  its  further  elaborations  and  its  delusional  identi¬ 
fication,  elementalism . ,  represents  a  co-ordinated  system  which  moulded 
our  s,rt  languages,  and  institutions,  and  which  influenced  every  phase 
of  our  lives.  Under  such  conditions,  isolated  doctrines,  no  matter  how 
wise,  become  powerless  in  the  face  of  such  a  system,  or,  more  correctly, 
a  system  of  interlocked  systems.  Only  a  revision  of  the  system  and  the 
tentative  formulation  of  a  ^-system  can  make  many  older  fundamental 
clarifications  workable,  which,  although  known  to  a  few  specialists, 
appear  generally  unknown  to  the  great  masses  and  unavailable  in  ele¬ 
mentary  education,  which  alone  can  be  generally  effective.  One  is  also 
amazed  at  the  power  of  structurally  correct  terminology,  and  feels  full 
of  sympathy  toward  the  primitive  interpretation  as  the  ‘magic  of 
words'!  Happy,  structural  high  abstractions  really  have  a  strong  cre¬ 
ative  character.  Since,  for  instance,  the  principle  of  ‘least  action',  or  the 
‘general  principle  of  relativity'  (the  theory  of  the  absolute) . ,  have  been 
formulated,  all  of  our  structural  knowledge  has  been  recast,  clarified, 
and  we  constantly  hear  of  some  remarkable  applications  of  the  new 
knowledge.  Similarly,  if  it  is  pointed  out  that  our  main  private  and 
public  difficulties  are  due  to  infantilism  produced  by  ‘aristotelianism',  in 
general,  and,  in  particular,  by  identification  and  elementalism,  we  at 
once  have  practical  means  for  a  revision  and  applications.  In  such  a 
first  and  novel  attempt  over-subtlety  is  impossible  and  even  not  desir¬ 
able.  It  is  preferable,  as  well  as  expedient,  to  formulate  the  general 
outline  and,  thereby,  draw  more  men  into  the  work  for  the  details. 

For  thousands  of  years,  millions  upon  millions  of  humans  have 
used  a  great  deal  of  their  nervous  energy  in  worrying  upon  delusional 
questions,  forced  upon  them  by  the  pernicious  ‘is’  of  identity,  such  as: 

ON  T1IK  STRUCTURAL  IMFFKRKNTIAL  40!) 

'What  is  an  object?’,  ‘What  is  life?’,  ‘What  is  hell?’,  ‘What  is  heaven?’, 
‘What  is  space?’  ‘What  is  time?’,  and  an  endless  array  of  such  irritants. 
The  answer,  based  on  the  human  discrimination  of  orders  of  abstractions 
and  so  proper  human  evaluation ,  is  definite,  undeniable,  simple,  and 
unique:  ‘Whatever  one  might  say  something  “is”,  it  is  not/  Whatever 
we  might  say  belongs  to  the  verbal  level  and  not  to  the  un-speakable, 
objective  levels. 

Let  me  repeat  once  more  that  the  ‘is’  of  identity  forces  us  into 
semantic  disturbances  of  wrong  evaluation .  We  establish,  for  instance, 
the  identity  of  the  un-speakable  objective  level  with  words,  which,  once 
stated,  becomes  obviously  false  to  facts.  The  ‘is’  of  identity,  if  used  as 
indicating  ‘identity’  (structurally  impossible  on  the  objective  levels), 
says  nothing.  Thus,  the  question,  ‘What  is  an  object  ?’,  may  be  answered, 
‘An  object  is  an  object’ — a  statement  which  says  nothing.  If  used  in 
definitions  or  classifications,  such  as  ‘Smith  is  a  man’,  a  type  of  state¬ 
ment  used  even  in  the  Principia  Mathematica,  or  ‘A  is  B  or  not  B’,  as 
in  the  formulation  of  the  law  of  ‘excluded  third’  in  the  two-valued  A 
‘logic’,  it  always  establishes  an  identity ,  false  to  facts.  The  first  state¬ 
ment  expresses  the  identity  of  a  proper  name  with  a  class  name  which 
must  lead  to  the  confusion  of  classes  (higher  order  abstractions)  with 
individuals  (lower  order  abstractions).  This  confusion  leads  automati¬ 
cally  to  disturbed  evaluation  in  life,  because  the  characteristics  of  a  class 
are  not  the  ‘same’  as,  nor  identical  with,  the  characteristics  of  the  indi¬ 
vidual.  I  shall  not  analyse  in  detail  the  ‘A  is  B’,  because,  obviously,  it 
is  not. 

How  about  Fido?  Fido  has  no  science  and,  therefore,  no  ‘event*. 
For  him,  the  object  is  not  an  abstraction  of  some  order,  but  fis  all*  he 
‘knows’  and  cares  about.  Smith  not  only  abstracts  in  indefinite  numbers 
of  different  orders,  and  does  it  automatically  and  habitually,  but  if  he 
enquires  he  may  also  become  conscious  of  abstracting — 4 is  not  all*,  and 
' this  is  not  this*.  Now,  Fido  can  never  be  conscious  of  abstracting,  as 
his  nervous  system  is  incapable  of  being  extended  by  extra-neural 
means,  and  this  extension  appears  to  be  a  necessary  condition  for  the 
acquiring  of  consciousness  of  abstracting. 

Although  for  Smith,  ‘This  is  not  this’,  as  illustrated  on  the  Struc¬ 
tural  Differential,  for  Fido,  that  diagram  would  eventually  mean  ‘this  is 
this’,  the  structure  of  his  world  being  represented  by  the  single  disk  (On). 
Fido  cannot  be  conscious  of  abstracting,  he  must  identify,  because  he 
‘knows’  nothing  of  this  process,  and  there  is  no  means  of  informing  him 
of  these  relations  and  structure. 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

If  we  are  not  conscious  of  abstracting,  we  must  identify — in  other 
words,  whenever  we  confuse  the  different  orders  of  abstractions,  un¬ 
avoidable  if  we  use  the  'is’  of  identity,  we  duplicate  or  copy  the  animal 
way  of  ‘thinking’,  with  similar  ‘emotional’  responses.  In  the  following 
chapters,  this  tragedy  will  be  explained  in  detail,  and  it  will  be  shown 
that  practically  all  human  difficulties  involve  this  semantic  factor  of 
copying  animals  in  our  nervous  reactions  and  evaluation  as  a  component. 

A  theory  which  not  only  throws  light  on  this  serious  problem,  but 
which  also  gives  means  of  replacing  the  old  harmful  s.r  by  more  bene¬ 
ficial  ones,  may  be  useful,  in  spite  of  various  temporary  difficulties  which 
are  due  to  the  old  identity-reactions  and  the  lack  of  familiarity  with 
the  new. 

The  old  identity-reactions  are  extremely  ingrained,  particularly  with 
grown-ups.  Serious  effort  and  permanent  reminders  are  necessary  to 
overcome  them.  The  Structural  Differential  represents  such  a  structural 
visual  reminder,  which  we  should  keep  constantly  before  our  eyes  until 
the  pernicious  disturbances  of  evaluation  have  been  overcome.  For 
Smith,  the  fundamental  evaluation  can  be  expressed  in  simple  and  quite 
primitive  language — ‘This  is  not  this’. 

The  above  most  vital  semantic  factors  of  evaluation  indispensable 
for  adjustment  and  sanity  are  conveyed  to  him  whenever  he  looks 
at  the  stratification  indicated  on  the  Differential.  The  hanging  free 
strings  indicating  the  non-abstract ed  characteristics  train  his  s.r  to  be 
aware  of  the  non-allness  of,  and  the  lack  of  identity  between,  his 
abstractions. 

Our  old  s.r  were  similar  to  Fido’s ;  we  were  never  fully  conscious 
of  abstracting.  Through  wrong  evaluation  we  identified  what  is  inher¬ 
ently  different  and  longed  for,  or  assumed  some  impossible  ‘allness’  in 
our  ‘knowings’. 

Practice  has  shown  me,  definitely,  that  to  acquire  these  new  reac¬ 
tions  of  consciousness  of  abstracting  is  difficult  and  requires  ‘time’  and 
effort  to  accomplish,  in  spite  of  the  exceptional,  nearly  primitive,  sim¬ 
plicity  of  the  means  employed.  The  ‘silence  on  the  objective  levels’ 
sounds  very  innocent;  yet  it  is  extremely  difficult  to  acquire,  as  it  in¬ 
volves  a  complete  checking  of  all  semantic  disturbances,  identifications, 
confusions  of  orders  of  abstractions,  habitual  ‘emotions’,  ‘preconceived 
ideas’. ,  practically  impossible  without  the  use  of  the  objective  Differen¬ 
tial  to  which  we  can  point  our  finger  and  be  silent,  to  begin  with.  In 
fact,  to  disregard  this  point,  actually  means  failure  in  accomplishing  the 
desired  semantic  results.  At  present,  as  far  as  experience  has  gone,  the 
main  results  were  achieved  when  a  given  individual  had  conquered  this 

ON  THE  STRUCTURAL  DIFFERENTIAL 

first,  simple,  and  obvious  semantic  obstacle.  If  the  simple  rules  and 
conditions  given  in  the  present  system  for  abolishing  identification  are 
followed  persistently  in  the  training  with  the  Differential,  a  complete 
and  very  beneficial  structural  and  semantic  change  in  the  character  and 
‘mental’  capacities  of  a  given  individual  occurs,  seemingly  all  out  of  pro¬ 
portion  with  the  simplicity  of  the  training.  But  if  we  consider  the  con¬ 
tent  of  all  knowledge  as  uniquely  structural,  and  if  the  majority  of  us 
are  semantically  tied  up,  blocked,  with  antiquated,  animalistic,  primitive, 
infant-like,  ‘mentally ’-ill  and  A  structure  and  identity-reactions,  owing 
to  the  lack  of  consciousness  of  abstracting,  which  we  renounce  in  toto 
by  acquiring  the  consciousness  of  abstracting,  such  remarkable  trans¬ 
formation  becomes  intelligible. 

The  publication  of  the  Structural  Differential  in  separate,  con¬ 
veniently  large  copies  has  been  forced  upon  me  by  experience  and  by 
various  difficulties  found  in  the  re-educating  of  our  s.r,  without  which 
a  ^-system,  adjustment,  sanity,  and  all  the  desirable  results  which  depend 
on  them,  are  impossible. 

CHAPTER  XXVI 

ON  ‘CONSCIOUSNESS’  AND  CONSCIOUSNESS  OF  ABSTRACTING 

But  a  felt  ‘contrary’  is  consciousness  in  germ.  .  .  .  Consciousness  re¬ 
quires  more  than  the  mere  entertainment  of  theory.  It  is  the  feeling  of 
the  contrast  of  theory,  as  mere  theory,  with  fact,  as  mere  fact.  This  con¬ 
trast  holds  whether  or  no  the  theory  be  correct.  (578)  A.  n.  whitehead 

A  language,  to  be  most  useful,  should  be  similar  in  its  structure  to 
the  structure  of  the  events  which  it  is  supposed  to  represent.  The  lan¬ 
guage  of  ‘abstractions  of  different  orders*  appears  to  be  satisfactory  in 
point  of  structure.  It  is  a  non-el  language,  since  it  does  not  discriminate 
between  ‘senses*  and  ‘mind’, .  It  is  a  functional  language,  since  it  de¬ 
scribes,  by  implication,  what  is  going  on  in  the  nervous  system  when  it 
reacts  to  stimuli.  It  is  a  language  which  can  be  made  as  flexible  and  as 
sharp  as  desired,  thus  making  it  possible  to  establish  sharp  verbal  differ¬ 
ences,  of  both  horizontal  and  vertical  type,  between  the  terms  ‘man* 
and  ‘animal*. 

The  last  semantic  characteristic  of  potential  sharpness  is  extremely 
important  for  a  theory  of  sanity.  Evidence  of  1933  leads  us  to  conclude 
that,  under  the  influence  of  external  stimuli,  the  most  primitive  and 
simplest  forms  of  life  were  moulded,  transformed,  and  influenced  in  the 
process  of  survival,  and,  therefore,  of  adjustment.  In  this  way,  more 
and  more  complex  structures  evolved.  It  should  be  emphasized  that 
organisms  represent  functional  units,  and  that  an  additive  change  in 
structure  does  not  necessarily  involve  a  simply  additive  change  in  func¬ 
tion.  By  physico-chemical,  structural,  colloidal  necessity  the  organism 
works  as-a- whole.  Being  a  relative  whole,  any  additive  structural  factor 
becomes  a  reactive  and  functional  factor  which  influences  the  working 
of  the  whole.  This  is,  perhaps,  best  illustrated  by  the  boy  who  was  born 
without  a  cortex,  but  with  no  other  obvious  defects.  He  was  incom¬ 
parably  more  helpless  and  unadjusted  than  animals  who  have  no  cortex, 
or  even  no  nervous  system  at  all.  Although  we  could  speak  in  additive 
terms  of  the  difference  between  this  boy  and  a  normal  boy,  as  one  having 
no  cortex  and  the  other  ‘plus  a  cortex*,  yet  the  functioning  was  so  differ¬ 
ent  as  not  to  be  expressible  in  a  ‘plus*  language. 

Similar  remarks  could  be  generalized  to  all  life.  We  must  be  very 
careful  in  building  sharp  distinctions,  since  the  anatomical  differences 
alone  are  unreliable.  If  we  want  to  have  more  reliable  differences,  we 
should  look  for  functional  differences. 

CONSCIOUSNESS  OK  AI1S TUACTJNC 

Wc  have  already  discovered  functional  differences  that  are  ex¬ 
pressed  by  the  horizontal  and  by  the  vertical  differences  between  the 
abstracting  capacities  of  Smith  and  Fido.  The  analysis  of  these  differ¬ 
ences  is  the  subject  of  the  present  chapter. 

*rl  bought'  represents  a  reaction  of  the  organism-as-a-whole,  pro¬ 
duced  by  the  working  of  the  whole,  and  influencing  the  whole.  From 
our  daily  experience,  we  are  familiar  with  what  we  usually  denote  as 
l»eing  ‘conscious’;  in  other  words,  we  are  aware  of  something,  be  it  an 
object,  a  process,  an  action,  a  ‘feeling1,  or  an  ‘idea’.  A  reaction  that  is 
very  habitual  and  semi-automatic  is  not  necessarily  ‘conscious’.  The  term 
‘consciousness’,  taken  separately,  is  not  a  complete  symbol ;  it  lacks  con¬ 
tent,  and  one  of  the  characteristics  of  ‘consciousness’  is  to  have  some 
content.  Usually,  the  term  ‘consciousness’  is  taken  as  undefined  and 
unde  finable,  because  of  its  immediate  character  for  every  one  of  us. 
Such  a  situation  is  not  desirable,  as  it  is  always  semantically  useful  to 
try  to  define  a  complex  term  by  simpler  terms.  We  may  limit  the  general 
imd  undefined  term  ‘consciousness’  and  make  it  a  definite  symbol  by  the 
deliberate  ascribing  of  some  content  to  this  term.  For  this  ‘consciousness 
of  something’  I  take  ‘consciousness  of  abstracting’  as  fundamental.  Per¬ 
haps  the  only  type  of  meanings  the  term  ‘consciousness’  has  is  covered 
by  the  functional  term  ‘consciousness  of  abstracting’,  which  represents 
a  general  process  going  on  in  our  nervous  system.  Even  if  this  is  not 
the  only  type  of  meanings,  the  term  ‘consciousness  of  abstracting’  ap¬ 
pears  to  be  of  such  crucial  semantic  importance  that  its  introduction  is 
necessary. 

The  term  ‘consciousness*,  because  of  its  hitherto  undefined  and 
traditionally  unde  finable  character,  did  not  allow  us  further  analysis. 
Neither  did  we  have  any  workable,  educational,  semantic  means  to  handle 
the  vast  field  of  psycho-logical  processes  which  this  incomplete  symbol 
indicated.  If  we  now  select  the  term  ‘consciousness  of  abstracting*  as 
fundamental,  we  not  only  make  the  last  symbol  complete  by  assigning 
functional  content  to  it,  but  we  also  find  means  to  define  it  more  spe¬ 
cifically  in  simpler  terms .  Through  understanding  of  the  processes  we 
gain  educational  means  of  handling  and  influencing  a  large  group  of 
semantic  psycho-logical  reactions. 

Let  us  analyse  this  new  term  by  aid  of  the  diagram  called  the  Struc- 
tural  Differential  referred  to  in  the  previous  chapter.  Here  the  object 
(0*)  represents  a  nervous  abstraction  of  a  low  order.  In  this  abstract¬ 
ing,  some  characteristics  of  the  event  were  missed  or  not  abstracted  ; 
these  are  indicated  by  the  not  connected  lines  (B').  When  we  abstracted 
from  our  object  further,  by  coining  a  definition  or  ascribing  ‘meanings’ 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OK  TIM E-1U N  1)1  NG 

to  the  label  (L),  again  we  did  not  abstract  ‘all’  the  characteristics  of  the 
object  into  the  definition;  but  some  characteristics  were  left  out,  as  indi¬ 

cated  by  the  lines  (B").  In  other  words,  the 

number  of  characteristics 
which  we  ascribe  to  the 
label,  by  some  process  of 
‘knowing',  or  ‘wanting’,  or 
‘needing’,  or  ‘interest*. , 
does  not  cover  the  number 
of  characteristics  the  ob¬ 
ject  has.  The  ‘object’  has 
more  characteristics  than 
we  can  include  in  the  ex¬ 
plicit  or  implicit  definition 
of  the  label  for  the  ‘ob¬ 
ject*.  Besides,  the  defini¬ 
tion  (implicit  or  explicit) 
of  the  ‘object’  is  not  the 
object  itself,  which  always 
holds  many  surprises  for 
us.  The  latter  has  the  ‘in¬ 
dividuality  of  the  object 
as  we  may  call  it.  Every 
one  who  uses  a  car,  or  a 
gun,  or  a  typewriter,  or 
who  has  had  a  number  of 
wives,  or  husbands,  or 
children,  knows  that  well. 
In  spite  of  the  fact  that 
these  objects  are,  to  a  large 
extent,  standardized,  every 
individual  object  has  indi¬ 
vidual  peculiarities.  With 

Fig.  1 

The  Structural  Differential 

modern  methods  of  physi¬ 
cal,  chemical,  and  astro¬ 

nomical  investigation,  scientists  find  that  even  their  special  materials  and 
equipments  have  also  peculiar  individualities  which  must  be  taken  into 
account  in  the  more  refined  researches. 

If  we  take  any  ordinary  object  and  expect  to  find  such  and  such 
characteristics,  ascribed  to  the  objects  by  definition ,  we  may  be  disap¬ 
pointed.  As  a  rule,  we  find  or  can  find,  if  our  analysis  is  subtle  enough, 
these  peculiar  individualities.  The  reader  can  easily  convince  himself 

CONSCIOUSNESS  OK  ABSTRACTING 

by  looking  over  a  box  of  matches,  and  by  noticing  the  peculiar  individu¬ 
ality  of  each  match.  But  since*  by  definition ,  we  expect  that  when  we 
strike  a  match  it  should  ignite,  we  may  disregard  all  other  characteristics 
as  irrelevant  for  our  purpose.  A  similar  process  is  at  work  in  other 
phases  of  life.  We  often  live,  feel  happy  or  unhappy,  by  what  actually 
amounts  to  a  definition,  and  not  by  the  empirical,  individual  facts  less 
coloured  by  semantic  factors.  When  Smithi  marries  Smith2,  they  mostly 
do  so  by  a  kind  of  definition.  They  have  certain  notions  as  to  what  ‘man’, 
‘woman’,  and  ‘marriage*  ‘are*  by  definition.  They  actually  go  through 
the  performance  and  find  that  the  Smithi  and  his  wife,  Smith2,  have 
unexpected  likes,  dislikes,  and  particularities — in  general,  characteristic 
and  semantic  reactions  not  included  in  their  definition  of  the  terms  ‘man’, 
‘woman’,  ‘husband’,  ‘wife’,  or  ‘marriage’.  Characteristics  ‘left  out’  in  the 
definitions  make  their  appearance.  ‘Disappointments’  accumulate,  and  a 
more  or  less  unhappy  life  begins. 

The  above  analysis  applies  to  all  phases  of  human  life,  and  appears 
entirely  general  because  of  the  structure  of  ‘human  knowledge’.  Charac¬ 
teristics  are  discovered  when  it  is  too  late.  The  not  knowing  or  the  for¬ 
getting  of  the  relations  explained  above  does  the  semantic  havoc.  On 
verbal,  ‘definitional’,  or  doctrinal  semantic  grounds,  we  expect  something 
else  than  what  the  experiences  of  life  give  us.  The  non-fulfillment  of 
expectation  produces  a  serious  affective  and  semantic  shock.  If  such 
shocks  are  repeated  again  and  again,  they  disorganize  the  normal  work¬ 
ing  of  the  nervous  system,  and  often  lead  to  pathological  states.  An 
indefinitely  large  number  of  experimental  facts  fully  supports  the  above 
conclusions.  Many  of  them  have  been  supplied  during  the  World  War, 
Curiously  enough,  when  the  soldier  did  expect  horrors,  and  later  experi¬ 
enced  them,  he  seldom  became  deranged  ‘mentally’.  If  he  did  not  fully 
expect  them,  and  yet  had  to  experience  them,  he  often  broke  down 
nervously. 

The  attack  of  hay  fever  at  the  sight  of  paper  roses,  referred  to 
already,  gives  a  similar  semantic  example.  The  attack  followed  from  the 
semantic  ‘ definition *  of  ‘roses’,  of  ‘hay  fever’,  and  from  the  situation 
as-a- whole,  and  was  not  due  to  inspection  of  the  objective  ‘roses',  or  to 
the  physico-chemical  action  of  the  ‘roses’.  If  the  patient  had  been  blind¬ 
folded  when  the  paper  ‘roses’  were  brought  into  his  presence,  no  attack 
would  have  occurred. 

We  are  now  ready  to  define  ‘consciousness  of  abstracting’  in  simpler 
terms;  namely,  in  terms  of  ‘memory’.  The  term  ‘memory’  is  structurally 
a  physico-chemical  term.  It  implies  that  the  events  are  interconnected, 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

that  everything  in  this  world  influences  everything  else,  and  that  hap¬ 
penings  leave  some  traces  somewhere. 

A  similar  analysis  can  be  carried  on  in  connection  with  the  object 
and  the  event.  Briefly,  the  object  represents  structurally  an  abstraction 
of  some  order,  does  not,  and  cannot,  include  all  the  characteristics  of  the 
event ;  and  so,  again,  we  have  some  characteristics  left  out  as  indicated 
by  the  lines  (B'). 

Here  we  have  the  possibility  of  making  a  series  of  most  general, 
and  yet  entirely  true,  negative  statements  of  great  semantic  importance ; 
that  the  label  is  not  the  object,  and  that  the  object  is  not  the  event , .  For 
the  number  of  m.o  characteristics  which  we  ascribe  to  the  label  by 
definition  does  not  cover  all  the  characteristics  we  recognize  in  the  ob¬ 
ject  ;  and  the  number  of  characteristics  which  we  perceive  in  the  object 
is  also  not  equal  to  the  infinite  numbers  of  characteristics  the  event  has. 
The  differences  are  still  more  profound.  Not  only  do  the  numbers  of 
m.o  characteristics  differ,  but  also  the  character  of  these  abstractions 
differs  from  level  to  level  of  the  successive  abstractions. 

We  can  now  define  ‘consciousness  of  abstracting'  as  ‘ awareness  that 
in  our  process  of  abstracting  we  have  left  out  characteristics'.  Or,  con¬ 
sciousness  of  abstracting  can  be  defined  as  ‘remembering  the  “is  not ", 
and  that  some  characteristics  have  been  left  ouf.  It  should  be  noticed 
that  in  this  formulation,  with  the  aid  of  the  Structural  Differential,  we 
have  succeeded  in  translating  a  negative  process  of  forgetting  into  a 
positive  process  of  remembering  the  denial  of  identity  and  that  charac¬ 
teristics  are  left  out.  Such  a  positive  formulation  makes  the  whole  sys¬ 
tem  workable  and  available  for  the  semantic  training  and  education. 

The  use  of  the  Structural  Differential  becomes  a  necessity  for  any 
one  who  wants  to  receive  full  semantic  benefit  from  the  present  work. 
A  book  is,  by  necessity,  verbal.  Whatever  any  author  can  say  is  verbal, 
and  nothing  whatsoever  can  be  said  which  is  not  verbal.  It  seems  entirely 
obvious  that  in  life  we  deal  with  an  enormous  number  of  things  and 
situations,  ‘feelings'. ,  which  are  not  verbal.  These  belong  to  the  ‘objec¬ 
tive  level'.  The  crucial  difficulty  is  found  in  the  fact  that  whatever  can 
be  said  is  not  and  cannot  be  on  the  objective  level,  but  belongs  only  to 
the  verbal  levels.  This  difference,  being  inexpressible  by  words,  cannot 
be  expressed  by  words.  We  must  have  other  means  to  indicate  this  dif¬ 
ference.  We  must  show  with  our  hand,  by  pointing  our  finger  to  the 
object,  and  by  being  silent  outwardly  as  well  as  inwardly,  which  silence 
we  may  indicate  by  closing  our  lips  with  the  other  hand.  The  verbal 
denial  of  the  ‘is'  of  identity  covers  this  point  also  when  shown  on  the 
Differential.  If  we  burst  into  speech  based  on  the  ‘is'  of  identity,  as  we 

CONSCIOUSNESS  OK  ABSTRACTING 

usually  do,  we  find  ourselves  obviously  on  the  verbal  levels  indicated 
by  the  labels  L,  Lx,  La,  .  .  .  L»,  but  never  on  the  objective  level  (O*). 
On  this  last  level,  we  can  look,  handle . ,  but  must  be  silent .  The  reason 
that  we  nearly  all  identify  the  two  levels  is  that  it  is  impossible  to  train 
an  individual  in  this  semantic  difference  by  verbal  means  alone ,  as  all 
verbal  means  belong  to  the  levels  of  labels  and  never  to  the  objective  un¬ 
speakable  levels.  With  a  visual  and  tactile  actual  object  and  labels  on 
the  Structural  Differential,  to  point  our  finger  at,  handle . ,  we  now  have 
simple  means  to  convey  the  tremendously  important  semantic  difference 
and  train  in  non-identity . 

We  should  notice  that  the  consciousness  of  abstracting,  or  the 
remembering  that  we  abstract  in  different  orders  with  omission  of  char¬ 
acteristics,  depends  on  the  denial  of  the  ‘is’  of  identity  and  is  connected 
with  limitations  or  ‘non-allness’,  so  characteristic  of  the  new  non-systems. 

The  consciousness  of  abstracting  eliminates  automatically  identifica¬ 
tion  or  ‘confusion  of  the  orders  of  abstractions1,  both  applying  to  the 
semantic  confusion  on  all  levels.  If  we  are  not  conscious  of  abstracting, 
we  are  bound  to  identify  or  confuse  the  object  with  its  finite  number 
of  characteristics,  with  the  event,  with  its  infinite  numbers  of  different 
characteristics.  Confusion  of  these  levels  may  misguide  us  into  semantic 
situations  ending  in  unpleasant  shocks.  If  we  acquire  the  consciousness 
of  abstracting,  and  remember  that  the  object  is  not  the  event  and  that 
we  have  abstracted  characteristics  fewer  than,  and  different  from,  those 
the  event  has,  we  should  expect  many  unforeseen  happenings  to  occur. 
Consequently,  when  the  unexpected  happens,  we  are  saved  from  painful 
and  harmful  semantic  shocks. 

If,  through  lack  of  consciousness  of  abstracting,  we  identify  or  con¬ 
fuse  words  with  objects  and  feelings,  or  memories  and  ‘ideas’  with 
experiences  which  belong  to  the  un-speakable  objective  level,  we  iden¬ 
tify  higher  order  abstractions  with  lower.  Since  this  special  type  of 
semantic  identification  or  confusion  is  extremely  general,  it  deserves  a 
special  name.  I  call  it  objectification ,  because  it  is  generally  the  confusion 
of  words  or  verbal  issues  (memories,  ‘ideas’. ,)  with  objective,  un-speak- 
able  levels,  such  as  objects,  or  experiences,  or  feelings , .  If  we  objectify, 
we  forget ,  or  we  do  not  remember  that  words  are  not  the  objects  or 
feelings  themselves,  that  the  verbal  levels  are  always  different  from  the 
objective  levels.  When  we  identify  them,  we  disregard  the  inherent 
differences,  and  so  proper  evaluation  and  full  adjustment  become  im¬ 
possible. 

Similar  semantic  difficulties  arise  from  the  confusion  of  higher 
order  abstractions;  for  instance,  the  identification  of  inferences  with 

Vll.  THE  MECHANISM  OE  TIME-BINDING 

descriptions.  This  may  be  made  clearer  by  examples.  In  studying  these 
examples,  it  should  be  remembered  that  the  organism  acts  as-a-whole, 
and  that  ‘emotional1  factors  are,  therefore,  always  present  and  should 
not  be  disregarded.  In  this  study,  the  reader  should  try  to  put  himself 
‘ emotionally ’  in  the  place  of  the  Smith  we  speak  about ;  then  he  cannot 
fail  to  understand  the  serious  semantic  disturbances  these  identifications 
create  in  everybody's  life. 

Let  us  begin  with  a  Smith  who  knows  nothing  of  what  has  been 
said  here,  and  who  is  not  conscious  of  abstracting.  For  him,  as  well  as 
for  Fido,  there  is,  in  principle,  no  realization  of  the  ‘characteristics  left 
out'.  He  is  ‘emotionally'  convinced  that  his  words  entirely  cover  the 
‘object'  which  ‘is  so  and  so'.  He  identifies  his  lower  abstractions  with 
characteristics  left  out,  with  higher  abstractions  which  have  all  char¬ 
acteristics  included.  He  ascribes  to  words  an  entirely  false  value 
and  certitude  which  they  cannot  have.  He  does  not  realize  that  his 
words  may  have  different  meanings  for  the  other  fellow.  He  ascribes 
to  words  ‘emotional'  objectivity  and  value,  and  the  verbal,  A  ‘perma¬ 
nence',  ‘definiteness',  ‘one- value'. ,  to  objects.  When  he  hears  something 
that  he  does  not  like,  he  does  not  ask  ‘what  do  you  mean?',  but,  under 
the  semantic  pressure  of  identification,  he  ascribes  his  own  meanings 
to  the  other  fellow’s  words.  For  him,  words  ‘are1  ‘emotionally'  over¬ 
loaded,  objectified  semantic  fetishes,  even  as  to  the  primitive  man  who 
believed  in  the  ‘magic  of  words'.  Upon  hearing  anything  strange,  his  s.r 
is  undelayed  and  may  appear  as,  ‘I  disagree  with  you',  or  T  don't  believe 
you', .  There  is  no  reason  to  be  dramatic  about  any  unwelcome  statement. 
One  needs  definitions  and  interpretations  of  such  statements,  which 
probably  are  correct  from  the  speaker's  point  of  view,  if  we  grant  him 
his  informations,  his  undefined  terms ,  the  structure  of  his  language  and 
premises  which  build  up  his  s.r.  But  our  Smith,  innocent  of  the  ‘struc¬ 
ture  of  human  knowledge’,  has  mostly  a  semantic  belief  in  the  one-value, 
absoluteness . ,  of  things,  and  thinghood  of  words,  and  does  not  know, 
or  does  not  remember ,  that  words  are  not  the  events  themselves.  Words 
represent  higher  order  abstractions  manufactured  by  higher  nerve  cen¬ 
tres,  and  objects  represent  lower  order  abstractions  manufactured  by 
lower  nerve  centres.  Under  such  identity-delusions ,  he  becomes  an  abso¬ 
lutist,  a  dogmatist,  a  finalist , .  He  seeks  to  establish  ‘ultimate  truths', 
‘eternal  verities'.,  and  is  willing  to  fight  for  them,  never  knowing  or 
remembering,  otherwise  forgetting,  the  ‘characteristics  left  out';  never 
