recognizing  that  the  noises  he  makes  are  not  the  objective  actualities  we 
deal  with.  If  somebody  contradicts  him,  he  is  much  disturbed.  Forgetting 
characteristics  left  out,  he  is  always  ‘right’.  For  him  his  statement  is  not 

CONSCIOUSNESS  OF  ABSTRACTING 

only  the  only  statement  possible,  but  he  actually  attributes  some  cosmic 
objective  evaluation  to  it. 

The  above  description  is  unsatisfactory,  but  cannot  be  much  im¬ 
proved  upon,  since  the  situation  involves  un-speakable  affective  com¬ 
ponents  which  are  not  words.  We  must  simply  try  to  put  ourselves  in 
his  place,  and  to  live  through  his  experiences  when  he  identifies  and 
iK'lieves  without  question  that  his  words  ‘are’  the  things  they  only  stand 
for.  To  give  the  full  consequences  of  such  identification  resulting  in 
wrong  evaluation,  I  might  add  most  tedious  descriptions  of  the  interplay 
of  situations,  evaluations.,  in  quarrels,  unhappinesses,  disagreements., 
leading  to  dramas  and  tragedies,  as  well  as  to  many  forms  of  ‘mental’ 
illness  effectively  described  only  in  the  belles-lettres.  Thus,  Smithi,  who 
is  not  conscious  of  abstracting,  makes  the  statement,  ‘A  circle  is  not 
square*.  Let  us  suppose  that  Brown!  contradicts  him.  Smith!  is  angered; 
for  his  s.ry  his  statement  ‘is’  the  ‘plain  truth’,  and  Browni  must  be  a  fool. 

I  le  objectifies  it,  ascribes  to  it  undue  value.  For  him,  it  ‘is*  ‘experience’, 
a  ‘fact*. ,  and  he  bursts  into  speech,  denouncing  Browm  and  showing 
how  wrong  he  ‘is’.  From  this  semantic  attitude,  many  difficulties  and 
tragedies  arise. 

But  if  Smith2  (conscious  of  abstracting)  makes  the  statement,  ‘A 
circle  is  not  square’,  and  Brown2  contradicts  him,  what  would  Smith2  do? 
He  would  smile,  would  not  burst  into  speech  to  defend  his  statement, 
but  would  ask  Brown2,  ‘What  do  you  mean?  I  do  not  quite  understand 
you*.  After  receiving  some  answer,  Smith2  would  explain  to  Brown2  that 
his  statement  is  not  anything  to  quarrel  about,  as  it  is  verbal  and  is  true 
only  by  definition.  He  would  also  grant  the  right  of  Brown2  not  to 
accept  his  definition ,  but  to  use  another  one  to  satisfy  himself.  The 
problem  would  then,  naturally,  arise  as  to  what  definition  both  could 
accept,  or  which  would  be  generally  acceptable.  And  the  problem  would 
then  be  solved  by  purely  pragmatic  considerations.  Words  appear  as 
creatures  of  definitions,  and  optional ;  but  this  attitude  involves  important 
and  new  s.r . 

This  fact  seems  of  tremendous  semantic  importance,  as  it  provides 
the  working  foundation  for  a  theory  of  ‘universal  agreement’.  In  the 
first  part  of  the  above  example,  Smithi,  according  to  the  accepted  stan¬ 
dards,  was  ‘right’  (‘a  circle  is  not  square’).  Is  he  ‘more  right’  than 
Browna,  for  whom  the  ‘circle  is  square’?  Not  at  all.  Both  statements 
belong  to  the  verbal  level,  and  represent  only  forms  of  representation 
for  s.r  inside  their  skin.  Either  may  be  ‘right’  by  some  explicit  or  im¬ 
plicit  ‘definitions’.  Are  the  two  statements  equally  valid  ?  This  we  do  not 
know  a  priori;  we  must  investigate  to  find  out  if  the  noises  uttered  have 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OK  TIME-BINDING 

meanings  outside  of  pathology,  or  which  statement  structurally  covers 
the  situation  better,  carries  us  structurally  further  in  describing  and 
analysing  this  world , .  Only  scientific  structural  analysis  can  give  the 
preference  to  one  form  over  another.  Smith  and  Brown  can  only  pro¬ 
duce  their  'definitions’  according  to  their  s,r,  but  they  are  not  judges  as  to 
which  'definitions’  will  ultimately  stand  the  test  of  structure. 

The  moment  we  eliminate  identification  we  become  conscious  of 
abstracting,  and  permanently  and  instinctively  remember  that  the  object 
is  not  the  event,  that  the  label  is  not  the  object,  and  that  a  statement 
about  a  statement  is  not  the  first  statement ;  thus,  we  reach  a  semantic 
state,  where  we  recognize  that  everybody  'is  right’  by  his  own  'defini¬ 
tions’.  But  any  individual  or  unenlightened  public  opinion  is  not  the 
sole  judge  as  to  what  'definitions’  and  what  language  should  prevail. 
Only  structural  investigation  (science)  can  decide  which  appears  as  the 
structurally  more  similar  form  of  representation  on  the  verbal  levels 
for  what  is  going  on  on  the  un-speakable,  objective  levels. 

When  it  comes  to  'description  of  facts’,  the  situation  is  not  funda¬ 
mentally  altered.  Mistakes  seem  always  possible  and  often  occur.  Be¬ 
sides,  the  semantic  impressions  which  'facts*  make  on  us  are  also  indi¬ 
vidual,  and  often  in  conflict,  as  comparison  of  the  testimonies  of 
eye-witnesses  shows.  But  there  is  no  need  for  permanent  disagreement ; 
more  structural  investigation  of  the  objective  and  verbal  levels  will  pro¬ 
vide  a  solution.  Once  such  an  investigation  is  carried  far  enough,  we 
can  always  reach  a  semantic  basis  where  all  may  agree,  provided  we  do 
not  identify,  do  not  objectify,  and  do  not  confuse  description  and  infer¬ 
ence,  descriptive  and  inferential  words , . 

As  our  analysis  is  carried  out  from  the  structural  and  non-el  point 
of  view,  we  should  not  miss  the  fact  that  semantic  components  asso¬ 
ciated  with  words  and  statements  are,  outside  of  very  pathological  cases, 
never  entirely  absent,  and  become  of  paramount  importance.  In  the  older 
days,  we  had  no  simple  and  effective  means  by  which  we  could  affect 
painful,  misplaced,  or  disproportionate  evaluations,  meanings . ,  through 
a  semantic  re-education,  which  are  supplied  by  the  present  analysis  and 
the  use  of  the  Structural  Differential.  The  means  to  eliminate  identifica¬ 
tion  consist  of :  first,  an  objective  relief  diagram  to  which  we  can  point 
our  Unger;  and  second,  a  convincing  explanation  (pointing  the  finger  to 
the  labels)  that  the  verbal  levels,  with  their  distressing  and  disastrous 
older  s.rt  are  not ,  and  differ  entirely  from,  the  levels  of  objects  and 
events.  Whatever  we  may  say  or  feel,  the  objects  and  events  remain  on 
the  un-speakable  levels  and  cannot  be  reached  by  words.  Under  such 
natural  structural  conditions,  we  can  only  reach  the  objective  level  by 

CONSCIOUSNESS  OK  ABSTRACTING 

seeing,  handling,  actually  feeling . ,  and,  therefore,  by  pointing  our  finger 
to  the  object  on  the  Structural  Differential  and  being  silent — all  of  which 
cannot  be  conveyed  by  words  alone . 

In  experiments  with  the  ‘mentally'  ill  in  whom  the  semantic  disturb¬ 
ances  were  very  strong,  it  took  several  months  to  train  the  patients  in 
non-identity  and  in  silence  on  the  objective  levels.  But,  as  soon  as  this 
was  achieved,  either  complete  or  partial  relief  followed. 

The  main  disturbances  in  daily  life,  as  well  as  in  ‘mental'  illness, 
are  found  in  the  affective  field.  We  find  an  internal  pressure  of  identi¬ 
fications,  expressed  by  bursting  into  speech,  and  unjustified  semantic 
over-evaluation  of  words,  the  ascribing  of  objectivity  to  words,.  In 
such  cases,  suppression  or  repression  of  words  does  not  accomplish  much, 
but  often  does  considerable  harm  and  must  be  avoided  by  all  means. 
Under  such  conditions,  the  use  of  the  relief  diagram  becomes  a  neces¬ 
sity  in  pointing  to  the  difference  between  different  orders  of  abstractions 
and  inducing  the  semantically  beneficial  silence  on  the  ‘objective  level' 
without  repression  or  suppression. 

With  the  use  of  the  Structural  Differential,  we  can  eliminate  iden¬ 
tification,  and  so  attain  the  benefits,  avoiding  the  dangers.  If  any  one 
identifies,  and  his  s.r  drive  him  into  an  outburst  of  speech,  we  do  not 
repress  or  suppress  him ;  we  say,  instead :  ‘At  your  pleasure  [since  it 
makes  him  feel  better],  but  remember  that  your  words  occur  on  the 
verbal  levels  [showing  with  a  gesture  of  the  hands  the  hanging  labels], 
and  that  they  are  not  the  objective  level,  which  remains  untouched  and 
unchanged*.  Such  a  procedure,  when  repeated  again  and  again,  gives 
him  the  proper  semantic  evaluation  of  orders  of  abstractions,  frees  him 
from  identification ,  yet  without  repression  or  suppression .  It  teaches 
him,  also,  to  enquire  into  alleged  ‘facts’,  and  then  to  try  to  find  struc¬ 
turally  better  forms  of  representation.  If  such  results  are  not  forth¬ 
coming,  we  may  use  the  older  forms,  but  by  proper  evaluation  we  do 
not  semantically  put  ‘belief'  in  these  forms  of  representation.  Such 
beliefs  always  appear  as  the  result  of  identification  somewhere. 

The  technique  of  training  is  simple.  We  live  on  the  ‘objective'  or 
lower  order  of  abstraction  levels,  where  we  must  see,  feel,  touch,  per¬ 
form  . ,  but  never  speak.  In  training,  we  must  use  our  hands , .  It  is  very 
useful,  after  the  Structural  Differential  has  been  repeatedly  explained, 
stressing,  in  particular,  the  rejection  of  the  ‘is*  of  identity,  not  to  inter¬ 
rupt  the  other  fellow.  Let  him  speak,  but  wave  the  hand,  indicating  the 
verbal  levels;  then  point  the  finger  to  the  objective  level,  and,  with  the 
other  hand,  close  your  own  lips,  to  show  that  on  the  objective  level  one 
can  only  be  silent.  When  performed  repeatedly,  this  pantomime  has  a 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

most  beneficial,  semantic,  pacifying  effect  upon  the  ‘over-emotionalized’ 
identification-conditions.  The  neurological  mechanism  of  this  action  is 
not  fully  known,  but  some  aspects  are  quite  clear. 

The  more  elaborate  a  nervous  system  becomes,  the  further  some 
parts  of  the  brain  are  removed  from  immediate  experience.  Nerve  cur¬ 
rents,  having  finite  velocity,  eventually  have  longer  and  more  numerous 
paths  to  travel ;  different  possibilities  and  complications  arise,  resulting  in 
‘delayed  action’.  It  is  known  that  the  thalamus  (roughly)  appears  con¬ 
nected  with  affective  and  ‘emotional’  life,  and  that  the  cortex,  farther 
removed  and  isolated  from  the  external  world,  has  the  effect  of  inducing 
this  ‘delay  in  action’.  In  unbalanced  and  ‘emotional’  ‘thinking’,  which  is 
so  prevalent,  the  thalamus  seems  overworked,  the  cortex  seems  not 
worked  enough.  The  results  take  on  the  form  of  a  low  kind  of  animal¬ 
istic,  primitive,  or  infantile  behaviour,  often  of  a  pathological  character 
in  a  supposedly  civilized  adult.  It  appears  that  the  ‘silence  on  objective 
levels’  introduces  this  ‘delayed  action’,  unloading  the  thalamic  material 
on  the  cortex.  This  psychophysiological  method  is  very  simple,  scientific, 
and  entirely  general.  The  standard  ‘mental’  therapy  of  today  applies 
also  a  method  of  re-education  of  s.r,  as  if  relieving  the  thalamus,  and 
putting  more  of  the  nerve  currents  through  the  cortex,  or  eventually 
furnishing  the  cortex  with  different  material,  so  that  the  thalamic  ma¬ 
terial  returning  from  the  cortex  could  be  properly  influenced. 

If  we  succeed  in  such  a  semantic  re-education,  the  difficulties  vanish. 
The  older  experimental  data  show  that  in  many  instances  we  have  suc¬ 
ceeded,  and  that  in  many  we  have  failed.  The  successful  cases  show  that 
we  actually  know  the  essential  semantic  points  involved;  the  failures 
show  that  we  do  not  know  enough,  and  that  our  older  theories  are  not 
sufficiently  general.  At  present,  only  the  more  pronounced  and  morbid 
semantic  disturbances  come  to  the  attention  of  physicians,  and  very  little 
is  done  by  way  of  preventive  measures.  Besides  the  pronounced  disturb¬ 
ances  in  daily  life,  we  see  an  enormous  number  of  semantic  disturbances 
which  we  disregard,  and  call  ‘peculiarities’.  In  the  majority  of  cases, 
these  ‘peculiarities’  are  undesirable,  and,  under  unfavorable  conditions, 
may  lead  to  more  serious  consequences  of  a  morbid  character.  They 
usually  involve  a  great  deal  of  unhappiness  for  all  concerned,  and  un¬ 
happiness  appears  as  a  sign  of  some  semantic  maladjustment  somewhere, 
and  so  may  be  destructive  to  ‘mental’  and  nervous  health. 

In  advanced  ‘mental’  illnesses,  such  as  usually  come  to  the  attention 
of  psychiatrists,  there  are  certain  psycho-logical  symptoms  which  are 
generally  present.  The  symptoms  of  interest  to  us  in  this  work  are  called 
‘delusions’,  ‘illusions’,  and  ‘hallucinations’.  All  of  them  involve  the 

CONSCIOUSNESS  OF  ABSTRACTING 

semantic  identification  or  confusions  of  the  orders  of  abstractions ,  the 
evaluation  of  lower  orders  of  abstraction  as  higher,  or  higher  as  lower. 
It  was  explained  already  that  some  components  of  identification  are  in¬ 
variably  present  there,  and  so  identification  may  be  considered  as  an 
elementary  type  of  semantic  disturbances  from  which  all  the  other  states 
differ  only  in  intensity. 

The  main  point  is  to  find  psychophysiological  preventive  means 
whereby  this  identification  can  be  forestalled  or  eliminated.  To  date, 
experience  and  analysis  show  that  all  forms  of  identification  may  be  suc¬ 
cessfully  eliminated  by  training  in  visualization,  if  this  semantic  state 
can  be  produced.  For  this  purpose  the  Structural  Differential  is  uniquely 
useful  and  necessary.  With  its  help  we  train  all  centres.  The  lower 
centres  are  involved,  as  we  see,  feel,  hear. ;  the  higher  centres  are  equally 
involved,  as  we  ‘remember’,  ‘understand’. ;  with  the  result  that  all  centres 
work  together  without  conflict.  The  ‘consciousness  of  abstracting  is 
inculcated,  replacing  vicious  s.r  of  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions 
and  identification. 

This  harmonious  working  of  all  centres  on  their  proper  levels  has 
extremely  far-reaching,  practical  consequences  in  ‘mental  and  physical 
hygiene.  We  become  co-ordinated,  adjusted,  and  difficulties  which  might 
otherwise  occur  in  the  future  are  eliminated  in  a  preventive  way.  It 
must  be  remembered  that,  at  present,  it  is  impossible  to  foresee  to  how 
great  an  extent  the  elimination  of  identification  on  all  levels  will  have  a 
beneficial  effect.  At  this  stage  we  know  even  experimentally  that  the 
benefits  are  very  large,  but  we  may  expect  that  they  will  become  still 
more  numerous  when  more  experimenting  has  been  done.  Delusions, 
illusions,  and  hallucinations  represent  manifestations  which  occur  in  prac¬ 
tically  all  ‘mental’  difficulties,  and  they  only  represent  a  semantic  identi¬ 
fication  of  orders  of  abstractions  of  different  degrees  of  intensity.  When 
this  confusion  is  eliminated,  we  may  expect  general  changes  in  the  symp¬ 
toms.  But  as  the  correspondence  is  probably  not  one-to-onet  it  is  im¬ 
possible  to  foretell  theoretically  what  improvements  may  be  expected  in 
pronounced  illness.  In  the  slighter  disturbances,  which  affect  us  in  daily 
life,  the  results  are  much  easier  to  foresee,  and  are  always  beneficial. 

To  how  great  an  extent  the  consciousness  of  abstracting  benefits 
semantically  the  whole  organism ,  I  may  illustrate  by  one  of  my  own 
experiences.  Once  I  was  travelling  on  a  ship.  A  gentleman  visited  my 
cabin,  and,  seeing  the  Structural  Differential,  asked  questions  about  it. 
After  a  short  explanation,  he  asked  about  practical  applications. 

My  guest  was  sitting  on  my  berth ;  I  was  sitting  on  a  small  folding 
chair.  I  got  up,  went  to  the  door,  then  pretended  that  I  was  coming  in, 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

and,  at  my  suggestion,  he  said,  ‘Please  have  a  seat*.  I  remained  standing 
while  explaining  how,  if  I  were  not  ‘conscious  of  abstracting’,  to  me  his 
word  ‘seat’  would  be  identified  with  the  chair  (objectification)  and  my 
s.r  would  be  such  that  I  would  sit  down  with  great  confidence.  If  the 
chair  were  to  collapse  I  would  have,  besides  the  bump,  an  affective 
shock,  ‘fright’. ,  which  might  do  harm  to  my  nervous  system.  But  if  I 
were  conscious  of  abstracting,  my  s.r  would  be  different.  I  would  re¬ 
member  that  the  word ,  the  label  ‘seat’  is  not  the  thing  on  which  I  am 
supposed  to  sit.  I  would  remember  that  I  am  to  sit  on  this  individual, 
unique,  un-speakable  object,  which  might  be  strong  or  weak,.  Accord¬ 
ingly*  ¥  would  sit  carefully.  In  case  the  chair  should  collapse,  and  I 
should  hurt  myself  physically,  I  would  still  have  been  saved  an  affective 
nervous  shock. 

During  all  these  explanations  I  was  handling  the  little  chair  and 
shaking  it.  I  did  not  notice  that  the  legs  were  falling  out,  and  that  the 
chair  was  becoming  unfit  for  use.  Then,  when  I  actually  sat  on  the  relic, 
it  gave  way  under  me.  However,  I  did  not  fall  on  the  floor.  I  caught 
myself  in  the  air,  so  to  say,  and  saved  myself  from  a  painful  experience. 
It  is  important  to  notice  that  such  physical  readiness  requires  a  very 
elaborate,  nervous,  unconscious  co-ordination,  which  was  accomplished 
by  the  semantic  state  of  non-identification  or  consciousness  of  abstract¬ 
ing.  When  such  a  consciousness  of  abstracting  is  acquired,  it  works 
instinctively  and  automatically  and  does  not  require  continual  effort.  Its 
operation  involves  a  fraction  of  a  second’s  delay  in  action ,  but  this  small 
delay  is  not  harmful  in  practice ;  on  the  contrary,  it  has  very  important 
psycho-logical  and  neurological  ‘delayed  action’  effects. 

It  seems  that  ‘silence’  on  the  objective  levels  involves  this  psycho- 
physiological  delay.  No  matter  how  small,  it  serves  to  unload  the  thal¬ 
amic  material  on  the  cortex.  In  a  number  of  clinical  cases,  Dr.  Philip  S. 
Graven  has  demonstrated  that  the  moment  such  a  delay  can  actually  be 
produced  in  the  patient,  he  either  improves  or  is  entirely  relieved.  The 
precise  neurological  mechanism  of  this  process  is  not  known,  but  there  is 
no  doubt  that  this  ‘delayed  action’  has  many  very  beneficial  effects  upon 
the  whole  working  of  the  nervous  system.  It  somehow  balances  harmful 
s.r,  and  also  somehow  stimulates  the  higher  nervous  centres  to  more 
physiological  control  over  the  lower  centres. 

A  very  vital  point  in  this  connection  should  be  noticed.  That  this 
‘delayed  action’  is  beneficial  is  acknowledged  by  the  majority  of  nor¬ 
mally  developed  adults  in  the  form  of  delay  in  action  and  finds  its 
expression  in  such  statements  as  ‘think  twice’,  ‘keep  your  head’,  ‘hold 
your  horses’,  ‘keep  cool’,  ‘steady’,  ‘wait  a  minute’. ,  and  such  functional 

CONSCIOUSNESS  OF  ABSTRACTING 

recipes  as  ‘when  angry,  count  ten’, .  In  daily  life,  such  wisdom  is  ac¬ 
quired  either  by  painful  experience,  or  is  taught  to  children  in  an  A 
language,  which,  as  practice  shows,  is  rarely  effective  because  of  its 
inadequacy.  It  is  seldom  realized  that  the  mechanism  of  these  functional 
observations  and  familiar  advices  have  very  powerful  and  workable 
underlying  neurological  processes,  which  can  be  reached  and  directly 
affected  by  psychophysiological,  ordinal,  non-el  methods  in  connection 
with  the  structure  of  the  language  we  use .  Thus,  under  an  infantile, 
A ,  and  prevailing  system  we  use  and  teach  our  children  a  language 
involving  the  ‘is'  of  identity,  and  so  we  must  confuse  orders  of  abstrac¬ 
tions,  preparing  for  ourselves  and  the  children  the  harmful  semantic 
predispositions  for  ‘bursting  into  speech’,  instead  of  ‘wait  a  minute', 
which,  neurologically,  means  abusing  our  thalamus  and  keeping  our  cor¬ 
tex  ‘unemployed'.  In  a  A  oo-valued  system  we  reject  the  ‘is’  of  identity ; 
we  cannot  confuse  orders  of  abstractions ;  we  cannot  identify  words  with 
the  un-speakable  objective  levels  or  inferences  with  descriptions,  and  we 
cannot  identify  the  different  abstractions  of  different  individuals , .  This 
semantic  state  of  proper  evaluation  results  in  discrimination  between  the 
different  orders  of  abstractions;  an  automatic  delay  is  introduced — the 
cortex  is  switched  completely  into  the  nervous  circuit.  The  semantic 
foundation  is  laid  for  ‘higher  mentality'  and  ‘emotional  balance’. 

We  have  already  had  occasion  to  mention  the  mechanism  of  pro¬ 
jection  in  connection  with  identification,  as  a  semantic  state  of  affective 
ascribing  of  lower  centre  characteristics  to  higher  order  abstractions  and 
vice  versa,  and  in  connection  with  the  introverted  or  extroverted  attitudes. 
Likewise,  we  have  already  reached  the  conclusion  that  a  well-adjusted 
and,  therefore,  well-balanced  individual  should  be  neither  of  the  extremes, 
but  a  balanced  extroverted  introvert.  By  training  with  the  Differential 
this  important  semantic  result  may  be  brought  about.  By  training  with 
the  ‘object’  on  its  level,  we  become  extroverted,  and  we  learn  to  observe ; 
this  results  in  semantic  freedom  from  ‘preconceived  ideas',  such  as  we 
have  when  we  start  with  the  evaluation,  label  first  and  object  next,  in¬ 
stead  of  the  natural  order,  object  first  and  label  next.  By  passing  to 
higher  order  abstractions  and  evaluating  the  successive  ranks  of  labels, 
we  train  in  introversion.  The  result,  as  a  whole,  is  that  we  may  achieve 
the  desirable  and  balanced  semantic  state  of  the  extroverted  introvert. 

That  in  the  training  with  the  Differential  we  use  all  available  nerve 
centres  is  beneficial,  because  the  lower  centres  are  in  closer  connection 
with  the  vegetative  nervous  system  than  are  the  others. 

CHAPTER  XXVII 

HIGHER  ORDER  ABSTRACTIONS 

The  characters  which  science  discerns  in  nature  are  subtle  characters, 
not  obvious  at  first  sight.  They  are  relations  of  relations  and  characters 
of  characters.  (573)  A.  N.  whitehead 

In  this  connection  one  should  particularly  remember  that  the  human 
language  permits  the  construction  of  sentences  which  do  not  involve  any 
consequences  and  which  therefore  have  no  content  at  all — in  spite  of  the 
fact  that  these  sentences  produce  some  kind  of  picture  in  our  imagination; 
e.  g.,  the  statement  that  besides  our  world  there  exists  another  world,  with 
which  any  connection  is  impossible  in  principle,  does  not  lead  to  any  ex¬ 
perimental  consequence,  but  does  produce  a  kind  of  picture  in  the  mind. 
Obviously  such  a  statement  can  neither  be  proved  nor  disproved.  One 
should  be  especially  careful  in  using  the  words  “reality,”  “actually,”  etc., 
since  these  words  very  often  lead  to  statements  of  the  type  just  mentioned. 

(215)  W.  HEISENBERG 

Section  A.  General . 

In  the  previous  chapters  I  demonstrated  that  there  is  a  short  cut 
which  enables  us  to  grasp,  acquire,  and  apply  what  has  been  advanced 
in  the  present  work.  This  semantic  short  cut  is  ‘consciousness  of  ab¬ 
stracting'.  It  is  a  psycho-logical  attitude  toward  all  our  abstracting  on 
all  levels,  and  so  involves  the  co-ordinated  working  of  the  organism- 
as-a-whole. 

The  use  of  the  Structural  Differential  is  necessary,  because  some 
levels  are  un-speakable;  We  can  see  them,  handle  them,  feel  them . ,  but 
under  no  circumstances  can  we  reach  those  levels  by  speech  alone.  We 
must,  therefore,  have  a  diagram,  by  preference  in  relief  form,  which 
represents  the  empirical  structural  conditions,  and  which  indicates  the 
un-speakable  level  by  some  other  means  than  speech.  We  must,  in  the 
simplest  case,  either  point  our  finger  to  the  object,  insisting  upon  silence, 
or  must  perform  bodily  some  activity  and  similarly  insist  upon  silence, 
as  the  performing  and  feelings  are  also  not  words. 

In  such  semantic  training  it  is  enough  to  insist  upon  the  non¬ 
identity  or  the  difference  between  the  objective,  un-speakable  levels  of 
lower  order  abstractions,  (0*),  and  the  verbal  or  higher  order  abstrac¬ 
tions,  (Ln).  When  this  habit  and  feeling  are  acquired,  no  one  should 
have  difficulties  in  extending  the  non-identity  method  to  daily-life  occur¬ 
rences.  To  achieve  these  semantic  aims,  we  must  first  emphasize  the 
common-sense  fact  that  an  object  is  not  the  event.  To  do  this,  we  start 
with  the  1933  scientific  structural  ‘metaphysics'  about  the  event  and 

HKillKK  <>R1)KR  ABSTRACTIONS 

stress  the  fact  that  the  ob¬ 
ject,  being  a  nervous  ab¬ 
straction  of  lower  order, 
has  fewer  and  different 
m.o  characteristics  than 
the  event  has.  This  is  best 
accomplished  by  stressing 
the  fact  that  in  abstract¬ 
ing  from  the  event  to  the 
object  we  left  out  some 
characteristics.  We  did  not 
abstract  * all *  characteris¬ 
tics;  this  would  be  a  self- 
contradiction  in  terms,  an 
impossibility. 

We  do  not  even  need 
to  stress  a  full  understand¬ 
ing  of  the  event.  Common- 
sense  examples,  showing 
that  what  we  recognize  as 
a  'pencil'  is  not  'all',  often 
suffice.  No  one  will  have 
difficulties,  provided  he 
trains  himself  in  this  di¬ 
rection,  ,in  remembering 
continually  and  instinc¬ 
tively  the  free  hanging 
strings  (B'),  (B"),  which 
indicate  the  non-abstracted 
or  left-out  characteristics 
and  which  help  to  train  in  non-identity.  With  the  relief  diagram,  the  s.r 
of  the  student  are  trained  through  all  nervous  centres .  He  sees,  he 
handles . ,  the  hanging  strings,  and  he  also  hears  about  them.  This  gives 
the  maximum  probability  that  the  organism-as-a-whole  will  be  affected. 
In  this  way  an  ‘intellectual'  theory  engages  the  ‘senses',  feelings,  and 
reflex  mechanisms.  To  affect  the  organism-as-a-whole,  organism-as-a- 
whole  methods  must  be  employed. 

A  similar  structural  situation  is  found  when  we  deal  with  higher 
order  abstractions.  A  word,  or  a  name,  or  a  statement  is  conveyed  in 
spoken  form  or  by  writing,  and  affects  first  the  lower  centres  and  then 
is  abstracted,  and  again  transformed,  by  the  higher  centres.  The  order 

Fig.  1 

The  Structural  Differential 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

is  generally  not  changed  when  the  verbal  issues  are  neither  seen  nor 
heard  but  originate  in  ourselves.  Most  ‘impulses’,  ‘interests’,  ‘meanings’, 
‘evaluations’. ,  originate  in  lower  centres  and  follow  the  usual  course, 
from  lower  centres  to  higher.  When  ‘experience’  (reaction  of  lower 
centres)  is  transformed  into  ‘memories’  (higher  centres) . ,  the  order  is 
similar.  Difficulties  begin  when  the  order  is  pathologically  reversed  and 
‘ideas’  are  evaluated  as  experience,  words  as  objects , .  In  the  building  of 
language  a  similar  process  can  be  observed.  We  observe  the  absolute 
individuals  with  which  we  actually  deal,  we  label  them  with  individual 
names,  say,  Alf  A2,  . .  .  ,  An,  A12,  .  .  .  ,  A21,  A22, . . . ,  A3i,  A32, .  . . , .  By 
a  process  of  abstracting  and  disregarding ,  for  instance,  the  characteristic 
subscripts  ‘1*,  we  would  have  only  the  ones  which  have  the  character¬ 
istic  subscripts  2,  3,  .  .  .  ,  9,  22,  23,  .  .  .  ,  29 , .  Disregarding  the  charac¬ 
teristic  subscripts  ‘2’,  we  would  have  the  ones  with  the  characteristics 
3,  4,  .  .  .  ,  9,  33,  34,  .  .  .  ,  39 , .  Finally,  if  we  should  eliminate  all  indi¬ 
vidual  characteristic  subscripts,  we  would  have  a  ‘general’  name  A  for 
the  whole  group  without  singling  out  individual  characteristics. 

All  words  of  the  type  of  ‘man’,  ‘animal’,  ‘house’,  ‘chair’,  ‘pencil’. , 
have  been  built  by  a  similar  process  of  abstraction,  or  disregard  for 
individual  differences.  In  each  case  of  disregard  of  individual  charac¬ 
teristics  a  new  neurological  process  was  involved. 

Similarly,  with  ‘statements  about  a  statement’.  When  we  hear  a 
statement,  or  see  it  in  a  written  form,  such  a  statement  becomes  a  stimu¬ 
lus  entering  through  the  lower  centres,  and  a  statement  about  it  repre¬ 
sents,  in  general,  a  new  process  of  abstraction,  or  an  abstraction  of 
higher  order. 

It  becomes  obvious  that  the  introduction  of  a  language  of  ‘different 
order  of  abstractions’,  although  it  is  not  familiar,  yet  structurally  it 
represents  very  closely,  in  terms  of  order ,  most  fundamental  neuro¬ 
logical  processes  going  on  in  us.  As  we  already  know,  a  natural  order 
has  been  established  by  evolution ;  namely,  lower  order  abstractions  first, 
higher  next;  the  identifications  of  orders  or  the  reversal  of  orders  ap¬ 
pears  pathological  for  man  and  appears  as  a  confusion  of  orders  of 
abstractions,  resulting  in  false  evaluation:  identification,  illusions,  delu¬ 
sions,  and  hallucinations. 

Historically,  the  first  to  pay  serious  attention  to  the  above  problems 
in  a  consistent,  yet  very  limited,  way  were  mathematicians.  In  the 
investigation  of  the  problems  of  the  foundation  of  mathematics,  mathe¬ 
matical  ‘logic*,  and  the  theory  of  aggregates,  we  came  across  self-con¬ 
tradictions  which  would  make  mathematics  impossible.  To  avoid  such 
a  disaster,  Russell  invented  what  is  called  the  ‘theory  of  mathematical 

HIGHER  ORDER  ABSTRACTIONS 

types’.  The  status  of  this  theory  is  a  very  interesting  and  instructive 
one.  The  theory  solves  the  mathematical  difficulties,  thus  saving  mathe¬ 
matics,  but  has  no  application  to  life.  Practically  all  mathematicians,  if  I 
am  not  mistaken,  the  author  of  the  theory  included,  somehow  ‘dislike* 
the  theory  and  make  efforts  to  solve  the  problems  in  a  different  way  and 
possibly  to  abandon  the  theory  altogether. 

We  have  already  shown  that  the  introduction  of  a  language  of 
‘different  orders  of  abstractions’  is  structurally  entirely  justified  and 
physiologically  natural,  as  it  describes,  in  terms  of  order,  the  activities 
of  the  nervous  system.  Such  facts  are  important ;  but  if,  in  addition,  the 
introduction  of  a  language  of  a  new  A  structure  would  give  us  further 
demonstrable  advantages,  then  the  introduction  of  such  a  language  would 
become  increasingly  desirable. 

Although  the  majority  of  mathematicians  ‘dislike’  the  theory  of 
types,  yet,  at  present,  this  theory  is  unconditionally  necessary  for  non- 
self -contradictory  mathematics.  The  author  was  pleasantly  surprised  to 
