find  that  after  his  ^-system  was  formulated,  this  simple  and  natural, 
actional,  functional,  operational,  non-el  theory  covers  the  theory  of 
mathematical  types  and  generalizes  it,  making  the  theory  applicable  not 
only  to  the  solution  of  mathematical  paradoxes  but  to  the  solution  of  the 
majority  of  purely  human  and  scientific  difficulties.  One  general  rule  of 
‘non-confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions’,  and  the  acquiring  of  the  simple 
and  workable  ‘consciousness  of  abstracting’  based  on  the  denial  of  the 
‘is’  of  identity,  offers  a  full  structural  and  semantic  solution.  The  dis¬ 
regard  of  the  issues  involved  leads  fatalistically  to  the  manufacture  of 
endless  and  unnecessary  human  sufferings  and  unhappiness,  the  elimina¬ 
tion  of  which  is  one  of  the  main  points  in  a  theory  of  sanity.  There  is 
no  mystery  in  1933  that  continuous  small  painful  shocks  may  lead  to 
serious  semantic  and  physical  disturbances.  Psycho-logicians  and  psychi¬ 
atrists  will  find  it  increasingly  difficult  to  work  at  their  problems  if  they 
disregard  these  semantic  issues.  Parents  arid  teachers  will  find  simple 
yet  effective  structural  means  for  training  the  reactions  of  children  in 
sanity ,  with  all  the  ensuing  semantic  benefits  to  the  individuals  and  to 
society. 

When  Whitehead  and  Russell  were  working  at  the  foundations  of 
mathematics,  they  came  across  endless  paradoxes  and  self-contradictions, 
which,  of  course,  would  make  mathematics  impossible.  After  many 
efforts  they  found  that  all  these  paradoxes  had  one  general  source,  in 
the  rough,  in  the  expressions  which  involve  the  word  ‘all’,  and  the  Solu¬ 
tion  was  found  by  introducing  ‘non-allness’,  a  semantic  forerunner  of 
non-identity.  Consider,  for  example,  ‘a  proposition  about  all  proposi- 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

tions’.  They  found  that  such  totalities,  or  such  ‘air  statements,  were  not 
legitimate,  as  they  involved  a  self-contradiction  to  start  with.  A  propo¬ 
sition  cannot  be  made  legitimately  about  ‘air  propositions  without  some 
restriction,  since  it  would  have  to  include  the  new  proposition  which  is 
being  made.  If  we  consider  a  m.o  term  like  ‘propositions’,  which  we  can 
manufacture  without  known  limits,  and  remember  that  any  statement 
about  propositions  takes  the  form  of  a  proposition,  then  obviously  we 
cannot  make  statements  about  all  propositions.  In  such  a  case  the  state¬ 
ment  must  be  limited ;  such  a  set  has  no  total,  and  a  statement  about  ‘all 
its  members’  cannot  be  made  legitimately.  Similarly,  we  cannot  speak 
about  all  numbers. 

Statements  such  as  ‘a  proposition  about  dll  propositions’  have  been 
called  by  Russell  ‘illegitimate  totalities’.  In  such  cases,  it  is  necessary 
to  break  up  the  set  into  smaller  sets,  each  of  which  is  capable  of  having 
a  totality.  This  represents,  in  the  main,  what  the  theory  of  types  aims 
to  accomplish.  In  the  language  of  the  Princtpia  Mathematica,  the  prin¬ 
ciple  which  enables  us  to  avoid  the  illegitimate  totalities  may  be  expressed 
as  follows :  ‘Whatever  involves  all  of  a  collection  must  not  be  one  of  the 
collection’,  or,  ‘If,  provided  a  certain  collection  had  a  total,  it  would  have 
members  only  definable  in  terms  of  that  total,  then  the  said  collection 
has  no  total’.1  The  above  principle  is  called  the  ‘vicious-circle  principle’, 
because  it  allows  us  to  evade  the  vicious  circles  which  the  introduction 
of  illegitimate  totalities  involve.  Russell  calls  the  arguments  which  in¬ 
volve  the  vicious-circle  principle,  ‘vicious-circle  fallacies’. 

As  an  example,  Russell  gives  the  two-valued  law  of  ‘excluded 
third’,  formulated  in  the  form  that  ‘all  propositions  are  true  or  false’. 
We  involve  a  vicious-circle  fallacy  if  we  argue  that  the  law  of  excluded 
third  takes  the  form  of  a  proposition,  and,  therefore,  may  be  evaluated 
as  true  or  false.  Before  we  can  make  any  statement  about  ‘all  proposi¬ 
tions’  legitimate,  we  must  limit  it  in  some  way  so  that  a  statement  about 
this  totality  must  fall  outside  this  totality. 

Another  example  of  a  vicious-circle  fallacy  may  be  given  as  that  of 
the  imaginary  sceptic  who  asserts  that  he  knows  nothing,  but  is  refuted 
by  the  question — does  he  know  that  he  knows  nothing?  Before  the  state¬ 
ment  of  the  sceptic  becomes  significant,  he  must  limit,  somehow,  the 
number  of  facts  concerning  which  he  asserts  his  ignorance,  which  repre¬ 
sent  an  illegitimate  totality.  When  such  a  limitation  is  imposed,  and  he 
asserts  that  he  is  ignorant  of  an  extensional  series  of  propositions,  of 
which  the  proposition  about  his  ignorance  is  not  a  member,  then  such 
scepticism  cannot  be  refuted  in  the  above  way. 

HIGHER  ORDER  ABSTRACTIONS 

We  do  not  need  to  enter  into  further  details  concerning  the  elabo¬ 
rate  and  difficult  theory  of  types.  In  my  A  psychophysiologicai  formula¬ 
tion,  the  theory  becomes  structurally  extremely  simple  and  natural,  and 
applies  to  mathematics  as  well  as  to  a  very  large  number  of  daily  experi¬ 
ences,  eliminating  an  unbelievably  large  number  of  misunderstandings, 
vicious  circles,  and  other  semantic  sources  of  human  disagreements  and 
unhappiness. 

It  should  be  noticed  that,  in  the  given  examples,  we  always  made  a 
■tutement  about  another  statement,  and  that  the  vicious  circle  arose 
from  identifying  or  from  the  confusion  of  the  orders  of  statements. 
1  he  way  out  is  found  in  the  consciousness  of  abstracting,  which  leads  to 
the  semantic  discrimination  between  orders  of  abstractions.  If  we  have 
certain  propositions,  pu  p2t  p3t  .  .  .  pn ,  and  make  a  new  proposition  about 
these  propositions,  say  P,  then,  according  to  the  present  theory,  the 
statement  P  about  the  statements  pu  p2 . ,  must  be  considered  as  an 
abstraction  of  higher  order,  and  so  different,  and  must  not  be  identified 
an  to  order  with  the  propositions  pu  p2,  .  .  .  />». 

The  above  psychophysiologicai  formulation  is  entirely  general,  yet 
simple  and  natural  in  a  ^-system.  To  make  this  clearer,  I  shall  take  sev¬ 
eral  statements  concerning  the  theory  of  types  from  the  Principia 
Mathematica ,  shall  designate  them  by  (Pr.),  shall  reformulate  them  in 
my  language  of  orders  of  abstractions ,  and  shall  designate  them  as  gen¬ 
eral  semantics  (G.  S.). 

Thus,  ‘The  vicious  circles  in  question  arise  from  supposing  that  a 
collection  of  objects  may  contain  members  which  can  only  be  defined 
by  means  of  the  collection  as  a  whole*  (Pr.).  Objects  as  individuals 
and  ‘collections  of  objects*  obviously  belong  to  different  orders  of  ab¬ 
ut  ractions  and  should  not  be  confused  (G.S.).  A  ‘Proposition  about  all 
propositions’  (Pr.).  This  involves  a  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions, 
for  if  we  posit  propositions  pu  p2y  .  .  .  pn,  then  a  proposition  P  about 
these  propositions  represents  a  higher  order  abstraction  and  should  not 
be  identified  with  them  (G.S.).  ‘More  generally,  given  any  set  of  objects 
such  that,  if  we  suppose  the  set  to  have  a  total,  it  will  contain  members 
which  presuppose  this  total,  then  such  a  set  cannot  have  a  total.  By 
saying  that  a  set  has  “no  total”,  we  mean,  primarily,  that  no  significant 
statement  can  be  made  about  “all  its  members”  ’  (Pr.).  A  set  of  state¬ 
ments  or  objects  or  elements,  or  the  like,  and  a  statement  about  them 
Iwlong  to  different  orders  of  abstractions  and  should  not  be  confused 
(G.S.).  In  the  language  of  Wittgenstein:  ‘No  proposition  can  say  any¬ 
thing  about  itself,  because  the  propositional  sign  cannot  be  contained  in 
Itself  (that  is  the  “whole  theory  of  types”).’2 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

In  the  language  of  the  present  general  semantics  a  statement  about 
a  statement  is  not  the  ‘same’  statement,  but  represents,  by  structural  and 
neurological  necessity,  a  higher  order  of  abstraction,  and  should  not  be 
confused  with  the  original  statement. 

Similar  reformulations  apply  to  all  cases  given  in  the  Principia 
Mathematica,  and  so  it  becomes  evident  that  the  present  theory  covers 
a  similar  ground  as  the  theory  of  types,  and  also  covers  an  endless  list 
of  daily-life  applications  which  are  of  crucial  semantic  importance  in  a 
theory  of  sanity.  We  must  stress  here  a  simple,  natural,  and  single 
semantic  law  of  non-identity  which  covers  all  confusions  of  orders  of 
abstraction .  This  one  rule  and  training  teach  us  not  to  confuse  the  higher 
orders  with  the  lower,  not  to  identify  words  with  objects  (not  to  ob¬ 
jectify),  as  well  as  not  to  confuse  higher  abstractions  of  different  orders. 
This  generality  and  structural  simplicity  constitute  an  argument  in  favor 
of  the  present  A- system.  It  is  easier  to  teach  a  single,  simple,  and  natural 
rule  which  covers  a  vast  field  of  semantic  sources  of  human  difficulties. 
For  when  the  rule  is  explained,  and  the  learner  is  trained  with  the 
Structural  Differential,  the  semantic  problem  resolves  itself  simply  into 
the  showing  with  one’s  finger  different  orders  of  abstractions,  and  insist¬ 
ing  that  ‘this  is  not  this'. 

If  we  consider  the  natural,  structural,  and  empirical  fact  that  our 
lives  are  lived  in  a  world  of  non-identical  abstractions  of  different 
orders,  the  discrimination  between  different  orders  becomes  of  para¬ 
mount  semantic  importance  for  evaluation.  Under  such  conditions  we 
should  become  thoroughly  acquainted  with  the  mechanism  of  these  dif¬ 
ferent  orders  of  abstractions.  We  should  notice,  first,  that  the  language 
of  the  Principia  Mathematica  is  Ay  and  involves  the  ‘is’  of  identity,. 
Such  a  language  leads  to  identifications  and  to  confusions,  and  makes 
simple  issues  difficult  and  perplexing.  The  term  ‘class’  is  very  confusing. 
What  do  we  mean  by  this  term  ?  In  life  we  have,  and  deal  with,  indi¬ 
viduals  on  objective,  un-speakable  levels.  If  we  take  a  number  of  indi¬ 
viduals,  we  have  a  number  of  them,  yet  they  all  remain  individual.  If 
we  produce  an  abstraction  of  higher  order,  so  that  the  individuality  of 
each  member  is  lost,  then  we  have  an  abstraction  of  a  higher  order 
(‘idea’  in  the  old  language),  but  no  more  the  absolute  individuals  of  our 
collection.  The  term  ‘class’  in  this  respect  is  seriously  confusing,  as  it 
tends  to  conceal  a  simple  experimental  fact,  and  leads  to  confusion  of 
the  orders  of  abstractions  if  the  multiordinality  of  the  term  ‘class’  is  not 
formulated. 

Many  critics  and  reviewers  of  the  Principia  Mathematica  somehow 
feel  this  to  be  so,  but  their  criticisms  are  not  bold  enough,  and  do  not 

HIGHER  ORDER  ABSTRACTIONS 

go  to  the  roots  of  the  A  semantic  difficulty.  They  do  not  pay  attention 
to  the  Af  ‘logical’,  ‘philosophical’,  and  ‘psychological’  elementalistic 
method  and  language  involving  the  ‘is’  of  identity,  in  which  the  Intro¬ 
duction  of  the  Principia  is  written.  Doctor  Alonzo  Church  is  the  first, 
as  far  as  my  knowledge  goes,  to  suggest  that,  following  Peano,  numbers 
should  be  defined  in  the  language  of  abstractions.  He  does  not  carry  his 
analysis  further,  however,  and  does  not  state  that  it  involves  a  language 
of  entirely  different  A  structure.3  If  we  abandon  the  term  ‘class’  and 
accept  the  language  of  ‘abstractions  of  different  orders’,  then  we  are  led 
to  the  rejection  of  the  ‘is’  of  identity  and  to  the  present  system,  of  which 
the  theory  of  mathematical  types  becomes  a  necessary  part.  The  prob¬ 
lems  of  ‘class’  cease  to  be  an  ‘assumption’,  as  the  different  orders  of 
abstractions  are  descriptions  of  experimental  facts ;  and  so  the  ‘axiom 
of  reducibility’  becomes  unnecessary.  In  my  language,  this  axiom  is 
also  an  aristotelian  description  of  the  experimental  fact  that  we  can 
abstract  in  different  orders. 

Section  B .  Multiordinal  terms . 

In  the  examples  given  in  Section  A,  we  used  words  such  as  ‘propo¬ 
sition’,  which  were  applied  to  all  higher  order  abstractions.  We  have  al¬ 
ready  seen  that  such  terms  may  have  different  uses  or  meanings  if 
applied  to  different  orders  of  abstractions.  Thus  originates  what  I  call 
the  multiordinality  of  terms.  The  words  ‘yes’,  ‘no’,  ‘true’,  ‘false’,  ‘func¬ 
tion’,  ‘property’,  ‘relation’,  ‘number’,  ‘difference’,  ‘name’,  ‘definition’, 
‘abstraction*,  ‘proposition’,  ‘fact’,  ‘reality’,  ‘structure’,  ‘characteristic’, 
‘problem’,  ‘to  know’,  ‘to  think’,  ‘to  speak’,  ‘to  hate’,  ‘to  love*,  ‘to  doubt’, 
‘cause’,  ‘effect’,  ‘meaning’,  ‘evaluation’,  and  an  endless  array  of  the  most 
important  terms  we  have,  must  be  considered  as  multiordinal  terms . 
There  is  a  most  important  semantic  characteristic  of  these  m,o  terms; 
namely,  that  they  are  ambiguous,  or  oo-valued,  in  general,  and  that  each 
has  a  definite  meaning,  or  one  value,  only  and  exclusively  in  a  given 
context,  when  the  order  of  abstraction  can  be  definitely  indicated. 

These  issues  appear  extremely  simple  and  general,  a  part  and  parcel 
of  the  structure  of  ‘human  knowledge’  and  of  our  language.  We  cannot 
avoid  these  semantic  issues,  and,  therefore,  the  only  way  left  is  to  face 
them  explicitly.  The  test  for  the  multiordinality  of  a  term  is  simple.  Let 
us  make  any  statement  and  see  if  a  given  term  applies  to  it  (‘true’, 
‘false*,  ‘yes’,  ‘no’,  ‘fact’,  ‘reality’,  ‘to  think’,  ‘to  love’,.).  If  it  does,  let 
us  deliberately  make  another  statement  about  the  former  statement  and 
test  if  the  given  term  may  be  used  again.  If  so,  it  is  a  safe  assertion 
that  this  term  should  be  considered  as  m.o.  Any  one  can  test  such  a  m.o 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

term  by  himself  without  any  difficulty.  The  main  point  about  all  such 
m.o  terms  is  that,  in  general >  they  are  ambiguous ,  and  that  all  arguments 
about  them,  ‘in  general’,  lead  only  to  identification  of  orders  of  abstrac¬ 
tions  and  semantic  disturbances,  and  nowhere  else.  Multiordinal  terms 
have  only  definite  meanings  on  a  given  level  and  in  a  given  context. 
Before  we  can  argue  about  them,  we  must  fix  their  orders,  whereupon 
the  issues  become  simple  and  lead  to  agreement.  As  to  ‘orders  of  ab¬ 
straction',  we  have  no  possibility  of  ascertaining  the  ‘absolute'  order  of 
an  abstraction ;  besides,  we  never  need  it.  In  human  semantic  difficulties, 
in  science,  as  well  as  in  private  life,  usually  no  more  than  three,  perhaps 
even  two,  neighbouring  levels  require  consideration.  When  it  comes  to 
a  serious  discussion  of  some  problem,  errors,  ambiguity,  confusion,  and 
disagreement  follow  from  confusing  or  identifying  the  neighbouring 
levels.  In  practice,  it  becomes  extremely  simple  to  settle  these  three  (or 
two)  levels  and  to  keep  them  separated,  provided  we  are  conscious  of 
abstracting,  but  not  otherwise . 

For  a  theory  of  sanity,  these  issues  seem  important  and  structurally 
essential.  In  identifications,  delusions,  illusions,  and  hallucinations,  we 
have  found  a  confusion  between  the  orders  of  abstractions  or  a  false 
evaluation  expressed  as  a  reversal  of  the  natural  order. 

One  of  the  symptoms  of  this  confusion  manifests  itself  as  ‘false 
beliefs',  which  again  imply  comparison  of  statements  about  ‘facts'  and 
‘reality',  and  involve  such  terms  as  ‘yes',  ‘no',  ‘true',  ‘false', .  As  all  these 
terms  are  multiordinal,  and,  therefore,  ambiguous,  ‘general'  ‘philosophi¬ 
cal'  rigmaroles  should  be  avoided.  With  the  consciousness  of  abstracting, 
and,  therefore,  with  a  feel  for  this  peculiar  stratification  of  ‘human 
knowledge',  all  semantic  problems  involved  can  be  settled  simply. 

The  avoidance  of  m.o  terms  is  impossible  and  undesirable.  Sys¬ 
tematic  ambiguity  of  the  most  important  terms  follows  systematic 
analogy.  They  appear  as  a  direct  result  and  condition  of  our  powers 
of  abstracting  in  different  orders,  and  allow  us  to  apply  one  chain  of 
oo-valued  reasoning  to  an  endless  array  of  different  one-valued  facts,  all 
of  which  are  different  and  become  manageable  only  through  our  ab¬ 
stracting  powers. 

For  further  details  about  the  theory  of  types,  the  reader  is  referred 
to  the  literature  on  the  subject  and  Supplement  II4  ;  here  I  shall  give 
only  a  few  examples  of  the  complexities  and  difficulties  inherent  in  lan¬ 
guage,  and  show  how  simply  they  become  solved  by  the  aid  of  A  gen¬ 
eral  semantics  and  the  resulting  ‘consciousness  of  abstracting'. 

As  an  example,  I  quote  Russell's  analysis  of  the  ‘simple'  statement 
‘I  am  lying',  as  given  in  the  Principia .  ‘The  oldest  contradiction  of  the 

HIGHER  ORDER  ABSTRACTIONS 

kind  in  question  is  the  Epimenides .  Epimenides  the  Cretan  said  that  all 
Cretans  were  liars,  and  all  other  statements  made  by  Cretans  were  cer¬ 
tainly  lies.  Was  this  a  lie?  The  simplest  form  of  this  contradiction  is 
afforded  by  the  man  who  says  “I  am  lying” ;  if  he  is  lying,  he  is  speaking 
the  truth,  and  vice  versa. . . . 

'When  a  man  says  “I  am  lying”,  we  may  interpret  his  statement 
as :  “There  is  a  proposition  which  I  am  affirming  and  which  is  false.” 
That  is  to  say,  he  is  asserting  the  truth  of  some  value  of  the  function 
“I  assert  p ,  and  p  is  false.”  But  we  saw  that  the  word  “false”  is  ambigu¬ 
ous,  and  that,  in  order  to  make  it  unambiguous,  we  must  specify  the 
order  of  falsehood,  or,  what  comes  to  the  same  thing,  the  order  of  the 
proposition  to  which  falsehood  is  ascribed.  We  saw  also  that,  if  p  is  a 
proposition  of  the  «th  order,  a  proposition  in  which  p  occurs  as  an 
apparent  variable  is  not  of  the  «th  order,  but  of  a  higher  order.  Hence 
the  kind  of  truth  or  falsehood  which  can  belong  to  the  statement  “there 
is  a  proposition  p  which  I  am  affirming  and  which  has  falsehood  of  the 
nth  order”  is  truth  or  falsehood  of  a  higher  order  than  the  nth.  Hence 
the  statement  of  Epimenides  does  not  fall  within  its  own  scope,  and 
therefore  no  contradiction  emerges. 

Tf  we  regard  the  statement  “I  am  lying”  as  a  compact  way  of 
simultaneously  making  all  the  following  statements :  “I  am  asserting  a 
false  proposition  of  the  first  order,”  “I  am  asserting  a  false  proposition 
of  the  second  order,”  and  so  on,  we  find  the  f  ollowing  curious  state  of 
things :  As  no  proposition  of  the  first  order  is  being  asserted,  the  state¬ 
ment  “I  am  asserting  a  false  proposition  of  the  first  order”  is  false. 
This  statement  is  of  the  second  order,  hence  the  statement  "I  am  mak¬ 
ing  a  false  statement  of  the  second  order”  is  true.  This  is  a  statement 
of  the  third  order,  and  is  the  only  statement  of  the  third  order  which  is 
being  made.  Hence  the  statement  “I  am  making  a  false  statement  of  the 
third  order”  is  false.  Thus  we  see  that  the  statement  “I  am  making  a 
false  statement  of  order  2n+  1”  is  false,  while  the  statement  “I  am 
making  a  false  statement  of  order  2n”  is  true.  But  in  this  state  of  things 
there  is  no  contradiction/5 

Clearly,  if  we  should  apply  the  language  of  orders  of  abstractions 
to  the  above  case,  a  similar  outcome  is  reached  more  generally  and  more 
simply.  If  we  should  confuse  the  orders  of  abstractions,  we  might 
naturally  have  an  endless  argument  at  hand  This  example  shows  how 
a  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions  might  lead  to  insoluble  verbal 
problems,  and  how  semantically  important  it  is  that  we  should  not  iden¬ 
tify,  and  that  we  should  be  conscious  of  abstracting,  with  the  resulting 
instinctive  feeling  for  this  peculiar  structural  stratification  of  'human 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

knowledge*.  We  should  notice  that  with  the  confusion  of  orders  of 
abstractions,  and  by  the  use  of  m.o  terms,  without  realizing  their 
go -valued  character,  we  may  always  construct  an  endless  array  of  such 
verbal  arguments  to  befog  the  issues,  but  that  as  soon  as  we  assign  a 
definite  order  to  the  m.o  terms,  and  so  settle  a  specific  single  meaning  in 
a  given  context  for  the  many  meanings  any  m.o  term  may  have,  the  dif¬ 
ficulties  vanish. 

As  the  above  analysis  applies  to  all  m.o  terms,  and  these  terms  hap¬ 
pen  to  be  most  important  in  our  lives,  there  is  no  use  in  trying  to  avoid 
these  terms  and  the  consequences  of  using  them.  Quite  the  contrary; 
often  it  is  structurally  necessary  to  build  a  m.o  term — for  instance, 
‘abstracting* — we  must  take  for  granted  that  it  has  many  meanings,  and 
indicate  these  meanings  by  assigning  to  the  term  the  definite  order  of 
abstraction.  Thus,  such  a  term  as  ‘abstracting*  or  ‘characteristic*., 
might  be  confusing  and  troublesome;  but  ‘abstracting  in  different 
orders*. ,  is  not,  as  in  a  given  context  we  may  always  assign  the  definite 
order  and  single  meaning  to  the  term. 

It  has  been  repeatedly  said  that  a  m.o  term  has,  by  structural  neces¬ 
sity,  many  meanings.  No  matter  how  we  define  it,  its  definition  is  again 
based  on  other  m.o  terms.  If  we  try  to  give  a  general  'meaning*  to  a 
m.o  term,  which  it  cannot  have,  further  and  deeper  analysis  would  dis¬ 
close  the  multiordinality  of  the  terms  by  which  it  is  defined,  restoring 
once  more  its  multiordinality.  As  there  is  no  possibility  of  avoiding  the 
above  structural  issue,  it  is  more  correct  and  also  more  expedient  to 
recognize  at  once  the  fundamental  multiordinality  of  a  term.  If  we  do 
so,  we  shall  not  get  confused  as  to  the  meaning  of  such  a  term  in  a  given 
context,  because,  in  principle,  in  a  context  its  meaning  is  single  and  fixed 
by  that  context. 

The  semantic  benefits  of  such  a  recognition  of  multiordinality  are, 
in  the  main,  sevenfold:  (1)  we  gain  an  enormous  economy  of  'time*  and 
effort,  as  we  stop  ‘the  hunting  of  the  snark*,  usually  called  ‘philosophy*, 
or  for  a  one-valued  general  definition  of  a  m.o  term,  which  would  not 
be  formulated  in  other  m.o  terms;  (2)  we  acquire  great  versatility  in 
expression,  as  our  most  important  vocabulary  consists  of  m.o  terms, 
which  can  be  extended  indefinitely  by  assigning  many  different  orders 
and,  therefore,  meanings;  (3)  we  recognize  that  a  definition  of  a  m.o 
term  must,  by  necessity,  represent  not  a  proposition  but  a  propositional 
function  involving  variables;  (4)  we  do  not  need  to  bother  much  about 
formal  definitions  of  a  m.o  term  outside  of  mathematics,  but  may  use 
the  term  freely,  realizing  that  its  unique,  in  principle,  meaning  in  a  given 
context  is  structurally  indicated  by  the  context;  (5)  under  such  struc- 

HIGHER  ORDER  ABSTRACTIONS 

tural  conditions,  the  freedom  of  the  writer  or  speaker  becomes  very 
much  accentuated ;  his  vocabulary  consists  potentially  of  infinite  numbers 
of  words,  and  psycho-logical,  semantic  blockages  are  eliminated;  (6) 
he  knows  that  a  reader  who  understands  that  oo -valued  mechanism  will 
never  be  confused  as  to  the  meaning  intended;  and  (7)  the  whole 
linguistic  process  becomes  extremely  flexible,  yet  it  preserves  its  essen¬ 
tial  extensional  one- valued  character,  in  a  given  case. 

In  a  certain  sense,  such  a  use  of  m.o  terms  is  to  be  found  in  poetry, 
and  it  is  well  known  that  many  scientists,  particularly  the  creative  ones, 
like  poetry.  Moreover,  poetry  often  conveys  in  a  few  sentences  more  of 
lasting  values  than  a  whole  volume  of  scientific  analysis.  The  free  use 
of  m.o  terms  without  the  bother  of  a  structurally  impossible  formalism 
outside  of  mathematics  accomplishes  this,  provided  we  are  conscious  of 
abstracting;  otherwise  only  confusion  results. 

It  should  be  understood  that  I  have  no  intention  of  condemning 
formalism.  Formalism  of  the  most  rigorous  character  is  an  extremely 
important  and  valuable  discipline  (mathematics  at  present)  ;  but  for¬ 
malism,  as  such,  in  experimental  science  and  life  appears  often  as  a 
handicap  and  not  as  a  benefit,  because,  in  empirical  science  and  life,  we 
are  engaged  in  exploring  and  discovering  the  unknown  structure  of  the 
world  as  a  means  for  structural  adjustment.  The  formal  elaboration  of 
some  language  is  only  the  consistent  elaboration  of  its  structure,  which 
must  be  accomplished  independently  if  we  are  to  have  means  to  compare 
verbal  with  empirical  structures.  From  a  A  point  of  view,  both  issues 
are  equally  important  in  the  search  for  structure. 

Under  such  structural  empirical  conditions  the  m.o  terms  acquire 
great  semantic  importance,  and  perhaps,  without  them,  language,  mathe¬ 
matics,  and  science  would  be  impossible.  As  soon  as  we  understand  this, 
we  are  forced  to  realize  the  profound  structural  and  semantic  difference 
between  the  A  and  A  systems.  What  in  the  old  days  were  considered 
propositions,  become  propositional  functions,  and  most  of  our  doctrines 
become  the  doctrinal  functions  of  Keyser,  or  system-functions,  allowing 
multiple  interpretations. 

Terms  belong  to  verbal  levels  and  their  meanings  must  be  given  by 
definitions,  these  definitions  depending  on  undefined  terms,  which  consist 
always,  as  far  as  my  knowledge  goes,  of  m.o  terms.  Perhaps  it  is  neces¬ 
sary  for  them  to  have  this  character,  to  be  useful  at  all.  When  these 
structural  empirical  conditions  are  taken  into  account,  we  must  conclude 
that  the  postulational  method  which  gives  the  structure  of  a  given  doc¬ 
trine  lies  at  the  foundation  of  all  human  linguistic  performances,  in 
daily  life  as  well  as  in  mathematics  and  science.  The  study  of  these  prob- 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

lems  throws  a  most  important  light  on  all  mysteries  of  language,  and  on 
the  proper  use  of  this  most  important  human  neurological  and  semantic 
function,  without  which  sanity  is  impossible. 

From  a  structural  point  of  view,  postulates  or  definitions  or  assump¬ 
tions  must  be  considered  as  those  relational  or  multi-dimensional  order 
structural  assumptions  which  establish,  conjointly  with  the  undefined 
terms,  the  structure  of  a  given  language.  Obviously,  to  find  the  struc¬ 
ture  of  a  language  we  must  work  out  the  given  language  to  a  system  of 
postulates  and  find  the  minimum  of  its  (never  unique)  undefined  terms. 
This  done,  we  should  have  the  structure  of  such  a  system  fully  dis¬ 
closed  ;  and,  with  the  structure  of  the  language  thoroughly  known,  we 
should  have  a  most  valuable  tool  for  investigating  empirical  structure  by 
predicting  verbally,  and  then  verifying  empirically. 

To  pacify  the  non-specialist,  let  me  say  at  once  that  this  work  is 
very  tedious  and  difficult,  although  a  crying  need ;  nevertheless,  it  may 
be  accomplished  by  a  single  individual.  Because  of  the  character  of  the 
problem,  however,  when  this  work  is  done,  the  semantic  results  have 
always  proved  thus  far — and  probably  will  continue  so — quite  simple 
and  comprehensible  to  the  common  sense,  even  of  a  child. 

One  very  important  point  should  be  noted.  Since  language  was  first 
used  by  the  human  race,  the  structural  and  related  semantic  conditions 
disclosed  by  the  present  analysis  have  not  been  changed,  as  they  are 
inherent  in  the  structure  of  ‘human  knowledge*  and  language.  Histori¬ 
cally,  we  were  always  most  interested  in  the  immediacy  of  our  daily 
lives.  We  began  with  grunts  symbolizing  this  immediacy,  and  we  never 
realize,  even  now,  that  these  historically  first  grunts  were  the  most  com¬ 
plex  and  difficult  of  them  all.  Besides  these  grunts,  we  have  also  devel¬ 
oped  others,  which  we  call  mathematics,  dealing  with,  and  elaborating, 
a  language  of  numbers,  or  (as  I  define  it  semantically)  a  language  of 
two  symmetrical  and  infinitely  many  asymmetrical  unique,  specific  rela¬ 
tions  for  exploring  the  structure  of  the  world,  which  is,  at  present,  the 
most  effective  and  the  simplest  language  yet  formed.  Only  in  1933,  after 
many  hundreds  of  thousands  of  years,  have  the  last  mentioned  grunts 
become  sufficiently  elaborate  to  give  us  a  sidelight  on  structure.  We 
must  revise  the  whole  linguistic  procedure  and  structure,  and  gain  the 
means  by  which  to  disclose  the  structure  of  ‘human  knowledge*.  Such 
semantic  means  will  provide  for  the  proper  handling  of  our  neurological 
structure,  which,  in  turn,  is  the  foundation  for  the  structurally  proper 
use  of  the  human  nervous  system,  and  will  lead  to  human  nervous  adjust¬ 
ment,  appropriate  s.r,  and,  therefore,  to  sanity. 

HIGHER  ORDER  ABSTRACTIONS 

Human  beings  are  quite  accustomed  to  the  fact  that  words  have 
different  meanings,  and  by  making  use  of  this  fact  have  produced  some 
rather  detrimental  speculations,  but,  to  the  best  of  my  knowledge,  the 
structural  discovery  of  the  multiordinality  of  terms  and  of  the  psycho- 
physiological  importance  of  the  treatment  of  orders  of  abstractions 
resulting  from  the  rejection  of  the  ‘is*  of  identity — as  formulated  in  the 
present  system — is  novel.  In  this  mechanism  of  multiordinality,  we 
shall  find  an  unusually  important  structural  problem  of  human  psycho¬ 
logies,  responsible  for  a  great  many  fundamental,  desirable,  undesirable, 
and  even  morbid,  human  characteristics.  The  full  mastery  of  this 
mechanism  is  only  possible  when  it  is  formulated,  and  leads  automati¬ 
cally  to  a  possibility  of  a  complete  psychophysiological  adjustment.  This 
adjustment  often  reverses  the  psycho-logical  process  prevailing  at  a 
given  date ;  and  this  is  the  foundation,  among  others,  of  what  we  call 
‘culture*  and  ‘sublimation*  in  psychiatry. 

Let  me  recall  that  one  of  the  most  fundamental  functional  differ¬ 
ences  between  animal  and  man  consists  in  the  fact  that  no  matter  in  how 
many  orders  the  animal  may  abstract,  its  abstractions  stop  on  some  level 
beyond  which  the  animal  cannot  proceed.  Not  so  with  man.  Structurally 
and  potentially,  man  can  abstract  in  indefinitely  many  orders,  and  no 
one  can  say  legitimately  that  he  has  reached  the  ‘final*  order  of  abstrac¬ 
tions  beyond  which  no  one  can  go.  In  the  older  days,  when  this  semantic 
mechanism  was  not  made  structurally  obvious,  the  majority  of  us  copied 
animals,  and  stopped  abstracting  on  some  level,  as  if  this  were  the 
‘final*  level.  In  our  semantic  training  in  language  and  the  ‘is*  of  identity 
given  to  us  by  our  parents  or  teachers  or  in  school,  the  multiordinality 
of  terms  was  never  suspected,  and,  although  the  human  physiological 
mechanism  was  operating  all  the  while,  we  used  it  on  the  conscious  level 
in  the  animalistic  way,  which  means  ceasing  to  abstract  at  some  level. 
Instead  of  being  told  of  the  mechanism,  and  of  being  trained  consciously 
in  the  fluid  and  dynamic  s.r  of  passing  to  higher  and  higher  abstractions 
as  normal,  for  Smith,  we  preserved  a  sub-normal,  animalistic  semantic 
blockage,  and  ‘emotionally*  stopped  abstracting  on  some  level. 

Thus,  for  instance,  if,  as  a  result  of  life,  we  come  to  a  psycho¬ 
logical  state  of  hate  or  doubt,  and  stop  at  that  level,  then,  as  we  know 
from  experience,  the  lives  of  the  given  individual  and  of  those  close  to 
him  are  not  so  happy.  But  a  hate  or  doubt  of  a  higher  order  reverses 
or  annuls  the  first  order  semantic  effect.  Thus,  hate  of  hate,  or  doubt 
of  doubt — a  second  order  effect— has  reversed  or  annulled  the  first  order 
effect,  which  was  detrimental  to  all  concerned  because  it  remained  a 
structurally-stopped  or  an  animalistic  first  order  effect. 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

The  whole  subject  of  our  human  capacity  for  higher  abstracting 
without  discernible  limits  appears  extremely  broad,  novel,  and  unana¬ 
