lysed.  It  will  take  many  years  and  volumes  to  work  it  out ;  so,  of  neces¬ 
sity,  the  examples  given  below  will  be  only  suggestive  and  will  serve  to 
illustrate  roughly  the  enormous  power  of  the  A  methods  and  structure, 
aiming  to  make  them  workable  as  an  educational,  powerful,  semantic 
device. 

Let  us  take  some  terms  which  may  be  considered  as  of  a  positive 
character  and  represent  the  structure  of  ‘culture’,  science,  and  what  is 
known  in  psychiatry  as  ‘sublimation’;  such  as  curiosity,  attention, 
analysis,  reasoning,  choice,  consideration,  knowing,  evaluation , .  The 
first  order  effects  are  well  known,  and  we  do  not  need  to  analyse  them. 
But  if  we  transform  them  into  second  order  effects,  we  then  have 
curiosity  of  curiosity,  attention  of  attention,  analysis  of  analysis,  reasoning 
about  reasoning  (which  represents  science, psycho-logics,  epistemology. ,)  ; 
choice  of  choice  (which  represents  freedom,  lack  of  psycho-logical 
blockages,  and  shows,  also,  the  semantic  mechanism  of  eliminat¬ 
ing  those  blocks)  ;  consideration  of  consideration,  gives  an  important 
cultural  achievement;  knowing  of  knowing  involves  abstracting  and 
structure,  becomes  ‘consciousness*,  at  least  in  its  limited  aspect,  taken  as 
consciousness  of  abstracting ;  evaluation  of  evaluation  becomes  a  theory 
of  sanity,. 

Another  group  represents  morbid  semantic  reactions.  Thus  the 
first  order  worry,  nervousness,  fear,  pity.,  may  be  quite  legitimate  and 
comparatively  harmless.  But  when  these  are  of  a  higher  order  and  iden¬ 
tified  with  the  first  order  as  in  worry  about  worry,  fear  of  fear.,  they 
become  morbid.  Pity  of  pity  is  dangerously  near  to  self-pity.  Second 
order  effects,  such  as  belief  in  belief,  makes  fanaticism.  To  know  that 
we  know,  to  have  conviction  of  conviction,  ignorance  of  ignorance., 
shows  the  mechanism  of  dogmatism ;  while  such  effects  as  free  will  of 
free  will,  or  cause  of  cause . ,  often  become  delusions  and  illusions. 

A  third  group  is  represented  by  such  first  order  effects  as  inhibi¬ 
tion,  hate,  doubt,  contempt,  disgust,  anger,  and  similar  semantic  states ; 
the  second  order  reverses  and  annuls  the  first  order  effects.  Thus  an 
inhibition  of  an  inhibition  becomes  a  positive  excitation  or  release  (see 
Part  VI)  ;  hate  of  hate  is  close  to  ‘love’ ;  doubt  of  doubt  becomes  scien¬ 
tific  criticism  and  imparts  the  scientific  tendency ;  the  others  obviously 
reverse  or  annul  the  first  order  undesirable  s.r . 

In  this  connection  the  pernicious  effect  of  identification  becomes 
quite  obvious.  In  the  first  and  third  cases  beneficial  effects  were  pre¬ 
vented ,  because  identification  of  orders  of  abstractions,  as  a  semantic 

HIGHER  order  abstractions. 

state,  produced  a  semantic  blockage  which  did  not  allow  us  to  pass  to 
higher  order  abstractions ;  in  the  second  case,  it  actually  produced  mor¬ 
bid  manifestations. 

The  consciousness  of  abstracting,  which  involves,  among  others, 
the  full  instinctive  semantic  realization  of  non-identity  and  the  stratifica¬ 
tion  of  human  knowledge,  and  so  the  multiordinality  of  the  most  im¬ 
portant  terms  we  use,  solves  these  weighty  and  complex  problems 
because  it  gives  us  structural  methods  for  semantic  evaluation,  for 
orientation,  and  for  handling  them.  By  passing  to  higher  orders  these 
states  which  involve  inhibition  or  negative  excitation  become  reversed. 
Some  of  them  on  higher  levels  become  culturally  important ;  and  some 
of  them  become  morbid.  Now  consciousness  of  abstracting  in  all  cases 
gives  us  the  semantic  freedom  of  all  levels  and  so  helps  evaluation  and 
selection,  thus  removing  the  possibility  of  remaining  animalistically  fixed 
or  blocked  on  any  one  level.  Here  we  find  the  mechanism  of  the  ‘change 
of  human  nature’  and  an  assistance  for  persons  in  morbid  states  to 
revise  by  themselves  their  own  afflictions  by  the  simple  realization  that 
the  symptoms  are  due  to  identifying  levels  which  are  essentially  different, 
an  unconscious  jumping  of  a  level  or  of  otherwise  confusing  the  orders 
of  abstractions.  Even  at  present  all  psychotherapy  is  unconsciously 
using  this  mechanism,  although,  as  far  as  I  know,  it  has  never  before 
been  structurally  formulated  in  a  general  way. 

It  should  be  added  that  the  moment  we  eliminate  identification  and 
acquire  the  consciousness  of  abstracting,  as  explained  in  the  present 
system,  we  have  already  acquired  the  permanent  semantic  feeling  of  this 
peculiar  structural  stratification  of  human  knowledge  which  is  found  in 
the  psycho-logics  of  the  differential  and  integral  calculus  and  mathe¬ 
matics,  similar  in  structure  to  the  world  around  us,  without  any  difficult 
mathematical  technique.  Psycho-logically,  both  mathematics  and  the 
present  system  appear  structurally  similar,  not  only  to  themselves,  but 
also  to  the  world  and  our  nervous  system;  and  at  this  point  it  departs 
very  widely  from  the  older  systems. 

Let  me  give  another  example  of  how  the  recognition  of  order  of 
abstractions  clears  up  semantic  difficulties. 

I  recall  vividly  an  argument  I  had  with  a  young  and  very  gifted 
mathematician.  Our  conversation  was  about  the  geometries  of  Euclid 
and  Lobatchevski,  and  we  were  discussing  the  dropping  and  introduction 
of  assumptions.  I  maintained  that  Lobatchevski  introduced  an  assump¬ 
tion  ;  he  maintained  that  Lobatchevski  dropped  an  assumption.  On  the 
surface,  it  might  have  appeared  that  this  is  a  problem  of  ‘fact’  and  not 
of  preference.  Tfie  famous  fifth  postulate  of  Euclid  reads,  ‘If  a  straight 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

line  falling  on  two  straight  lines  makes  the  interior  angles  on  the  same 
side  less  than  two  right  angles,  the  two  straight  lines,  if  produced 
indefinitely,  meet  on  that  side  on  which  are  the  angles  less  than  two 
right  angles'.  We  should,  note,  in  passing,  that  a  straight  line  is  assumed 
to  be  of  ‘infinite'  length,  which  involves  a  definite  type  of  structural 
metaphysics  of  ‘space',  common  to  the  A  and  older  systems.  This  pos¬ 
tulate  of  Euclid  can  be  expressed  in  one  of  its  equivalent  forms,  as,  for 
instance,  ‘Through  a  point  outside  a  straight  line  one,  and  only  one, 
parallel  to  it  can  be  drawn'.  Lobatchevski  and  others  decided  to  build  up 
a  geometry  without  this  postulate,  and  in  this  they  were  successful. 
Let  us  consider  what  Lobatchevski  did.  For  this,  we  go  to  a  deeper 
level — otherwise,  to  a  higher  order  abstraction — where  we  discover  that 
what  on  his  level  had  been  the  dropping  of  an  assumption  becomes  on 
our  deeper  level  or  higher  order  abstraction  the  introduction  of  an 
assumption;  namely,  the  assumption  that  through  a  point  outside  a 
straight  line  there  passes  more  than  one  parallel  line. 

Now  such  a  process  is  structurally  inherent  in  all  human  knowledge . 
More  than  this,  it  is  a  unique  characteristic  of  the  structure  of  human 
knowledge.  We  can  always  do  this.  If  we  pass  to  higher  orders  of 
abstractions,  situations  seemingly  ‘insoluble',  ‘matters  of  fact',  quite 
often  become  problems  of  preference .  This  problem  is  of  extreme 
semantic  importance,  and  of  indefinitely  extended  consequences  for  all 
science,  psychiatry,  and  education  in  particular. 

The  examples  I  have  given  show  a  most  astonishing  semantic 
situation ;  namely,  that  one  question  can  sometimes  be  answered  ‘yes'  or 
‘no*,  ‘true'  or  ‘false',  depending  on  the  order  of  abstractions  the  answerer 
is  considering.  The  above  facts  alter  considerably  the  former  sup¬ 
posedly  sharply  defined  fields  of  ‘yes'  and  ‘no',  ‘true’  and  ‘false’,  and,, 
in  general,  of  all  multiordinal  terms.  Many  problems  of  ‘fact’  on  one 
level  of  abstraction  become  problems  of  ‘preference'  on  another,  thereby 
helping  to  diminish  the  semantic  field  of  disagreement. 

It  is  interesting  to  throw  some  light  on  the  problem  of  ‘preference'. 
Which  statement  or  attitude  is  preferable?  The  one  claiming  that 
Lobatchevski  dropped  a  postulate,  or  the  one  claiming  that  Lobatchevski 
introduced  a  new  postulate  ?  Both  are  ‘facts’,  but  on  different  levels,  or  of 
different  orders.  The  dropping  appears  as  an  historical  fact ;  the  intro¬ 
ducing  as  a  psycho-logical  fact  inherent  in  the  structure  of  human 
knowledge.  The  preference  is  fairly  indicated;  the  psycho-logical  fact 
is  of  the  utmost  generality  (as  all  psycho-logical  facts  are)  and,  there¬ 
fore,  more  useful,  since  it  applies  to  all  human  endeavours  and  not  merely 
to  what  a  certain  mathematician  did  under  certain  circumstances. 

HIGHER  ORDER  ABSTRACTIONS 

Section  C.  Confusion  of  higher  orders  of  abstractions . 

We  have  already  seen  that  Fido’s  power  of  abstracting  stops  some¬ 
where.  If  we  are  finalists  of  any  kind,  we  also  assume  that  our  power 
of  abstracting  stops  somewhere.  In  some  such  way  the  finalistic,  dog¬ 
matic  and  absolutistic  semantic  attitudes  are  built. 

If,  however,  by  the  aid  of  the  Structural  Differential  we  train  the 
s.r  of  our  children  in  A  non-identity  and  the  inherent  stratification  of 
human  knowledge  and  power  of  abstracting,  we  facilitate  the  passing  to 
higher  order  abstractions  and  establish  flexible  s.r  of  full  conditionality 
which  are  unique  for  Smith  and  of  great  preventive  and  therapeutic 
value.  We  thus  build  up  ‘human  mind*  for  efficiency  and  sanity,  by 
eliminating  the  factors  of  semantic  blockages,  while,  by  engaging  the 
activity  of  the  higher  nerve  centres,  we  diminish  the  vicious  overflow 
of  nervous  energy  upon  the  lower  nerve  centres,  which,  if  allowed,  must, 
of  necessity,  make  itself  manifest  in  arrested  or  regressive  symptoms. 

The  above  issues  are  of  serious  semantic  importance  in  our  daily 
lives  and  in  sanity.  All  semantic  disturbances  involve  evaluation,  doc¬ 
trines,  creeds,  speculations  . ,  and  vice  versa.  Under  circumstances  such 
as  described  above,  which  appear  inherent  with  us,  it  is  dangerous  not 
to  have  means  to  see  one’s  way  clear  in  the  maze  of  verbal  difficulties 
with  all  their  dangerous  and  ever-present  semantic  components. 

By  disregarding  the  orders  of  abstractions,  we  can  manufacture  any 
kind  of  verbal  difficulties ;  and,  without  the  consciousness  of  abstracting, 
we  all  become  nearly  helpless  and  hopeless  semantic  victims  of  a  primi¬ 
tive-made  language  and  its  underlying  structural  metaphysics.  Yet  the 
way  out  is  simple;  non-identity  leads  to  ‘consciousness  of  abstracting* 
and  gives  us  a  new  working  sense  for  values,  new  s.r,  to  guide  us  in  the 
verbal  labyrinth. 

Outside  of  ‘objectification’,  which  is  defined  as  the  evaluation  of 
higher  order  abstractions  as  lower ;  namely,  words,  memories . ,  as  objects, 
experiences,  feelings.,  the  most  usual  identification  of  different  higher 
order  abstractions  appears  as  the  confusion  of  inferences  and  inferential 
terms  with  descriptions  and  descriptive  terms. 

Obviously,  if  we  consider  a  description  as  of  the  nth  order,  then 
an  inference  from  such  a  description  (or  others)  should  be  considered 
as  an  abstraction  of  a  higher  order  (n+  1).  Before  we  make  a  deci¬ 
sion,  we  usually  make  a  more  or  less  hasty  survey  of  happenings,  this 
survey  establishing  a  foundation  for  our  judgements,  which  become  the 
basis  of  our  action.  This  statement  is  fairly  general,  as  the  components 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

of  it  can  be  found  by  analysis  practically  everywhere.  Our  problem  is  to 
analyse  the  general  case.  Let  us  follow  up  roughly  the  process. 

We  assume,  for  instance,  an  hypothetical  case  of  an  ideal  observer 
who  observes  correctly  and  gives  an  impersonal,  unbiased  account  of 
what  he  has  observed.  Let  us  assume  that  the  happenings  he  has  observed 
appeared  as:  £,  ♦,  |,  £,  .  .  .  ,  and  then  a  new  happening  £  occurred. 
At  this  level  of  observation ,  no  speaking  can  be  done,  and,  therefore, 
I  use  various  fanciful  symbols,  and  not  words.  The  observer  then 
gives  a  description  of  the  above  happenings,  let  us  say  a,  b,  c,  d,  .  .  .  ,  x; 
then  he  makes  an  inference  from  these  descriptions  and  reaches  a  con¬ 
clusion  or  forms  a  judgement  A  about  these  facts.  We  assume  that  facts 
unknown  to  him,  which  always  exist,  are  not  important  in  this  case. 
Let  us  assume,  also,  that  his  conclusion  seems  correct  and  that  the  action 
A”  which  this  conclusion  motivates  is  appropriate.  Obviously,  we  deal 
with  at  least  three  different  levels  of  abstractions :  the  seen,  experienced . , 
lower  order  abstractions  (un-speakable)  ;  then  the  descriptive  level,  and, 
finally,  the  inferential  levels. 

Let  us  assume  now  another  individual,  Smithi,  ignorant  of  struc¬ 
ture  or  the  orders  of  abstractions,  of  consciousness  of  abstracting,  of 
s.r. ;  a  politician  or  a  preacher,  let  us  say,  a  person  who  habitually  iden¬ 
tifies,  confuses  his  orders,  uses  inferential  language  for  descriptions,  and 
rather  makes  a  business  out  of  it.  Let  us  assume  that  Smithx  observes  the 
‘same  happenings1.  He  would  witness  the  happenings  £,  , 

and  the  happening  £  would  appear  new  to  him.  The  happenings 
0,  ♦,  |,  fc, . .  . ,  he  would  describe  in  the  form  a,  bt  c,  d,  ,  .  .  ,  from 
which  fewer  descriptions  he  would  form  a  judgement ,  reach  a  conclu¬ 
sion ,  B ;  which  means  that  he  would  pass  to  another  order  of  abstrac¬ 
tions.  When  the  new  happening  £  occurs,  he  handles  it  with  an  already 
formed  opinion  Bt  and  so  his  description  of  the  happening  £  is  coloured 
by  his  older  s.r  and  no  longer  the  x  of  the  ideal  observer,  but  B(x)  —  y. 
His  description  of  ‘facts*  would  not  appear  as  the  a,  bt  c,  d,  .  .  .  ,  xt  of 
the  ideal  observer  but  a,  b,  c,  d>  .  .  .  ,  B(x)  —  y.  Next  he  would  abstract 
on  a  higher  level,  form  a  new  judgement,  about  ‘facts*  a,  b,  c,  d,  .  ,  .  , 
B(x)  =  y,  let  us  say,  C.  We  see  how  the  semantic  error  was  produced. 
The  happenings  appeared  the  ‘same*,  yet  the  unconscious  identification 
of  levels  brought  finally  an  entirely  different  conclusion  to  motivate  a 
quite  different  action,  C". 

A  diagram  will  make  this  structurally  clearer,  as  it  is  very  difficult 
to  explain  this  by  words  alone.  On  the  Structural  Differential  it  is  shown 
without  difficulty. 

HIGHER  ORDER  ABSTRACTIONS 

Seen  happenings  (un¬ 
speakable) 

(First  order  abstrac¬ 
tions)  . 

IDEAL  OBSERVER 

,1, 

Description 
(  Second  order  abstrac¬ 
tions)  . . 

a,  b, 

Inferences,  conclusions, 
and  what  not. 

(Third  order  abstrac-  , 

tions) .  A 

Creeds  and  other  se¬ 
mantic  reactions .... 

Action . 

A 

A 

t 

V 

SMITH! 

S 

a,  b,  c,  . . 

■B(x) 

if 

r 

I 

C 

i 

c 

I 

cu 

Let  us  illustrate  the  foregoing  with  two  clinical  examples.  In  one 
case,  a  young  boy  persistently  did  not  get  up  in  the  morning.  In  another 
case,  a  boy  persistently  took  money  from  his  mother’s  pocketbook.  In 
both  cases,  the  actions  were  undesirable.  In  both  cases,  the  parents 
unconsciously  identified  the  levels,  x  was  identified  with  B(x)f  and  con¬ 
fused  their  orders  of  abstractions.  In  the  first  case,  they  concluded  that 
the  boy  was  lazy;  in  the  second,  that  the  boy  was  a  thief .  The  parents, 
through  semantic  identification,  read  these  inferences  into  every  new 
‘description’  of  forthcoming  facts,  so  that  the  parents’  new  ‘facts’  became 
more  and  more  semantically  distorted  and  coloured  in  evaluation,  and 
their  actions  more  and  more  detrimental  to  all  concerned.  The  general 
conditions  in  both  families  became  continually  worse,  until  the  reading 
of  inferences  into  descriptions  by  the  ignorant  parents  produced  a 
semantic  background  in  the  boys  of  driving  them  to  murderous  intents. 

A  psychiatrist  dealt  with  the  problem  as  shown  in  the  diagram  of 
the  ideal  observer.  The  net  result  was  that  the  one  boy  was  not  ‘lazy’, 
nor  the  other  a  ‘thief’,  but  that  both  were  ill.  After  medical  attention, 
of  which  the  first  step  was  to  clarify  the  symbolic  semantic  situation, 
though  not  in  such  a  general  way  as  given  here,  all  went  smoothly.  Two 
families  were  saved  from  crime  and  wreck. 

I  may  give  another  example  out  of  a  long  list  which  it  is  unnecessary 
for  our  purpose  to  analyse,  because  as  soon  as  the  ‘consciousness  of 
abstracting’  is  acquired,  the  avoidance  of  these  inherent  semantic  dif¬ 
ficulties  becomes  automatic.  In  a  common  fallacy  of  (Petitio  Principii \ 

VI l.  TI1E  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

or  ‘Begging  the  Question*  fallacy,  we,  by  self-deceptive  semantic  evalu¬ 
ation,  assume  the  conclusion  to  be  proved.  In  other  words,  we  confuse 
the  orders  of  abstractions.  Beside  the  wilful  use  of  this  fallacy  by  law¬ 
yers  in  courts  to  influence  juries  of  low  intelligence . ,  a  similar  fallacy  is 
widely  committed  in  the  reasonings  of  daily  life  and  leads  to  many 
unnecessary  semantic  difficulties.  Particularly  vicious  is  the  use  of  the 
so-called  ‘question-begging  epithets*.  We  postulate  the  fact  which  we 
wish  to  prove,  label  it  by  another  name,  and  then  use  the  new  higher 
order  name  in  our  premise.  It  represents  clearly  a  confusion  of  orders 
of  abstractions. 

All  such  terms  as  ‘un-patriotic’,  *un-christian*,  ‘un-american*,  ‘pro- 
german*  (during  the  World  War),  ‘wet*,  ‘dry*.,  fall  into  this  group.  It 
is  probably  no  secret  that  a  large  part  of  the  population  of  this  world 
was  swayed  by  such  methods  during  the  war.  In  times  of  peace,  large 
countries  are  continually  swayed  by  such  use  of  terms  which  play  upon 
the  pathological  s.r  of  the  population,  thereby  facilitating  the  ‘putting 
over*  of  different  propagandas.  Similar  procedures  lead  to  many  seman¬ 
tic  difficulties  in  daily  life.  It  is  easy  to  see  that  the  difficulty  is  general ; 
namely,  ‘the  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions'.  The  antidote  is 
equally  general,  and  is  found  in  the  elimination  of  the  ‘is*  of  identity, 
resulting  in  the  ‘consciousness  of  abstracting*.  It  should  be  noticed  that 
these  pathological  reactions  have  long  been  known,  and  that  they  are 
extremely  general.  We  are  told  about  them  in  schools  under  the  name 
of  ‘logical  fallacies*,  disregarding  their  semantic  character,  and  so  it  is 
practically  impossible  to  eliminate  them  or  to  apply  the  wisdom  we  are 
taught.  It  is  not  difficult  to  see  why  this  should  occur.  In  the  older  days, 
all  the  ‘wisdom*  was  taught  to  us  by  purely  ‘intellectual*,  ‘verbal*,  classi¬ 
cal  A  and  el  methods.  We  had  no  simple  psycho  physiological  method  of 
complete  generality,  which  could  be  taught  in  a  non-el  way  affecting  all 
nerve  centres.  It  is  known  how  difficult  it  is  to  ‘change  human  nature*, 
which  simply  means  that  the  older  verbal  educational  methods  could  not 
properly  affect  the  lower  centres.  It  seems  that  the  first  step  in  develop¬ 
ing  a  method  to  accomplish  these  ends  is  to  use  the  Structural  Differen¬ 
tial,  without  which  it  is  practically  impossible  to  teach  ‘silence  on  the 
objective  level*  and  ‘delayed  action*  and  to  train  through  all  centres  in 
non-identity,  ‘stratification*,  natural  order,  and  so  in  appropriate  s,r .  It 
appears  that  now,  to  begin  with,  we  have  acquired  a  workable  and 
simple  psychophysiological  method  for  changing  identification  into  vis¬ 
ualization,  and,  in  general,  for  the  prevention  or  elimination  of  identi¬ 
fication  or  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions.  We  have  now  discovered 
a  mechanism  which  involves  and  deals  directly  with  the  reactions  of  the 

HIGHER  ORDER  ABSTRACTIONS 

lower  centres,  ‘senses',  affects,  ’emotions' , .  The  older,  difficult  ‘change 
in  human  nature'  becomes  an  easily  accomplished  fact  in  a  structural,  A 
semantic  education.  ‘Human  nature'  can  best  be  described,  perhaps,  as  a 
complex  of  s.r,  which  can  be  educated  and  ‘changed’  to  a  large  extent. 

It  seems  unnecessary  to  enlarge  further  upon  this  subject.  Every 
attentive  reader  can  supply  endless  examples  of  this  kind  of  semantic 
disturbances  from  his  own  observation  or  experience.  Naturally,  the 
generality,  simplicity,  and  physiological  character  of  the  method  proposed 
in  this  work  become  powerful  assets,  and  instruction  in  the  A  methods 
can  easily  be  given  to,  or  acquired  by,  everybody.  It  can  be  taught  in 
homes  and  schools.  It  gives  a  preventive  psychophysiological  method  of 
training  the  s.r  in  the  millions  and  millions  of  cases  in  which  human  life 
becomes  wrecked  through  the  lack  of  a  working  structural  educational 
theory  concerned  with  these  reactions.  But  it  is  not  enough  to  preach 
these  ‘platitudes';  they  must  be  practised  as  well.  If  the  parents  and 
the  boys  mentioned  above  had  been  trained  as  children  with  the  Struc¬ 
tural  Differential,  it  would  have  been  an  impossibility  for  the  situation  to 
have  become  so  acute. 

Let  us  follow  our  daily  experiences  by  the  aid  of  the  Structural 
Differential.  We  find  ourselves  on  at  least  five  levels.  The  first  repre¬ 
sents  the  un-speakable  event,  or  the  scientific  object,  or  the  unseen 
physico-chemical  processes  on  the  sub-microscopic  levels  which  constitute 
stimuli  registered  by  our  nervous  system  as  objects.  The  second  con¬ 
sists  of  the  external,  objective,  also  un-speakable,  levels  on  which  we 
see  with  our  eyes,.  On  this  level,  we  could  make  a  moving  picture, 
including  actions.,  (writing  a  book  is  also  behaviour).  The  third  level 
represents  the  equally  un-speakable  psycho-logical  ‘pictures'  and  s.r.  On 
the  fourth  level  of  abstractions  we  describe  verbally  our  facts,  that 
humans  (a)  eat,  sleep.;  ( b )  cheat,  murder.;  (c)  moralize,  philosophize, 
legislate . ;  (d )  scientize,  mathematize , .  Finally,  in  the  present  context, 
our  inferences  belong  to  the  fifth  level. 

Unfortunately,  we  usually  abstract  facts  (a),  identify  the  levels, 
and  form  a  conclusion  ‘man  is  an  animal', .  From  this  conclusion  we  con¬ 
fuse  the  levels  again  and  colour  the  description  of  the  facts  (6),  (c), 
(d) . ;  jump  again  to  higher  levels  and  build  conclusions  from  descrip¬ 
tions  (a)  and  from  distorted,  coloured  descriptions  ( b ),  (c),  (J),  and 
so  obtain  the  prevailing  doctrines  in  all  fields.  These  again  lead  us,  in 
the  field  of  action,  to  the  mess  we  all  find  ourselves  in.  In  this  dervish 
dance  between  the  levels  we  entirely  disregarded  uncoloured  facts  ( d ). 

The  ideal  observer  would  observe  all  forms  of  human  behaviour  at 
a  given  date,  not  leaving  out  facts  (d)  ;  then,  without  confusing  his 

VIJ.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIM E-R1N DING 

levels,  and  also  without  confusing  descriptions  with  inferences,  he  would 
reach  his  higher  order  of  abstractions  properly,  with  very  different 
resultant  doctrines,  which  would  produce  entirely  different  semantic 
evaluation,  and  motivate  equally  different  action. 

We  may  understand  now  why  we  must  constantly  revise  our  doc¬ 
trines,  for  the  above  analysis  throws  a  considerable  light  on  the  fact  that 
scientists  need  training  with  the  Differential  as  much  as  other  mortals 
(the  author  included).  History  shows  that  they  have  not  officially 
checked  themselves  up  sufficiently  to  become  aware  of  this  fatal  habit 
of  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions  through  identification. 

It  might  appear,  at  first  glance,  that  all  that  has  been  said  here  is 
simple  and  easy.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  not  for  the  grown-ups ;  it  is  easy 
only  for  children  and  the  young.  In  all  my  studies  and  experimenting  I 
have  found  that,  for  the  reasons  already  given,  the  use  of  the  Differen¬ 
tial  appears  essential,  and  that  it  requires  a  long  while  and  training  to 
accomplish  new  semantic  results.  As  a  rule,  unless  they  are  very  un¬ 
happy,  people  try  to  trust  their  ‘understanding*,  and  dislike  to  train 
repeatedly  with  the  Differential.  For  some  reason  or  other,  they  usually 
forget  that  they  cannot  acquire  structural  familiarity  with,  or  reflex- 
reactions  in,  spelling,  or  typewriting,  or  driving  a  car.,  by  verbal  means 
alone.  Similar  considerations  apply  in  this  case.  Without  the  actual 
training  with  the  Differential,  certainly  the  best  results  cannot  be 
expected. 

To  gain  the  full  benefit  involves  the  uprooting  of  old  habits,  taboos, 
‘philosophies’,  and  private  doctrines,  the  worst  being  the  structure  of 
our  primitive  A  language  with  the  ‘is’  of  identity,  all  of  which  are  deeply 
rooted  and  work  unconsciously.  Only  the  semantic  training  with  the 
Differential  in  non-identity  can  affect  the  ‘habitual’  and  the  ‘uncon¬ 
scious’.  Rationalization,  lip-service  to  the  ‘understanding’  of  it,  will  be 
of  no  use  whatsoever.  Persistent  training  seems  the  only  way  to  acquire 
this  special  structural  sense  for  proper  evaluation ,  and  the  habit  of 
feeling  when  identification,  or  the  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions 
becomes  particularly  dangerous.  This  feeling,  as  it  involves  most  im¬ 
portant  factors  of  evaluation,  is  difficult  to  acquire,  as  difficult,  perhaps, 
as  reflex-learning  to  spell  or  to  typewrite.  But,  when  acquired,  it  makes 
us  aware  of  the  continuous,  necessary  utilization  of  many  levels  of 
abstractions,  which  becomes  dangerous  only  when  we  identify  them  or 
are  not  conscious  of  this  fact.  We  can  then  utilize  the  different  orders 
of  abstractions  consciously,  without  identification,  and  thus  keep  out  of 
danger.  Most  of  the  important  terms  appear  as  multiordinal,  and,  al¬ 
though  they  belong  to  verbal  levels,  they  apply  often  to  all  levels,  an 

HIGHER  ORDER  ABSTRACTIONS 

important  structural  fact  impossible  to  avoid,  and  one  which  makes  this 
special  semantic  sense  uniquely  necessary  to  acquire. 

It  seems  unnecessary  to  repeat  that  everything  that  has  been  said 
above  applies  in  the  fullest  extent  to  our  ethical,  social,  political,  eco¬ 
nomic,  and  international  relations.  Before  any  sanity  can  be  brought  into 
the  analysis  of  these  relations,  before  they  can  be  rationally  analysed, 
the  investigators  would  have  to  be  trained  to  observe  correctly  and  to 
avoid  verbal  structural  pitfalls.  For  the  lack  of  such  semantic  training 
and  re-education,  the  ‘time-honoured1  ‘Fido’  debates  involving  the  ‘is'  of 
identity,  continue  on  all  sides,  and  lead  to  naught  else  but  a  waste  of 
‘time’  and  effort. 

I  say  waste  of  ‘time’,  simply  because  there  seems  no  end  to  the 
paradoxes  which,  with  a  little  ingenuity,  we  can  build  up  when  we  begin 
to  gamble  with  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions  and  disregard  multi- 
ordinality.  Any  doctrine,  no  matter  how  structurally  true  or  beneficial, 
can  be  defeated,  confused,  or  delayed,  by  the  use  of  such  methods.  These 
problems  appear  of  crucial  semantic  importance,  because  our  lives  are 
lived  in  a  permanent  structural  interplay  between  different  orders  of 
abstractions.  All  our  achievements  depend  upon  this  interplay,  yet  the 
most  acute  and  painful  dangers  also  have  their  sources  in  the  non¬ 
realization  of  this  dervish  dance  between  different  orders  of  abstractions. 

Since  we  cannot  evade  the  passing  from  level  to  level,  or  the  use  of 
multiordinal  terms,  our  wisdom  should  consist  only  in  not  abusing  these 
semantic  conditions  of  human  life.  As  we  must  do  that,  let  us  do  it, 
but  let  us  not  identify  the  orders,  and  thus  let  us  evade  the  dangers. 
Consciousness  of  abstracting  gives  us  the  complete  psychophysiological 
solution  of  this  complex  situation,  as  it  allows  us  to  have  the  psycho¬ 
logical  benefits  and  to  avoid  the  dangers  by  the  use  of  physiological 
means. 

In  conclusion,  I  must  stress  once  more  the  importance  of  the  struc¬ 
ture  of  the  language  in  which  we  analyse  any  given  problem.  In  the 
