.7-system  I  am  proposing,  the  term  order  is  accepted  as  one  of  its  very 
foundations.  In  1933,  we  know  that  as  words  are  not  the  things  spoken 
about . ,  structure,  and  structure  alone,  becomes  the  only  possible  content 
of  knowledge,  and  the  search  for  structure,  the  only  possible  aim  of 
science.  If  we  try  to  define  structure,  we  can  do  so  in  terms  of  relations 
and  multi-dimensional  order.  The  recent  advances  of  science  show, 
beyond  doubt,  that  the  day  will  come  when  all  science  will  be  formu¬ 
lated  in  terms  of  structure  and,  therefore,  of  physics,  and  physics 
formulated  as  a  form  of  multi-dimensional  geometry,  based  on  multi¬ 
dimensional  order,  giving  us,  ultimately,  multiordinal  structure. 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

The  application  of  the  term  order,  which  involves  physiological,  as 
well  as  semantic,  mechanisms  of  evaluation,  to  the  analysis  of  human 
behaviour,  has  led  me  to  the  present  A~ system  and  the  investigation  of 
the  structure  of  language.  The  discovery  that  some  of  the  most  im¬ 
portant  terms  we  use  appear  multiordinal,  a  character  concealed  by  the 
‘is’  of  identity,  has  disclosed  to  us  a  most  vital  and  inherent  psycho¬ 
logical  mechanism,  responsible  in  humans  for  many  most  desirable,  many 
undesirable,  and  many  morbid  human  characteristics.  It  disclosed,  also, 
the  psycho-logical  structure  of  these  characteristics,  and  so  we  have 
obtained  physiological  means  by  which  to  enhance  the  development  of 
desirable  characteristics,  and  to  prevent  or  transform  the  others. 

Further  analysis  has  disclosed  a  natural  survival  order  in  evaluation : 
the  event  first,  the  object  next;  the  object  first,  the  label  next;  descrip¬ 
tion  first,  inferences  next . ,  in  inherent  importance.  We  have  also  found 
that  the  majority  of  human  difficulties,  'mental'  ills  included,  involve 
semantic  disturbances  and  exhibit,  not  the  natural  survival  order,  but 
the  identification  of  different  orders,  resulting  in  a  reversed  (patho¬ 
logical)  order. 

It  is  impossible  in  this  book  to  review  the  data  of  psychiatry  from 
the  A  point  of  view,  as  this  would  require  a  separate  large  volume, 
which,  I  hope,  will  be  written  some  day;  but  any  one  can  verify  the 
statements  made  above  by  himself  from  clinical  literature,  and  also  by 
analysing  his  own  or  other  persons*  life-difficulties,  quarrels,  disagree¬ 
ments  . ,  which  generally  involve  quite  unnecessary  sufferings.  Psycho¬ 
therapeutic  literature  shows  abundantly  that  the  success  of  the  physicians 
depends  mostly  on  reversing  the  pathological  reversed  order  in  a  given 
field,  and  so  restoring  the  natural  order  in  the  s.r .  It  is  easily  verified 
that,  in  most  cases,  when  ‘mental*  illness  originated  through  different  life 
experiences,  these  would  have  affected  very  little,  if  at  all,  a  child  or 
an  adult  who  was  conscious  of  abstracting,  and  whose  nervous  processes 
and  corresponding  semantic  states  followed  the  natural  order. 

With  the  aid  of  the  Structural  Differential  and  a  A  language  of 
new  structure,  it  is  easy  to  train  the  s.r  of  an  infant,  a  child,  or  a  young 
person,  and  possible,  although  much  more  difficult,  to  train  a  grown-up 
in  the  natural  order.  Such  a  training  becomes  a  potent  preventive  struc¬ 
tural  physiological  method,  as  it  eliminates  the  psycho-logical  states  of 
identification  or  reversed  order,  both  of  which  represent  the  raw  seman¬ 
tic  material  out  of  which  future  nervous  disorders  are  produced. 

The  non~el  term  ‘order’  is  equally  applicable  in  life  and  science; 
gives  us,  in  1933,  the  simplest  .structural  common  base,  and  allows  us  to 

1  IK iilEU  ORDER  AKSTKAC  TIONS 

4S1 

ill  tempt  the  formulation  of  a  science  of  man,  which  ultimately  becomes 
a  theory  of  sanity,  a  consequence  of  a  non-aristotelian  system . 

It  should  be  recalled  that  order  is  accepted  in  the  present  system  as 
undefined  and  fundamental ;  yet  its  use  is  easily  explained  by  the  aid  of 
the  term  'between',  and  can  be  shown  and  applied  in  reference  to  em¬ 
pirical  structures. 

If  we  can  formulate  a  method  which,  through  the  application  of  a 
pHychophysiological  term  such  as  order,  and  a  simple  device  such  as  the 
training  of  s,r  in  the  natural  survival  order,  or  reversing  the  pathologi¬ 
cal  reversed  order,  includes  the  mechanism  of  non-identity  and  one  of 
the  most  important  human  nervous  functionings,  such  a  method,  because 
of  its  structural  simplicity  and  physiological  character,  may  be  expected 
to  prove  very  workable.  I  desire  to  stress  most  emphatically  the  very 
important  general ,  impersonal ,  preventive ,  semantic ,  reflex-character  of 
»uch  a  method. 

In  actual  life,  we  deal,  for  the  most  part,  with  persons  who  are 
'mentally'  or  nervously  disturbed  in  different  degrees.  We  could,  even¬ 
tually,  divide  them  for  our  purpose  into  two  groups:  (1)  those  who 
do  not  want  to  improve  or  get  well,  but  who  somehow  like  their  ficti¬ 
tious  worlds  and  the  maladjustments  connected  with  them;  (2)  those 
who  genuinely  want  to  get  over  their  difficulties. 

In  general,  it  is  extremely  difficult  or  impossible  to  achieve  any¬ 
thing  at  all  with  the  first  group.  The  second  group  is  greatly  helped 
if  we  give  them  means  to  work  by  themselves  at  their  problems.  Very 
often  it  is  most  effective  to  explain  to  them  this  simple  'natural  order’, 
'identification',  and  'reversed  order'  mechanism,  the  multiordinality  of 
terms . ,  and  so  give  them  a  definite  psychophysiological  symptom  to 
struggle  against.  These  symptoms  of  identification  or  reversed  order,  in 
their  generality  and  structural  neurological  fundamentally,  underlie  the 
process  of  formation  of  practically  all  known  semantic  difficulties  of 
evaluation. 

The  reader  should  not  assume  that  it  is  always  possible  to  eliminate 
identification  and  so  achieve  this  coveted  natural  order,  or  the  reversal 
of  the  reversed  pathological  order;  but,  whenever  this  is  possible,  the 
person  is  relieved  in  a  great  many  psycho-logical  fields.  The  simplicity 
and  generality,  the  physiological  and  structural  character  of  this  method 
seems  its  main  recommendation,  particularly  as  a  preventive  measure  or 
semantic  training  for  sanity.  The  training  is  a  laborious  process,  requir- 
Ing  great  persistence ;  but,  to  my  knowledge,  very  few  trainings  are  easy, 
and,  perhaps,  none  leads  to  more  important  results  than  does  this  one. 

CHAPTER  XXVIII 

ON  THE  MECHANISM  OF  IDENTIFICATION  AND  VISUALIZATION 

“Did  you  say  'pig,'  or  ‘fig’?”  said  the  Cat. 

“I  said  ‘pig’,”  replied  Alice;  “and  I  wish  you  wouldn't  keep  appearing 
and  vanishing  so  suddenly:  you  make  one  quite  giddy!” 

“All  right,”  said  the  Cat;  and  this  time  it  vanished  quite  slowly,  be¬ 
ginning  with  the  end  of  the  tail,  and  ending  with  the  grin,  which  remained 
some  time  after  the  rest  of  it  had  gone. 

“Well!  I’ve  often  seen  a  cat  without  a  grin,”  thought  Alice;  “but  a  grin 
without  a  cat!  It's  the  most  curious  thing  I  ever  saw  in  all  my  life!”* 

LEWIS  CARROLL 

The  significance  of  the  paradoxical  phase  is  not  limited  to  pathological 
states  such  as  those  previously  observed,  and  it  is  highly  probable  that  it 
plays  an  important  part  in  normal  men  too,  who  often  are  apt  to  be  much 
more  influenced  by  words  than  by  the  actual  facts  of  the  surrounding 
reality.  (394)  I.  p.  pavlov 

In  the  case  of  an  imbecile,  repetition  without  comprehension,  psittacism, 
may  prevail;  the  r6le  of  visual  impressions  is  null  or  nearly  so  among  the 
illiterate;  the  deaf  from  birth  who  have  learned  to  speak  have  no  auditory 
impressions  to  intervene.  But,  normally,  it  is  feelings  and  ideas  that  ap¬ 
pear  in  action,  in  the  form  of  language.  <4ip  henri  pi£ron 

The  specific  neurones  necessary  for  sensation  are  also  necessary  for  the 
associative  reawakening  of  that  sensation,  which  is  called  the  image — a 
dynamic  process  and  not  a  photographic  negative  resting  miraculously  in 
the  nervous  substance,  where  some  subtle  spirit  might  go  to  consult  it. 
<411)  HENRI  FI^RON 

It  is  none  the  less  true  that  certain  cultivated  persons  can  use  visual 
images,  and  can  even  use  these  images  in  preference  to  others.  <4ii) 

HENRI  PI&RON 

Objectification  and  visualization  are  usually  not  differentiated.  The 
first  represents  a  very  undesirable  semantic  process,  whereas  the  second, 
visualization,  represents  one  of  the  most  beneficial  and  efficient  forms  of 
human  'thought'.  From  a  A  point  of  view,  such  a  lack  of  differentiation 
between  the  two  reactions  appears  as  a  very  serious  problem,  requiring 
an  analysis  of  the  respective  mechanisms. 

To  visualize,  we  must  have  such  forms  of  representation  as  lend 
themselves  to  visualization;  otherwise,  we  must  fail.  The  ^-system, 
which  could  not  adequately  handle  asymmetrical  relations,  and  could  not 
be  built  explicitly  on  structure,  necessarily  involves  identification.  In  the 
/I  period,  we  were  able  to  visualize  objects  and  a  few  objective  situa¬ 
tions,  but  all  the  higher  abstractions  were,  in  principle,  inaccessible  to 
visualization,  making  scientific  theories  needlessly  difficult.  A  ^-system, 
free  from  identification,  must  be  based  explicitly  on  structure  on  all  levels 
(structure  defined  in  terms  of  relations  and  ultimately  multi-dimensional 

*  Alice  in  Wonderland . 

IDENTIFICATION  AND  VISUALIZATION 

order),  which  can  be  easily  visualized.  It  should  be  recalled  that  struc- 
litrr,  relations,  and  multi-dimensional  order  supply  us  with  a  language 
which  completely  bridges  daily-life  experiences  with  all  science,  leading 
toward  a  general  theory  of  values.  Mathematics  and  mathematical 
physics  then  become  the  representatives  and  the  foundation  of  all 
sc  ience ;  and  in  the  human  field  a  general  theory  of  values  will  lead  to 
adjustment  or  sanity  and  will  some  day  include  ethics,  economics , . 

For  these  reasons,  the  Structural  Differential  is  uniquely  useful,  as, 
at  a  glance,  it  conveys  to  the  eye  structural  differences  between  the  world 
of  the  animal,  the  primitive  man,  and  the  infant,  which,  no  matter  how 
complex,  is  extremely  simple  in  comparison  with  the  world  of  the 
'civilized*  adult.  The  first  involves  a  one-valued  orientation  which,  if  ap¬ 
plied  to  the  oo-valued  facts  of  life,  gives  extremely  inadequate,  wasteful, 
and  ultimately  painful  adjustment,  where  only  the  few  strongest  sur¬ 
vive.  The  second  involves  oo-valued  orientation,  similar  in  structure  to  the 
actual,  empirical,  oo-valued  facts  of  life,  allowing  a  one-to-one  adjust¬ 
ment  in  evaluation  with  the  facts  in  each  individual  case,  and  producing 
a  semantic  flexibility . ,  necessary  for  adjustment.  This  flexibility  is  known 
to  be  the  foundation  for  balanced  semantic  states,  ‘higher  intelligence*,. 

Visualization  requires  a  definite  elimination,  through  differentiation, 
of  harmful  identification,  which,  as  usual,  is  based  on  incorrect  evalua¬ 
tion  of  structural  issues.  Thus,  we  have  had  endless,  bitter,  and  futile 
urguments  as  to  whether  or  not  the  ‘mechanistic*  point  of  view  of  the 
world  and  ourselves  is  legitimate,  adequate , .  The  average  person,  as 
well  as  the  majority  of  ‘philosophers*,  identifies  ‘mechanistic*  with  ‘ma- 
chinistic*.  Roughly,  mechanics  is  a  name  for  a  science  which  deals  with 
dynamic  manifestations  on  all  levels ;  thus,  we  have  macroscopic  classical 
mechanics,  colloidal  mechanics  now  being  formulated,  and  the  sub- 
microscopic  quantum  mechanics  already  being  well-developed  disciplines. 
In  the  rough,  ‘machine*  is  a  label  applied  to  a  man-made  apparatus  for 
the  application  or  transformation  of  power.  But  even  machines  differ 
greatly ;  thus,  a  dynamo  is  entirely  different  in  principle,  in  theory,  and 
in  applications  from  a  lathe  or  an  automobile. 

If  we  ask :  ‘Is  the  machinists  point  of  view  of  the  world  justified?*, 
the  answer  is  simple  and  undeniable;  namely,  that  this  point  of  view  is 
grossly  inadequate  and  should  be  entirely  abandoned.  But  it  is  not  so  with 
the  mechanistic  point  of  view,  understood  in  its  modern  sense  and  in¬ 
cluding  the  quantum  mechanics  point  of  view,  which  is  entirely  struc¬ 
tural.  In  1933,  we  know  positively  that  even  the  gross  macroscopic 
physico-chemical  characteristics  of  everything  we  are  dealing  with 
depend  on  the  sub-microscopic  structure  (see  Part  X).  The  details  are 

454  VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

not  yet  fully  known,  but  the  principles  are  firmly  established.  With  a 
A  understanding  and  evaluation  of  the  unique  importance  of  structure 
as  the  only  possible  content  of  ‘knowledge’,  these  ‘firmly  established’ 
principles  become  irr ever sibly  established* .  W e  may  go  further  and  say 
that  the  quantum  mechanics  point  of  view  becomes  the  first  structurally 
correct  point  of  view  and,  as  such,  should  be  accepted  fully  in  any  sane 
orientation.  If  we  stop  identification,  then  we  will  differentiate  between 
some  simple  facts.  For  instance,  we  will  understand  that  any  semantic 
state,  reaction,  or  process  has  its  corresponding  sub-microscopic,  struc¬ 
tural,  colloidal,  and  ultimately  quantum  mechanical  processes  going  on 
in  the  nervous  system ;  however,  the  j.r,  or  feelings  of  pain  or  pleasure . , 
are  not  the  sub-microscopic  processes.  These  belong  to  different  levels, 
but  with  oo-valued  semantics  we  can  establish  in  principle  a  one-to-one 
correspondence  between  them.  Thus,  when  we  differentiate  adequately, 
the  older  mac/nnistic  objections  disappear  entirely;  and,  in  its  proper 
field,  for  structural  reasons,  we  must  preserve  the  mechanistic ,  and  en¬ 
tirely  abandon  the  too  crude  machmistic  attitudes.  The  mechanistic 
(1933)  attitude  is  based  on  structure  and  so  is  indispensable  for  visual¬ 
ization  ;  and  training  in  visualisation  automatically  abolishes  objectifica¬ 
tion,  which  represents  an  important  special  case  of  all  identification. 
From  the  point  of  view  of  a  A- system,  adjustment  and  sanity  in  humans 
depend,  to  a  large  extent,  on  their  ‘understanding’,  which  is  entirely 
structural  in  character;  therefore,  we  must  accept  a  mechanistic  (1933) 
attitude ,  which,  in  the  meantime,  can  be  visualized. 

The  finding  of  structural  means  of  representation  facilitates  visual¬ 
isation,  imagining,  picturing,.  In  the  adjustment  trend  we  start  with 
lower  nerve-impressions,  ‘senses’,  ‘feelings’.,  lower  abstractions,  and 
these  are  abstracted  again  by  the  higher  centres.  The  higher  centres 
produce  the  ‘very  abstract’  theories,  which  cannot  be  visualized  for  a 
while.  The  lower  centres,  which  are  involved  in  visualization,  can  deal 
only  with  structures  which  can  be  ‘concretely  pictured’.  So  we  always 
try  to  invent  mechanistic  or  geometrical  theories,  such  as  can  be  handled 
by  the  lower  centres. 

Individual  ‘experiences’,  supplied  by  the  lower  centres  of  different 
individuals,  do  not  blend  directly.  They  are  blended  in  the  higher  cen¬ 
tres.  In  them  manifold  experiences,  whether  individual  or  accumulated 
by  the  race  (time-binding),  are  abstracted  further,  integrated,  and  sum¬ 
marized.  Once  this  has  been  accomplished,  structural  means  are  sought 
and  discovered  to  translate  these  higher  abstractions  into  lower,  the  only 
ones  with  which  the  lower  centres  can  deal.  Then  we  can  ‘visualize’  our 
theories,  and  the  higher  centres  not  only  influence  the  lower  centres,  but 

IDENTIFICATION  AND  VISUALIZATION 

the  lower  centres  have  appropriate  means  by  which  to  co-operate  with 
the  higher  centres  in  their  new  non-el  quests. 

The  lack  of  explicitly  structural  forms  of  representations  is  respon¬ 
sible,  also,  for  the  difficulties  which  arise  when  the  higher  order  abstrac¬ 
tions  are  translated  into  the  reflex-reactions  of  the  lower  centres,  which 
can  deal  with  ‘intuitions’,  ‘orientations’,  ‘visualization’,  .  The  so-called 
‘geniuses’  have  a  very  subtle  nervous  system  in  which  the  translation  of 
higher  order  abstractions  into  lower  and  vice  versa  is  easily  accomplished. 
From  the  point  of  view  of  forms  or  representations,  we  can  have  two 
issues:  (1)  we  may  have  el  forms  of  representations  which  are  not 
based  on  structure,  visualization . ,  and  cannot  efficiently  affect  the  activi¬ 
ties  of  the  lower  centres;  (2)  we  may  have  a  non-el  system  based  on 
structure,  visualization . ,  which  can  be  translated  simply,  easily,  and 
efficiently  into  the  terms  of  the  lower  centres.  These  problems  are  of 
educational  importance  and  should  be  worked  out  more  fully. 

In  my  experience  with  grown-ups  who  have  had  only  a  short  con¬ 
tact  with  my  work,  I  find,  in  many  cases,  that,  although  they  may  have 
even  given  their  complete  verbal  approval  of  the  main  point  of  the  sys¬ 
tem,  yet,  invariably,  in  practice,  the  full  application  is  lacking.  Obvi¬ 
ously,  the  semantic  importance  of  the  present  findings  is  not  in  the  verbal 
approval  alone,  when  that  approval  is  not  applied,  but  in  the  consistent 
and  permanent  instinctive  acquisition  of  the  new  semantic  attitude  which 
involves  a  complete  elimination  of  identification,  allness,  elementalism , . 

We  can  teach  any  one  to  repeat  verbally,  by  heart,  instructions  for 
operating  an  automobile,  a  piano,  or  a  typewriter;  but  no  one  could 
operate  them  satisfactorily  by  reflex-action  after  such  verbal  training 
alone.  To  operate  effectively  and  skilfully  any  structural  complex,  we 
must  become  intimately  familiar  with  its  structural  working  through  actual 
reflex-training,  and  only  then  can  we  expect  the  best  results.  In  my  ex¬ 
perience,  this  is  true  with  language,  and,  without  the  visual  Structural 
Differential  on  which  we  can  point  our  finger  to  the  objective  level  and  urge 
silence . ,  such  basic  semantic  reflex-training  cannot  properly  be  given. 

If  we  ask  a  man:  ‘Do  you  know  how  to  drive  a  car?’,  and  he  an¬ 
swers  ‘Yes’,  we  assume  that  he  has  acquired  the  proper  reflexes.  If  he 
answers  ‘No,  but  I  know  about  it’,  he  means  that  he  has  not  acquired 
the  proper  reflexes,  but  that  his  ‘knowledge’  is  on  purely  verbal  levels, 
non-effective  in  application  on  non-verbal  reflex-levels.  This  applies  fully 
to  s.r;  we  may  ‘know’  about  them,  but  we  may  never  apply  successfully 
what  we  supposedly  ‘know’.  To  ‘know’  represents  a  multiordinal  process 
which  involves  equally  the  activities  of  the  lower  nerve  centres  and  of 
the  higher.  In  our  el  systems  we  had  no  such  distinction,  and  so  we 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

confused  them.  The  older  ‘knowledge’,  when  presented  in  el  language, 
could  fiot  have  been  absorbed  easily  by  the  non-el  organisms-as-a-whole. 
As  the  main  task,  at  present,  is  to  unlearn  the  older  s.r,  the  new  reactions 
need  a  persistent  training,  particularly  by  the  grown-ups.  The  non-el, 
A  language  and  method  prove  to  have  psychophysiological  importance. 

Although  the  neurological  mechanism  underlying  identification,  ob¬ 
jectification,  visualization.,  is  not  well  known  (1933),  neurology  gives 
us  evidence  that  in  these  states,  as  well  as  in  delusions  and  hallucina¬ 
tions,  the  actual  lower  nerve  centres  are  somehow  engaged.  We  may 
assume  that  different  ‘resistances’,  ‘blockages’.,  in  some  parts  of  the 
nervous  system  make  the  passage  of  nervous  impulses  more  difficult, 
and  it  seems  reasonable  to  suppose  that,  in  such  cases,  the  paths  travelled 
by  the  nervous  currents  are  different. 

In  Fig.  1,  an  hypothetical  and  over-simplified  scheme  of  the  different 
types  of  distribution  of  nervous  currents,  as  is  known  functionally,  is 
suggested.  The  ordering  is  not  anatomical  but  functional  in  terms  of 
degrees  of  intensity.  In  this  scheme,  we  may  consider  that  the  nervous 
impulse  (A)  reaches  the  lower  nerve  centres,  the 
brain-stem  and  the  thalamus,  passes  through  the 
sub-cortical  layers  and  the  cortex,  continuously 
being  transformed.  Finally,  in  returning,  it  may 
take  either  the  beneficial  and  adaptive  semantic 
form  of  visualization  (V),  free  from  identifica¬ 
tion  and  semantic  disturbances,  or  may  involve 
identification,  with  semantic  disturbances,  such 
as  objectifications  of  different  orders  (O),  delu¬ 
sions  (D),  illusions  (I),  or,  finally  hallucinations 
(H). 

Identification,  or  confusion  of  orders  of  ab¬ 
stractions,  consists  of  erroneous  evaluation :  that 
which  is  going  on  inside  of  our  skin  has  objective  existence  outside  of 
our  skins;  the  ascribing  of  external  objectivity  to  words;  the  identifica¬ 
tion  in  value  of  ‘memories  of  experiences’  with  experience ;  the  identi¬ 
fication  of  our  s.r  and  states  with  words;  the  identification  of  infer¬ 
ences  with  descriptions,.  Identification  is  greatly  facilitated,  if  not 
actually  induced,  by  the  A  structure  of  language  in  which  we  have  one 
.name  for  at  least  four  entirely  different  entities.  Thus,  the  A  ‘apple’ 
(without  subscripts  and  date)  is  used  as  a  label  for  the  physico-chemical 
process ;  for  an  object,  say,  ‘apple1>Feb.23fi93s’ ;  for  a  ‘mental’  picture  on  the 
un-speakable  semantic  level,  and  for  the  verbal  definition.  Under  such 
linguistic  conditions,  it  is  practically  impossible,  without  special  training , 

IDKNTIHCATION  AND  VISUALIZATION 

nut  to  identify  the  four  entirely  different  abstractions  into  one . ,  with  all 
the  following  sinister  consequences. 

Delusions  represent  incorrect  notions  and  inappropriate  sr  formed, 
not  by  insufficient  knowledge  or  ‘logic’,  but  by  affective  pressure  in  a 
definite  evaluational  direction;  as,  for  instance,  delusions  of  grandeur; 
delusions  of  persecution;  delusions  of  ‘sin’;  delusions  of  reference,. 

Illusions  appear  more  like  real  perceptions,  but  pathologically 
changed.  For  instance,  anything  may  be  semantically  coloured  or  inter¬ 
preted,  or  evaluated  as  an  offense,  or  a  threat,  or  a  promise , . 

Hallucinations  consist  of  ‘perceptions’,  with  all  their  vividness,  but 
without  any  external  stimuli.  Patients  hear  voices ;  see  visions ;  feel 
pricks  or  burnings . ,  when  there  is  nothing  to  hear,  or  see,  or  to  be 
pricked  by. 

In  visualisation ,  identification  does  not  occur;  orders  of  abstractions 
arc  not  confused;  semantic  disturbances  do  not  appear;  the  evaluation 
is  correct;  a  ‘picture’  is  evaluated  as  a  picture  and  not  as  the  events  , .  In 
oilier  words,  because  of  the  consciousness  of  abstracting,  the  natural 
order  of  evaluation  is  preserved.  But  once,  through  identification,  this 
natural  order  is  reversed,  it  marks  a  pathological  condition  more  or  less 
morbid,  and  often  of  a  non-adaptive  character. 

Identification  represents,  in  affective  tension,  the  mildest  semantic 
disturbance,  consisting  of  an  error  in  meanings  and  evaluation.  Objects 
arc  evaluated  as  events;  ‘ideas’,  or  higher  order  abstractions,  are  evalu¬ 
ated  as  objects;  as  experience;  as  the  un-speakable  semantic  states  or 
reactions ;  otherwise,  as  lower  order  abstractions.  The  confusion  in  the 
held  of  higher  order  abstractions  follows  a  similar  rule.  Inferences 
obviously  represent  higher  order  abstractions  than  descriptions ;  so,  when 
I  hey  are  not  differentiated,  higher  order  abstractions  are  again  identified 
with  the  lower.  We  all  know  from  daily-life  experience  the  fantastic 
amount  of  suffering  we  can,  and  do,  actually  produce  for  ourselves  and 
others  with  such  identifications. 

In  delusions,  a  similar  but  more  intense  identification  occurs,  result¬ 
ing  in  erroneous  semantic  evaluation;  wishes,  feelings,  and  other 
semantic  states  inside  of  our  skins  are  projected  into  the  external  world, 
giving  delusionally  strong  objective  evaluation. 

In  illusions,  we  also  ascribe  to,  or  identify  our  complex  semantic 
states  with,  different  perceptions  and  evaluate  our  higher  order  abstrac¬ 
tions  as  lower. 

In  hallucinations,  this  process  of  reversing  the  natural  order  comes 
to  a  culminating  point :  higher  order  abstractions  are  translated  into,  and 
have  the  full  vividness  and  ‘reality’  of,  lower  order  abstractions. 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

We  see  that  the  pathological  processes  of  ‘mental’  illnesses  involve 
identification  as  a  generalised  symptom;  which  means  the  reversal ,  in 
different  degrees ,  of  the  natural  order  of  evaluation  based  on  the  inten¬ 
sified  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions.  The  more  intense  this  process 
of  reversal  becomes,  the  more  non-adaptive  and  morbid  the  manifesta¬ 
tions.  It  should  be  noticed  that  this  analysis  becomes  a  necessity  once 
we  decide  to  accept  a  non-el  language.  This  analysis  is  far  from  exhaus¬ 
tive,  but  an  analysis  in  new  non-el ,  structurally  correct  terms,  throws  a 
new  light  on  old  problems. 

Hallucinations  which  result  from  ‘physical’  illness  do  not  represent 
a  permanent  danger,  but  when  a  patient  seems  ‘physically’  well,  and  his 
confusions  of  orders  of  abstractions,  delusions,  illusions,  and  hallucina¬ 
tions  become  completely  ‘rationalized’,  then  these  are  unmistakable  signs 
of  serious  ‘mental’  illness,  suggesting  sub-microscopic  colloidal  lesions. 
Now  this  ‘rationalization’  represents  nothing  else  but  a  nervous  disturb¬ 
ance  and  involves  identification  somewhere.  In  ‘physical’  ills  the  nervous 
system  may  be  disturbed,  but  the  illness  does  not  usually  originate  in 
nervous  disturbances,  and  so,  as  such,  is  not  dangerous. 

The  distinction  between  visualization  and  objectification  based  on  a 
/^-system  seems  new ;  the  difference  is  subtle,  but  when  it  is  formulated 
we  can  discover  a  simple  means  whereby  to  control  the  situation.  If  we 
were  to  take  a  ‘bone’  made  of  papier-mache  and  smear  it  with  fat  or 
meat,  Fido  would,  perhaps,  objectify  (identify)  such  a  ‘bone’  from  the 
smell  and  the  form  of  the  papier-mache  with  an  edible  one,  and  would 
fight  for  it.  We  do  a  similar  sort  of  thing  when  we  objectify.  Religious 
wars,  the  ‘holy  inquisition’,  the  persecution  of  science,  which  we  are 
witnessing  even  at  the  present  day  in  some  countries  and  communities, 
are  excellent  examples. 

We  should  notice  that  Fido  was  able  to  trust  his  natural,  even 
‘objectified’,  instinct,  for  nature  does  not  play  such  tricks  on  him,  such 
as  producing  ‘bones’  of  papier-mache.  If  nature  did,  dogs  that  objectify 
and  persist  in  their  liking  for  such  ‘food’  would  soon  be  eliminated. 
These  particular  objectifications  would  be  dangerous  and  painful  to 
those  particular  kinds  of  dogs  with  that  particular  nervous  system,  and 
would  ultimately  prove  of  no  survival  value.  Thus  identification,  which 
represents  an  inappropriate  evaluation,  is  harmful  to  all  life,  but  is  little 
noticed  at  present,  because  the  main  periods  of  the  animal  racial  adjust¬ 
ment  have  been  accomplished  long  ago.  Experiments  on  flies  show  that 
the  number  of  mutants  which  may  be  produced  in  a  laboratory  is  large, 
but  very  few  would  survive  outside  of  a  laboratory.  In  unaided  nature, 
these  mutants  probably  occur,  but  seldom  leave  observable  traces.3 

IDENTIFICATION  AND  VISUALIZATION 

I  lowevcr,  even  today,  as  Pavlov  has  shown  in  his  laboratories,  we  can 
impose,  by  an  interplay  of  a  four-dimensional  order  of  stimuli,  such  con¬ 
ditions  upon  animals  for  which  their  nervous  survival  structure  was  not 
naturally  adapted,  and  so  induce  nervous  pathological  states.  Wrong 
evaluation  is,  indeed,  harmful  to  all  life  and  accounts  for  such  rigid 
survival  laws  in  nature,  which  science  teaches  humans  how  to  make  more 
flexible.  Practically  word  for  word,  this  applies  to  ourselves.  We  are 
constantly  producing  more  and  more  complex  conditions  of  life,  man¬ 
made,  man-invented,  and  deceptive  for  the  non-prepared.  These  new 
conditions  are  usually  due  to  the  application  of  the  work  of  some  genius, 
and  the  nervous  system  and  s.r  of  most  of  us  are  not  prepared  for  such 
eventualities.  In  spite  of  inventions  and  discoveries  of  science,  which 
are  human  achievements,  we  still  preserve  animalistic  systems  and  doc¬ 
trines  which  shape  our  s.r.  Hence,  life  becomes  more  strained  and  in¬ 
creasingly  more  unhappy,  thereby  multiplying  the  number  of  nervous 
break-downs. 

It  is  known  that  not  all  people  are  able  to  visualize  equally  well.  In 
the  older  days  this  fact  was  taken  for  granted,  and  did  not  suggest 
further  analysis.  Under  present  conditions  in  many  human  beings  and 
hIho  in  animals,  as  shown  in  the  experiments  of  Pavlov,  the  visual 
stimuli  are  physiologically  weaker  than  the  auditory  ones;  in  man,  how- 
rver,  the  visual  stimuli  should  be  physiologically  stronger  than  the  audi- 
lory.  This  difference  does  not  affect  the  general  mechanism  of  the  cyclic 
nerve  currents  and  orders  of  abstractions.  In  the  auditory  type  the  main 
returning  currents  are  deviated  into  different  paths.  The  division  be¬ 
tween  ‘visual’  and  ‘auditory’  types  is  not  sharp.  In  life  we  deal  mainly 
with  individuals  who  have  no  more  than  a  special  inclination  for  one 
or  the  other  types  of  reaction. 

In  the  case  of  ‘mental’  processes,  human  adjustment  has  to  be 
managed  on  higher,  more  numerous,  and  more  complex  levels.  Obvi- 
ounly,  then,  the  auditory  types  are  more  enmeshed  by  words,  further 
removed  from  life  than  the  visual  ones,  and  so  cannot  be  equally  well 
adjusted.  This  fact  should  not  be  neglected,  and  on  the  human  levels 
we'  should  have  educational  methods  to  train  in  visualization,  which  au¬ 
tomatically  eliminates  identification. 

The  auditory  channels  which  connect  us  with  the  external  world 
are  much  less  subtle  and  effective  than  the  visual  ones.  The  eye  is  not 
merely  a  ‘sense-organ’.  Embryology  shows  that  the  eye  is  a  part  of  the 
brain  itself,  and  what  is  called  the  ‘optic  nerve’  must  be  considered  not 
a  nerve  but  as  a  genuine  nervous  tract.  This  fact,  of  course,  would 
