iHMign  to  the  eye  a  special  semantic  importance,  not  shared  with  other 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

‘sense-organs’  or  receptors.  We  ought  not  to  be  surprised  to  find  that 
the  visual  types  are  better  adjusted  to  this  world  than  the  auditory  types. 
In  pathological  states,  such  as  identifications,  delusions,  illusions,  and 
hallucinations,  there  seems  to  be  involved  a  translation  of  auditory 
semantic  stimuli  into  visual  images.  In  these  pathological  cases  the  order 
of  evaluation  appears  as  label  first  and  object  next,  while  the  adaptive 
order  seems  to  require  object  first  and  label  next , .  There  seems  little 
doubt  that  visualization  is  very  useful,  and  that  identification  is  espe¬ 
cially  harmful.  The  most  effective  means  to  transform  the  s.r  of  iden¬ 
tification  is  found  in  visualization ,  which  indicates  its  special  semantic 
importance . 

The  semantic  disturbance  of  identification  may  have  many  sources, 
auditory  included,  but  the  only  adaptive  trend  is  in  visualization,  which 
involves  in  some  way  the  optical  neural  structure.  Some  structural  light 
is  thrown  on  this  subject  when  we  realize  that,  physiologically,  the  eye 
is  more  closely  related  to  the  vegetative  nervous  system,  which  regu¬ 
lates  our  vital  organs,  than  the  ear  is.  In  man  the  optic  thalamus  is 
greatly  enlarged,  so  that  the  whole  thalamus  is  often  called  the  ‘optic 
thalamus  .  Actually,  the  thalamus  has  many  functions,  other  than  visual, 
and  is  connected  with  affective  manifestations. 

As  most  of  our  observations  are  accomplished  by  the  aid  of  the  eye, 
we  should  expect  auditory  types  to  be  poor  observers ,  and  so  racially, 
in  the  long  run,  not  so  well  adjusted  semantically.  Observation  shows 
that  the  auditory  types  often  have  infantile  reactions— a  serious  handi¬ 
cap.  From  an  adaptive  point  of  view  the  ‘normal’,  non-inf antile,  best- 
adjusted  individual  ought  to  be  a  visual  type.  Auditory  types  must 
also  be  further  detached  from  actualities  than  the  visual  types,  as  audi¬ 
tory  stimuli  involve  more  inferences  than  descriptions,  which  is  the 
opposite  of  the  functioning  of  the  visual  types.  If  inferences,  rather 
than  descriptions,  are  involved,  we  naturally  deal  with  higher  abstrac¬ 
tions  first,  and  with  the  lower  next,  and  so  there  is  always  a  danger  of 
the  semantic  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions,  which  necessarily  in¬ 
volves  inappropriate  evaluation,-  of  which  objectification  is  only  a  par¬ 
ticular  case. 

Even  to  common  sense  it  seems  clear  that  there  is  a  significant  dif¬ 
ference  between  ‘knowing’  this  world  by  hearing  and  ‘knowing’  it  by 
seeing.  There  is,  likewise,  a  difference  between  the  translation  of  higher 
abstractions  into  lower  terms  by  the  visual  path,  and  the  corresponding 
translation  by  the  auditory  path.  In  daily  life  we  never  say  ‘I  hear’ 
when  we  wish  to  convey  that  we  understand ;  but  we  say  ‘I  see'.  When 
we  say  ‘I  hear’,  we  usually  wish  to  convey  that  we  have  heard  some- 

IDENTIFICATION  AND  VISUALIZATION 

tiling  which  we  did  not  fully  grasp  or  approve.  The  above  relation  is 
rather  important,  but  has  not  been  sufficiently  analysed.  The  problems  of 
introversion  and  extroversion  are  connected  with  it. 

The  relation  between  the  problems  of  identification  and  the  number 
of  values  found  in  the  empirical  world  in  connection  with  the  number 
of  values  ascribed,  or  assumed . ,  by  our  semantic  processes,  is  most 
important. 

The  following  analysis  is,  by  necessity,  one-sided,  over-simplified . , 
as  a  fuller  analysis  would  require  a  separate  volume.  I  consider  many 
problems  ‘in  principle*  only ;  this  allows  me  a  briefer  treatment  necessary 
for  my  purpose,  but  it  must  be  realized  that  our  language  and  general 
semantics,  which,  in  practice,  we  use  unconsciously,  are  extremely  com¬ 
plex  and  involve  one-,  two-,  three-,  and  oo-valued  components,  never,  as 
yet,  sharply  differentiated  nor  formulated.  Investigation  shows  that  the 
oo-valued  semantics  is  the  most  general  and  includes  the  one-,  two- . ,  and 
few-valued  semantics  as  particular  cases.  The  one-valued  semantics  of 
literal  identifications  are  found  only  among  animals,  primitive  people, 
infants,  and  the  ‘mentally*  ill,  although  more  or  less  serious  traces  of 
some  identification  are  found  in  practically  all  of  us,  because  these  are 
embodied  in  the  structure  of  our  language  and  prevent  the  acquisition 
of  the  oo-valued  systems  necessary  for  sanity.  For  my  purpose,  it  is 
enough  to  formulate  the  problems  for  the  complete  elimination  of  primi¬ 
tive  identification,  and  then  modern,  oo-valued,  A  semantics  follow 
automatically.  Under  such  conditions,  I  must  concentrate  on  the  vital 
problem  of  one-valued  identification  and  treat  the  two- . ,  and  few-valued 
systems  sketchily,  ‘in  principle’,  although  we  must  realize  that  the  last 
systems  have  been  made  more  flexible  by  the  use  of  many  ingenious 
verbal  devices  which  I  do  not  even  mention  in  the  present  work. 

Let  me  repeat  that  the  attitudes,  flexibility,  or  fixity . ,  of  our  s.r  de¬ 
pend  to  a  large  extent  on  the  structure  of  language  used,  which  involves 
also  its  appropriate  general  semantics.  The  ‘logic’  of  our  schooldays 
represents  a  composite  affair,  in  the  main  A ,  and  we  call  it  by  this  last 
name.  This  ‘logic’  can  be  considered  as  a  two-valued  ‘logic’  because  of 
the  fundamental  ‘law  of  the  excluded  third*,  expressed  as  ‘A  is  B  or  not 
B*,  by  which  a  third  possibility  is  excluded.  But  even  the  traditional 
‘logic*  had  to  admit  in  its  scheme  what  was  called  ‘modality’;  namely, 
some  degrees  of  certainty  or  uncertainty  with  which  a  given  statement 
is  made.  Lately,  Lukasiewicz  has  shown  that  a  three-valued  ‘logic’  can 
be  so  formulated  as  to  include  modality.  Later,  he  and  Tarski  general¬ 
ized  it  to  an  w-valued  ‘logic’.  When  n  tends  toward  infinity,  this  ‘logic’ 
becomes  the  ‘logic’  of  probability.  If  these  disciplines  are  made  non-el , 

Vli.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

we  have  what  I  call  one-,  two-,  three- . ,  and  oo-valued  general  semantics 
Theoretically,  and  in  practice,  we  are  interested  mostly  in  the  one-,  two-, 
three-,  few-valued,  and  oo-valued  general  semantics.  For  my  purpose, 
and  for  simplicity,  I  shall  deal  only  with  identification;  that  is,  the 
primitive  one-valued  semantics,  the  influence  of  which  is  found  in  both 
the  two-  and  three- valued  semantics,  and  may  only  be  completely  elimi¬ 
nated  in  an  oo-valued  semantics . 

We  live  in  a  four-dimensional  space-time  manifold  which,  on  all 
levels,  consists  of  absolutely  individual  events,  objects,  situations,  ab¬ 
stractions  . ,  and  we  must  conclude  that  structurally  we  live  in  an  indefi¬ 
nitely  many-valued  or  oo-valued  world,  the  possibilities  of  which  follow 
in  principle  the  laws  of  combinations  of  higher  orders.  The  above 
statement  represents  a  description  of  a  structural  observation  about  the 
empirical  world,  independent  of  our  pleasure,  and  can  be  contradicted 
only  by  exhibiting  empirically,  actual  ‘identity'  or  ‘absolute  sameness'. , 
of  different  events,  objects,  or  situations . ,  which  exhibiting  becomes  an 
impossibility  if  we  decide  to  investigate  facts  more  fully. 

Under  such  empirical  conditions,  for  adjustment  and  so  for  sanity, 
we  must  have  on  semantic  levels  such  theories,  systems,  methods . , 
which  would  allow  us  in  a  given  case,  under  given  conditions,  at  a  given 
date , ,  to  evaluate  the  individual  happenings  uniquely;  or  which  would 
allow  us  to  establish  a  one-to-one  correspondence  between  the  essen¬ 
tially  oo-valued  facts  of  experience  and  our  semantic  states.  It  becomes 
obvious  that  this  can  be  accomplished  only  if  we  have  oo-valued  and 
non-el  general  semantics.  We  see  that  the  two-,  or  three-valued,  el  A 
‘logic',  ‘psychology'. ,  and,  in  general,  the  ^-system,  being  structurally 
different  from  the  empirical  world,  will  prevent,  in  principle,  such  an 
adjustment  and,  therefore,  sanity. 

Identification  may  be  considered  as  the  remains  of  pre-human,  or 
primitive,  or  infantile,  one- valued  semantics,  which  establishes,  or  results 
from,  semantic  states,  by  which  the  essentially  oo-valued  facts  of  experi¬ 
ence  are  not  differentiated  or  evaluated  properly,  and  so  the  indefinitely 
many  values  of  these  facts  are  identified  into  a  single  value.  Such 
identification  is  always  structurally  unjustified  and  dangerous,  and  may 
be  the  result  of  a  great  many  factors,  such  as  low  development,  ignor¬ 
ance,  insufficient  observation,  ‘wishful  thinking',  fears,  pathological 
states  of  our  nervous  system,  different  semantic  disturbances,  ‘mental' 
ills,  infantilism  in  the  grown-ups , .  But  among  humans  we  cannot  avoid 
training,  through  the  mechanism  of  language  and  its  structure,  in  some, 
most  often  unconscious,  general  semantics,  and  so  a  great  deal  depends 

IDENTIFICATION  AND  VISUALIZATION 

on  what  kind  of  semantics  or  methods  of  evaluation  we  impose  on  our 
children. 

We  should  notice  an  important  fact  which  is  usually  disregarded; 
namely,  that  a  language,  and  often  one  word,  involves  a  definite  type  of 
semantics.  Thus,  in  primitive  ‘polysynthetic*  languages,  it  is  not  a  ques¬ 
tion  of  associations  or  superstitions;  the  mystic  characteristics  and  the 
thing  simply  are  not  differentiated,  but  literally  identified  into  one  whole. 
Thus,  we  have  one-valued  semantics  where  the  ‘good’  and  ‘evil  spirits' 
actually  participate  in  everything  considered  as  a  synthetic  whole.2 

A  language  of  ‘true'  and  ‘false'  involves  two-valued  semantics ;  the 
introduction  of  adverbs  or  their  equivalents  introduces  modality  and  so 
three- valued  semantics.  The  introduction  of  indefinitely  many  degrees 
between  the  ‘true'  and  ‘false’  leads  finally  to  oo-valued  semantics. 

A  diagram  may  help  to  make  this  clearer. 

A,  B,  C.,  oo-valued  and  different  facts 
of  experience,  which,  in  a  given  case, 
have,  by  necessity,  indefinitely  many , 
single ,  individual  values, 
a,  b,  c . ,  oo-valued  non-aristotelian  orien¬ 
tation  structurally  similar  to  the  empirical 
world  which  allows  us,  in  a  given  case,  to 
assign  indefinitely  many  single,  one-to-one 

corresponding  values  to  the  individual  Fig.  2 

facts. 

A,  B,  C.,  oo-valued  and  different  facts 
of  experience,  which,  in  a  given  case, 
have,  by  necessity,  indefinitely  many, 
single,  individual  values. 

2Slt  Sa.,  two-,  three-.,  and  few-valued 
aristotelian  orientation  structurally  non- 
similar  to  the  empirical  world,  which 
compels  us  to  ascribe  two . ,  or  few  values 
to  the  essentially  indefinitely  many- valued 

and  different  facts,  resulting  in  identifira-  Fig.  3 

tion  of  the  many  values  into  a  few,  which 
improper  evaluation  is  projected  on  the 
facts. 

A,  B,  C . ,  oo-valued  and  different  facts 
of  experience,  which,  ^  in  a  given  case, 
have,  by  necessity,  indefinitely  many,  * 
single,  individual  values.  ^ 

ft,  one-valued,  animal,  primitive . ,  orien¬ 
tation,  structurally  non-similar  to  the 
empirical  world,  which  compels  us  to 
ascribe  one  value  to  the  essentially  in¬ 
definitely  many-valued  and  different  facts, 
resulting  in  identification  of  the  many 
values  into  one,  which  improper  evalua¬ 
tion  is  projected  on  the  facts. 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

In  Fig.  2,  the  arrows  Aa,  Bb . ,  indicate  the  A  one-to-one  correspon¬ 
dence  between  the  oo-valued  individual  facts  of  life,  A,B,C . ,  and  the 
corresponding  s.rt  or  a,b,c  orientations . ,  which  ascribe  single  values  to 
the  different  facts,  establishing  a  foundation  for  structurally  correct 
proper  evaluation  which  helps  adjustment  and  so  sanity. 

In  Fig.  3,  the  A  two- . ,  few- valued  orientation  and  type  of  corre¬ 
spondence  is  shown. 

In  Fig.  4,  12  indicates  a  single,  say,  proper  evaluation  of  the  one 
fact  A.  The  arrows  OB,  ClC,  12D,  OE,  OF,  .  .  .  ,  12N  indicate  the  projec¬ 
tion  of  the  one-valued  semantic  state,  or  orientation  on  the  essentially 
unchanged  oo-valued  facts  A,  B,  C . ,  distorting  them.  In  other  words, 
the  oo-valued  facts,  through  the  identification  of  many  values  into  one, 
and  by  pathological  projection,  have  been  given  wrong  evaluation, 
thereby  preventing,  in  principle ,  adjustment  and  sanity,  particularly  for 
a  civilized  human  1933. 

If  we  train  our  children  in  one-,  two-,  three-,  and  more  generally 
few-valued  el,  A  reactions  based  on  corresponding  languages,  ‘logics'. , 
the  result  must  be  that  they  will  have  great  difficulty  in  adjusting  them¬ 
selves  to  a  world  of  non-el  oo-valued  facts,  and  that,  even  if  they  suc¬ 
ceed,  this  would  ultimately  happen  only  after  a  great  waste  of  efforts  and 
unnecessary  sufferings.  If  we  approach  the  oo-valued  facts  of  life  with 
one-,  two-,  or  even  few- valued  semantic  attitudes,  we  must  identify 
some  of  the  indefinitely  many  values  into  one,  or  a  few  values,  and  so 
approach  the  oo-valued  world  with  an  orientation  which  projects  ignor¬ 
antly  or  pathologically  our  restricted,  few- valued  semantic  evaluations 
on  the  oo-valued  individual  facts  of  experience. 

The  above  explanations  apply  in  the  fullest  extent  to  the  structure 
of  language.  The  daily  language,  as  well  as  our  attitudes  toward  it,  still 
reflects  primitive  structural  s.r  of  the  period  before  it  was  known  that 
on  the  objective  levels  we  deal  exclusively  with  oo -valued,  four-dimen¬ 
sional  processes .  The  language  in  the  ^-system  represents,  in  principle, 
what  may  be  called  a  three-dimensional  and  one-,  two- . ,  more  generally 
few-valued  linguistic  system  structurally  non-similar  to  the  oo-valued, 
four-dimensional  event-process  conditions.  Let  us  analyse,  for  instance, 
the  A  term  ‘apple'.  This  term  represents,  in  principle ,  a  name  for  a  ver¬ 
bal,  one-valued,  and  constant  intensional  definition,  in  which  space-time 
relations  do  not  enter.  What  are  the  structural  facts  of  experience  ?  The 
object  which  we  call  ‘apple’  represents  a  process  which  changes  con¬ 
tinually;  besides,  every  single  apple  that  ever  existed,  or  will  exist,  was 
an  absolute  individual,  and  different  from  any  other  objective  ‘apple'. 
In  applying  such  a  three-dimensional  and  one-valued  language  to  essen- 

IDENTIFICATION  AND  VISUALIZATION 

tially  oo-valued  processes,  we  only  make  proper  evaluation,  and  so  ad¬ 
justment  and  sanity,  very  difficult. 

Yet  the  structural  adjustment  is  simple  in  a  ^-system.  The  A 
‘apple’  was  a  name  for  a  verbal  intensional  definition ;  in  a  ^-system, 
we  manufacture  indefinitely  many  names  for  the  indefinitely  many  objec¬ 
tive  and  different  ‘apples’  by  subscripts,  ‘applet,  ‘apple2\  ‘apple 3’. ,  sup¬ 
plementing  the  subscript  with  the  date ;  thus,  in  ‘applei  ^.23.1933’,  we  gain 
the  possibility  of  considering  ‘apple*,*’  as  oo-valued,  and  so,  in  a  given 
case.,  we  are  enabled  to  have  a  single  name  which  we  could  relate  to 
single  values  of  the  objective,  absolute  individuals,  and  absolute  individ¬ 
ual  stages  of  the  process.  Similarly  with  multiordinal  terms.  Before  the 
multiordinality  of  terms  was  discovered  and  formulated  by  me  in  1925, 
these  terms  were  silently  assumed  in  principle,  to  be  one-valued,  and  we 
were  either  prevented  from  using  them  in  connection  with  oo-valued 
orders  of  abstractions,  or,  if  used  by  semantic  necessity,  we  identified  the 
indefinitely  many  values  into  one.  Both  results  were  undesirable;  the 
first  established  semantic  blockages  to  creative  scientific  work ;  the  other 
promulgated  semantic  disturbances.  But  once  the  multiordinality  of 
terms  is  established,  we  have  oo-valued  terms  to  which,  in  a  given  con¬ 
text  (by  differentiating  the  different  orders  of  abstractions  which  a  con¬ 
text  indicates),  we  can  ascribe  single  values. 

Such  a  pioneering  analysis  may  appear  difficult  at  first,  but  this  is 
only  due  to  the  lack  of  familiarity  and  established  pre-^4  and  A 
one-,  two-,  three-,  or  few- valued  s,rt  all  of  which  involve  ultimately 
identification  somewhere.  Once  identification  is  abolished,  however,  and 
this  is  childishly  simple,  although  not  easy  and  rather  laborious  for 
grown-ups,  oo-valued  semantics  become  natural  and  automatic ,  evading 
very  serious  theoretical  difficulties.  In  the  present  volume,  I  had  to 
elaborate  in  detail  upon  different  issues,  simply  because  my  readers  will 
be  mostly  grown-ups  with  established  pre-At  and  A  reactions,  who  must 
first  be  made  to  recognize  the  benefits  of  a  A  evaluation  before  they  will 
be  willing  to  undergo  a  laborious  re-education  of  their  older  s.r .  The 
procedure  in  the  training  of  infants  and  children  is  extremely  simple 
and  entirely  on  their  levels. 

There  is,  however,  one  point  that  I  wish  to  make  entirely  clear. 
From  the  older  point  of  view,  one  might  say  that  a  ^-system  may  lead 
to  ‘over-rationalization’  and,  consequently,  take  ‘all  the  joy  out  of  life’. 
Such  objections  are  entirely  unjustified.  First  of  all,  the  ^-system  leads 
to  shallow,  but  often  clever  verbal  interplay  of  definitions,  mostly  non¬ 
similar  in  structure  to  the  world  and  ourselves,  representing  a  species  of 
apologetics,  and  usually  called  ‘rationalization’.  The  ^-system  leads  to 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

structural  adjustment  of  language  and  s.r ,  and  a  structural  enquiry, 
resulting  in  understanding.  It  makes  shallow  infantile  ‘rationalization’, 
‘wishful  thinking’,  and  apologetics  of  different  brands  impossible,  but 
leads  to  a  higher  order  of  adult  intelligence,  based  on  proper  evaluation. 
In  mere  ‘rationalization’,  we  often  have  clever,  but  shallow,  infantile 
evaluation,  based  on  the  ignorance  or  disregard  of  structural  facts,  which 
alone  make  up  the  content  of  all  ‘knowledge’.  In  a  ^-system,  by  elimi¬ 
nating  the  sources  of  infantile  evaluation  and  reactions,  we  supply  the 
nervous  system  of  the  infant  with  uniquely  appropriate  material,  so  that 
it  may  develop  into  a  ‘normal’  adult.  In  the  older  system,  instead  of 
helping,  we  hindered  the  development  of  adult  standards  of  evaluation, 
with  well-known  results.  There  is  nothing  wrong  with  ‘human  nature’ 
or  the  majority  of  nervous  systems  as  such,  but  there  is  something 
definitely  wrong  with  our  educational  methods  inside  and  outside  our 
schools. 

There  is  another  point  which  is  still  more  convincing  and,  perhaps, 
even  more  decisive.  The  above-mentioned  older  objections  are  due  to  s.r 
based  on  the  play  upon  elementcdistic  terms  and  are  a  neurological  impos¬ 
sibility.  The  organism  works  as-a-whole,  and  in  the  cyclic  nerve  currents 
it  is  impossible,  by  any  known  educational  methods,  to  abolish  ‘emotions’. 
But  what  can  be  accomplished  is  this:  By  training  in  silence  on  the 
un-speakable  objective  levels  and  in  differentiation  between  different 
orders  of  abstractions,  we  automatically  abolish  the  infantile  identifica¬ 
tions  and  evaluations;  we  introduce  a  ‘delay  in  action’,  which  is  the 
physiological  means  for  getting  our  ‘emotions’  under  control  and  for 
engaging  the  fuller  co-operation  of  the  cortex.  Infantile  ‘over-emotion¬ 
alism’  is  abolished  in  the  adult.  Infants  would  behave  as  infants,  but 
this  infantile  behaviour  would  not  be  carried  into  the  period  when 
adulthood  should  begin.  The  ‘emotions’  are  not  abolished  but  ‘sub¬ 
limated’. 

It  is  true  that  many  standards  would  be  changed.  For  instance,  we 
might  roughly  say  that  an  infantile  type  is  often  bored  by  a  symphony 
and  that  jazz  satisfies  his  infantile  make-up.  If  we  were  to  take  such  an 
infantile  grown-up  and  compel  him  to  listen  only  to  symphonies,  this 
would  not  be  kind,  nor  would  it  transform  his  infantile  s.r  into  adult 
reactions.  But,  if  unhampered  by  inappropriate  semantic  and  so  neuro¬ 
logical  training,  he  would  be  free  to  develop  normally  into  an  adult,  and 
his  own  preference  would  be  toward  a  symphony  rather  than  toward 
primitive  throbbings,  his  enjoyment,  then,  would  not  be  diminished,  but, 
perhaps,  made  fuller. 

IDENTIFICATION  AND  VISUALIZATION 

Similar  analysis  could  be  made  of  all  human  interests,  with  the 
result  that  the  forcing  of  adult  standards  on  infantile  types  would 
remain  unkind;  but  the  sad  part  of  it  is  that,  in  spite  of  repressions, 
imiHJsitions . ,  these  imposed  standards  remain  largely  ineffective  and  are 
abandoned  as  soon  as  compulsion  ends.  Not  so,  if,  by  proper  semantic 
education,  we  allow  the  infant  to  develop  normally  into  adulthood.  The 
new  standards  are  not  imposed,  but  become  his  own.  We  do  not  then 
need  compulsion  from  without,  because  the  new  standards  act  from 
within  and  become  pleasurable  and  lasting. 

A  similar  process  is  very  obvious  in  the  practice  of  psychotherapy. 
The  standards  of  evaluation  of  the  patients  are  usually  inappropriate 
to  the  conditions  of  modern  life  and  often  clash  sharply  with  the 
accepted  standards.  Moralizing  without  changing  by  other  means  his 
ntundards  of  evaluation  never  accomplishes  any  satisfactory  therapeutic 
results ;  quite  the  contrary,  it  often  does  a  great  deal  of  harm.  A  physi¬ 
cian  would  be  very  unwise  to  censure  or  condemn  a  symptom,  as  this 
would  preclude  any  beneficial  results.  What  physicians  usually  do  is  to 
treat  any  symptom,  no  matter  how  repulsive,  with  great  sympathy  and 
understanding.  They  do  not  attempt  to  change  the  symptom  directly, 
but,  by  the  understanding  of  its  main  mechanism,  they  try  to  change  the 
patient's  standards  of  evaluation,  of  which  the  symptom  is  only  a  conse¬ 
quence.  If  at  all  successful  and  the  physician  succeeds  in  changing  the 
inappropriate  standards  of  evaluation,  the  symptom  then  automatically 
disappears.  In  daily  life,  we  usually  attack  only  the  symptoms,  disre¬ 
garding  mostly  the  underlying  structural  foundations;  this  method  ac¬ 
counts  for  the  doubtful  results. 

Under  infantile  standards  we  apply  similar  methods  to  society. 
M  any  may  want  to  abolish  wars,  revolutions,  ‘depressions’. ,  but  they  do 
not  investigate  structurally  deep  enough.  They  attack  the  symptoms, 
instead  of  analysing  the  structural  issues  which  produce  these  symptoms. 

In  conclusion,  let  us  notice  that  the  analysis  of  a  semantic  mechan¬ 
ism  on  a  printed  page  requires  new  terms  and  the  co-ordination  of 
many  details . ,  which,  at  first,  do  not  always  appear  so  simple,  although, 
once  the  theoretical  side  is  mastered,  the  educational  application  is  genu¬ 
inely  simple.  Thus,  the  analysis  of  the  one-,  two-,  three- . ,  and  oo-valued 
semantics  may  appear  difficult,  yet,  in  practice,  it  only  amounts  to  im¬ 
parting  through  our  educational  systems  a  semantic  flexibility,  instead 
of  fixity;  to  acquiring  the  inclination  of  starting  with  observations,  fol¬ 
lowed  by  descriptions,  from  which  we  pass  to  inferences,  in  connection 
with  awareness  of  these  ordered  processes , .  In  training,  it  is  enough  to 
abolish  identification,  and  this  is  easily  achieved  once  we  have  produced 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

the  proper  method,  based  on  a  language  of  new  A  structure.  This  last 
actually  consists  of  but  a  few,  new,  simple,  and  common-sense  terms,  the 
analysis  of  which  helps  us  to  discover  a  few  simple  and  invariant  psycho- 
physiological  relations.  Thus,  identification  is  eliminated  by  starting  with 
an  ordinal  language  and  method.  Once  we  get  the  feel  of  the  horizontal 
and  vertical  stratification,  and  learn  to  differentiate  between  orders  of 
abstractions,  identification  disappears.  Silence  on  the  objective  levels 
produces  a  ‘delay’,  involves  and  trains  the  cortex ;  our  reactions  become 
more  and  more  intelligent  in  the  human  sense . ,  . ;  and  the  most  impor¬ 
tant  results  are  reached  by  the  simplest  means. 

The  training  in  visualization  and  the  abolishing  of  objectification 
are  the  first  and  most  important  steps  for  a  complete  elimination  of 
identification.  When  this  first  step  is  achieved,  the  rest  is  comparatively 
a  very  simple  task. 

But  the  reader  may  ask  why  we  should  have  to  use  such  unfamiliar 
and,  therefore,  seemingly  difficult  methods  to  achieve  such  obvious 
results.  Do  we  really  need  a  ^-system  to  achieve  the  results  which,  even 
in  an  ^-system,  are  known  to  be  desirable?  The  answer  is  weighty 
with  consequences  and  should  be  taken  very  earnestly.  In  the  ^-system, 
these  desirable  results  could  not  be  attained  generally,  because  the  struc¬ 
ture  of  our  old  languages  and  the  method  hampered  rather  than  helped 
us.  New  theories,  new  systems . ,  are  built  precisely  with  the  aim  to 
facilitate  adjustment.  Those  questions  which  in  the  older  days  were  sup¬ 
posed  to  be  ‘philosophical’,  ‘metaphysical’ . ,  the  application  of  which  re¬ 
quired  a  high  grade  of  intelligence,  knowledge . ,  to  start  with,  become, 
in  the  new  way,  simply  a  problem  of  the  structure  of  the  language  we 
use.  All  the  issues  appear  closely  interrelated.  We  do  not  require  ‘high 
intelligence’  nor  ‘higher  education’  to  begin  with,  in  order  to  obtain  these 
desirable  results,  as  the  results  follow  automatically  from  the  structure 
of  the  language  we  accept  and  teach  our  children.  Thus,  the  older  im¬ 
possibilities  are  achieved  simply  and  automatically,  with  the  greatest 
possible  efficiency  and  the  most  lasting  results. 

CHAPTER  XXIX 

ON  NON-ARISTOTELIAN  TRAINING 

If  the  preliminary  experiments  described  above  should  be  fully  upheld, 
an  important  fact  in  the  physiology  of  the  cortex  will  be  disclosed — namely, 
that  new  connections  can  be  established  in  the  cortex,  not  only  in  the  areas 
of  optimal  excitability,  but  also  in  those  areas  which  are  in  one  or  another 
phase  of  inhibition.  (394)  p*  pavlov 

That  wretched  monosyllable  4*all"  has  caused  mathematicians  more 
trouble  than  all  the  rest  of  the  dictionary.  (23>  e,  t.  bell 

. . .  these  observations  .  .  .  point  to  the  view  ...  that  the  mechanism 
of  development  of  a  conditional  reflex  and  the  mechanism  of  external  in¬ 
hibition  are  somehow  similar,  and  that  the  process  of  external  inhibition 
bears  some  relation  to  the  development  of  new  connections  between  dif¬ 
ferent  cortical  elements.  (394)  t  p*  favlov 

In  particular  the  factor  of  duration  of  time  was  shown  to  act  as  a  real 
physiological  stimulus,  and  experiments  were  described  in  which  definite 
time  intervals  appeared  as  effective  stimuli.  (394)  I.  p.  pavlov 

The  procedure  for  training  in  the  present  system  by  the  aid  of  the 
Differential  follows  directly  from  the  theoretical  considerations  which 
have  been  explained  in  the  foregoing  chapters.  The  contentions  of  the 
system  have  been  verified  experimentally  in  all  cases  where  it  has  been 
consistently  applied. 

The  main  aim  is  to  acquire  the  coveted  'consciousness  of  abstract¬ 
ing’,  on  which  non-delusional  evaluation  is  based,  and  which  becomes  the 
foundation  for  non-pathological  s.r  and  sanity.  As  we  deal  with  different 
aspects  of  an  organic'  process  which  inherently  works  as-a-whole,  all 
these  aspects  appear  strictly  interrelated.  We  have  found  by  analysis 
two  main  aspects  which  underlie  the  others.  It  appears  that  the  A 
structure  leads  to  semantic  states  which  can  be  formulated  as  the  feeling 
of  ‘allness’,  and  that,  through  the  ‘is’  of  identity,  it  leads  to  the  con¬ 
fusion  of  orders  of  abstractions.  Thus,  for  training,  the  program  is 
readily  sketched :  we  must  first  eliminate  the  'allness’ ;  then  we  must 
impart  this  peculiar  stratification  of  'human  knowledge*  which  follows 
from  the  rejection  of  the  'is*  of  identity;  in  other  words,  eliminate 
identification.  It  becomes  also  obvious  that  a  theory  of  sanity  cannot  be 
separated  from  a  ^-system. 

Since  the  organism  works  as-a-whole,  all  nerve  centres  should  be 
trained  so  as  to  impart  a  permanent,  lasting,  and  ingrained  feeling  of 
abstracting.  Once  this  has  been  achieved,  the  recognition  of  the  vertical 
and  the  horizontal  stratification  of  human  knowledge  becomes,  also,  a 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

permanent  semantic  state.  This  gives  us  a  kind  of  semantic  co-ordinate 
system,  in  which  we  can  represent  any  life  situation  or  scientific  situa¬ 
tion,  or  any  difficulty,  with  great  clarity,  and  so  evaluate  them  properly. 
In  verbal  theoretical  explanations  this  procedure  appears  complex;  in 
practice,  it  is  not  so.  It  is  extremely  simple,  provided  we  persistently 
follow  the  instructions,  which  are  based  on  theory  and  practice.  Above 
all,  we  must  not  expect  results  too  quickly. 

For  reasons  already  explained,  students  should  not  only  hear  and  see 
the  explanations,  but  should  also  perform  for  themselves,  should  handle 
the  labels  and  indicate  with  their  hands  the  different  orders  of  abstrac¬ 
tions.  After  preliminary  explanations,  the  children  should  be  called  to 
the  Differential,  and,  using  their  hands,  they  should  explain  it.  This 
applies,  also,  to  grown-ups  and  to  patients.  The  Differential  is  not  only 
a  permanent  structural  and  semantic  reminder  which  affects  many  nerve 
centres;  it  is  more,  for,  in  training,  it  conveys  the  natural  order  through 
all  centres.  Any  reader  who  refuses  to  use  his  hands  in  this  connection 
handicaps  himself  seriously,  because  ordering  abolishes  identification. 

