Fundamentally,  there  is  no  structural  difference  between  the  use  of 
language  and  the  use  of  any  other  mechanical  device;  they  all  involve 
reflex-action.  It  is  well  known  that  any  pianist,  telegraph  operator, 
typist,  or  chauffeur  would  not  be  a  successful  performer  if  he  had  to 
meditate  about  every  move  he  makes.  As  a  rule,  verbal  explanations  of 
the  working  of  the  respective  machines  are  necessary  at  first,  yet  the 
structural  reflex-skill  required  is  actually  acquired  by  prolonged  practice, 
where  again  all  nervous  centres  are  involved.  We  all  know  what  amaz¬ 
ing  unconscious  reflex-adjustments  a  good  driver  of  a  car  can  make  in 
case  of  unexpected  danger. 

A  similar  semantic  reflex-skill  is  required  in  handling  our  linguistic 
apparatus,  and,  in  case  of  danger,  of  sudden  turns  and  twists,  our 
orientation  should  also  work  unconsciously.  That  is  why  the  structural 
feeling  for  the  working  of  the  apparatus  es  required.  All  nerve  centres 
should  be  trained  to  employ  the  most  effective  means  to  affect  the  organ¬ 
ism  and  its  working  as-a- whole. 

The  semantic  training  of  grown-ups  and  that  of  children  do  not 
differ  in  essentials.  Children  have  fewer  established  habits,  have  more 
fluid  s.r  than  adults,  and,  therefore,  the  results  with  children  are 
achieved  more  quickly  and  last  better. 

I  shall  now  explain  how  to  train  children.  A  similar  method  applies 
to  adults,  also;  but  an  adult  should  not  trust  himself  too  much  that 
he  has  completely  acquired  ‘consciousness  of  abstracting’.  He  must  train 
very  thoroughly.  I  speak  from  personal  experience.  Although  I  have 

ON  NON-ARISTOTELIAN  TRAINING 

the  Differential  before  my  eyes  practically  always  and  am  the  author 
uf  the  present  system,  yet  every  once  in  a  while  I  catch  myself  with  one 
of  the  old  vicious  semantic  habits.  Habits,  and  particularly  linguistic 
habits,  may  be  very  pernicious  and  difficult  to  change. 

We  do  not  need  to 
Ktart  with  profound  theo¬ 
retical  considerations;  we 
may  start  with  any  famil¬ 
iar  daily-life  objects  and  a 
microscope  or  magnifying 
glass.  We  bring  the  Dif¬ 
ferential  into  the  class¬ 
room,  with  labels  (except 
one)  detached,  but  do  not 
proceed  to  explain  it.  We 
start  with  a  little  semantic 
experiment  upon  the  sub¬ 
ject  of  ‘allness’.  We  take 
any  actual  object,  an  apple, 
a  pencil,  or  anything  else 
which  is  familiar  to  the 
children.  The  principles  in¬ 
volved  are  entirely  general 
and  apply  to  all  objective 
levels  in  a  very  similar 
way.  We  tell  them  that  we 
will  have  some  fun.  Then 
we  ask  them  to  tell  us 
*  everything"  or  ‘all’  about 
the  object  in  question;  in 
this  case,  the  apple.  When 
the  children  begin  to  tell 
us  ‘all*  about  it,  we  write 
the  characteristics  down 
on  the  black-board.  This 

last  is  vital .  We  must  have  a  visual  and  extensional  record  of  the 

ascribed  characteristics.  When  the  children  have  exhausted  their  ingen¬ 

uity  in  telling  ‘all*  about  the  apple,  we  should  not  be  satisfied.  We 
should  make  them  doubt,  urging  them  that,  perhaps,  they  did  not  tell 
‘all"  about  it,  using  the  word  ‘all*  continually.  The  term  ‘all’  should  be 
stressed  and  repeated  to  the  point  of  the  children's  being  thoroughly 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

annoyed  with  the  term.  The  more  they  learn  to  dislike  this  term,  the 
better.  We  are  already  training  a  most  important  s.r. 

We  should  not  be  satisfied  with  the  best  answers  made  by  the  most 
intelligent  children.  In  a  large  class  there  may  even  be  a  child  who  tells 
us  bluntly  that  it  is  impossible  to  tell  'air  about  the  apple.  We  should 
concentrate  on  the  less  intelligent  children  and  deal  particularly  with 
them.  There  are  many  and  important  reasons  for  this.  For  one  thing, 
the  children  become  more  eager  and  more  interested  in  their  own 
achievement.  Then,  too,  they  easily  learn  by  example  what  a  difference 
in  intelligence  means.  This  understanding  of  the  shortcomings  of  others 
has  an  important  semantic,  broadening  effect.  In  life,  numerous  serious 
'hurts’  occur  precisely  because  we  do  not  appreciate  some  natural  short¬ 
comings  and  expect  too  much .  Expecting  too  much  leads  to  very  harm¬ 
ful  semantic  shocks,  disappointments,  suspicions,  fears,  hopelessness, 
helplessness,  pessimism , . 

The  less  bright  children  benefit  also.  The  experiment  is  conducted 
on  their  level,  so  that  they  also  have  the  maximum  chance  to  benefit. 
Soon  the  children  begin  to  argue  about  the  new  method  and  to  explain  it 
to  each  other  by  themselves ;  for  we  have  touched  very  vital  and  complex 
semantic  processes  of  'curiosity*,  ‘achievement’,  'ambitions’. ,  character¬ 
istics  strongly  represented  in  the  child’s  life.  We  evade,  also,  the  danger 
of  taking  clever,  yet  shallow,  replies  as  standard.  The  last  error  would 
be  fatal,  as  the  issues  are  fundamental,  and  we  should  not  rest  content 
with  mere  verbal  brilliancy. 

When  the  subject  seems  exhausted,  and  the  list  of  characteristics 
of  the  apple  ‘complete’  (we  repeatedly  make  certain  that  the  children 
assume  they  have  told  us  ‘all’  about  it),  we  cut  the  apple  into  pieces 
and  show  the  children  experimentally,  using  eventually  a  microscope  or 
a  magnifying  glass,  that  they  did  not  tell  us  ‘all’  about  the  apple. 

It  may  appear  to  some  educators  that  such  training  might  involve 
some  undesirable  psycho-logical  results.  But  later,  when  consciousness 
of  abstracting  is  acquired  as  a  lasting  semantic  state,  this  fear  appears 
entirely  unjustified,  as  explained  further  on.  The  first  step  in  dealing 
with  ‘reality’  seems  to  demand  that  we  abandon  entirely  the  older  delu¬ 
sional  methods. 

When  the  children  have  become  thoroughly  convinced  of  the  non- 
allness  and  the  impossibility  of  ‘allness’,  we  are  ready  to  explain  to 
them  what  the  word  abstracting  means,  using  again  the  terms  ‘all’  and 
'not  all’.  We  show  them  a  small  rotating  fan  and  explain  to  them  about 
the  separate  blades  which  when  rotating  we  see  as  a  disk.  In  such 
demonstrations  we  can  go  as  far  as  desired.  All  science  supplies  data 

ON  NON-ARISTOTELIAN  TRAINING 

(e.g.,  the  dynamic  structure  of  seemingly  solid  materials).  We  must 
select  the  data  according  to  the  age  of  the  children  or  the  knowledge  of 
the  grown-ups.  Everything  said  should  be  demonstrated  empirically 
from  a  structural  point  of  view. 

The  next  step  is  to  demonstrate  practically  that  an  object  taken 
from  different  points  of  view  has  different  aspects  for  different  ob¬ 
servers.  We  may  use  different  objects  or  wooden  geometrical  figures 
painted  with  different  colours  on  different  sides.  We  may  place  the 
object  in  different  positions  and  ask  the  children  their  descriptions, 
which  should  be  written  down.  The  descriptions  will,  of  course,  be  dif¬ 
ferent,  and  the  children  should  be  made  thoroughly  aware  of  this.  In  all 
these  preliminary  exercises  the  ingenuity  of  the  teacher  has  a  vast  field 
for  exercise,  and  we  do  not  need  to  enter  into  details. 

When  all  these  results  have  been  accomplished  on  the  level  of  the 
least  developed  child,  we  then  proceed  to  explain  the  Differential  as  a 
structural  diagrammatic  summary  of  the  above  results.  It  is  a  positive 
condition  that  the  new  language  be  used,  and  that  an  object  be  described 
as  an  abstraction  of  some  order.  If  this  vital  structural  point  is  disre¬ 
garded,  most  of  the  psycho-logical  semantic  benefits  of  ‘non-allness’  are 
either  lost  or  greatly  lessened.  We  should  make  this  term  clear  to  the 
child,  and  should  train  him  in  its  use,  as  it  appears  uniquely  in  accord¬ 
ance  with  the  structure  and  the  functioning  of  his  nervous  system.  The 
child  should  be  warned  that  the  old  languages  are  not  structurally  suit¬ 
able  for  their  future  understanding  and  semantic  adjustment.  This 
warning  should  be  repeated  seriously  and  persistently. 

Having  eliminated  ‘allness’,  we  begin  to  eliminate  the  ‘is’  of  iden¬ 
tity,  which,  at  the  primitive  and  infantile  stages  of  racial  human  develop¬ 
ment,  happens  to  be  extremely  ingrained  in  our  s.r,  embodied,  as  it  is, 
in  the  structure  of  our  daily  language.  As  was  explained  before,  identi¬ 
fication  is  a  natural  reaction  of  the  animal,  the  primitive  man,  and  the 
infant,  reflected  and  systematized  in  the  A  and  older  linguistic  systems, 
which,  through  the  ignorance  or  neglect  of  parents  and  teachers,  is  not 
counteracted  and  so  is  continued  into  the  lives  of  children  and  grown¬ 
ups,  until,  finally,  it  becomes  embodied  in  the  structure  of  what  we  call 
‘civilization’  (1933).  In  a  theory  of  adjustment  or  sanity  we  must 
counteract  this  animalistic,  primitive,  or  infantile  s.r  by  building  a 
/4-system,  which  entirely  rejects  the  ‘is’  of  identity. 

In  the  ^-system,  through  the  use  of  this  ‘is’,  different  orders  of  ab¬ 
stractions  were  unconsciously  identified  in  values,  in  obvious  contradic¬ 
tion  to  empirical  facts.  In  other  words,  being  identified  in  values,  they 
were  treated  as  of  one  order  or  on  one  level  and  so  did  not  necessitate 

474  VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OK  TIME-BINDING 

indefinitely  many  expanded  orders  of  horizontal  and  vertical  differences. 
Similarly  with  the  objectively  meaningless  ‘infinite  velocity’  of  a  process, 
it  does  no*  allow  order.  But  once  we  have  a  finite  velocity  of  a-  process, 
order  makes  its  appearance  as  an  indispensable  aspect  of  a  process.  The 
finite  and  known  velocity  of  nerve  currents  on  the  physic o-mathe- 
matical  levels  results  in  ordered  series  on  physiological  levels ;  in  non¬ 
identity  and  proper  evaluation  on  semantic  levels ,  and  in  orders  of 
abstractions  and  a  non-aristotelian  system  and  general  semantics  on 
verbal  levels . 

Once  we  abolish  in  our  language  the  always  false  to  fact  ‘is*  of 
identity,  we  automatically  stop  identifying  different  orders  of  abstrac¬ 
tions.  We  do  not  assume  that  they  represent  one  level,  which  becomes 
expanded  into  a  natural  ordered  series  of  indefinitely  many  different 
orders  of  abstractions,  with  different  values.  Adjustment,  therefore, 
sanity  and  adulthood  of  humanity,  depend  on  proper  evaluation,  impos¬ 
sible  under  conditions  of  delusional  identification  of  fundamentally 
different  orders  of  abstractions.  We  must  then  train  the  s.r  in  the  natural 
physiological  order  of  the  process  of  abstracting  which,  on  the  psycho¬ 
logical  levels,  become  non-pathological  semantic  evaluation. 

In  the  case  of  training  in  the  ‘non-allness’,  it  was  necessary  to  start 
with  the  analysis  of  an  ordinary  object,  to  give  the  child  a  simplified 
theoretical  explanation,  and  then  to  demonstrate  it  empirically.  The 
child  will  be  easily  ‘convinced',  but  this  conviction  is  not  enough,  because 
it  will  not  affect  permanently  his  s.r .  We  explain  this  difficulty  very 
simply,  telling  him  that,  although  he  ‘agreed’  with  our  presentation,  he 
will  vety  soon  forget’  it,  and  so  we  need  a  permanent  visual  reminder 
which  is  supplied  by  the  strings,  freely  hanging  from  the  event  and 
from  the  object,  and  indicating  those  ‘characteristics  left  out’,  or  not 
abstracted. 

In  the  elimination  of  the  ‘is*  of  identity,  we  have  also  structurally 
interconnected  aspects.  The  rejection  of  this  ‘is’  becomes  an  equivalent 
to  the  stressing  of  the  stratification  in  the  structure  of  ‘human  knowl¬ 
edge’.  To  facilitate  training,  we  should  stress  both  aspects  by  ail  avail¬ 
able  means,  and  should  involve  as  many  nerve  centres  as  we  can.  Thus 
through  the  ear  we  stress  verbally  the  formula  of  the  rejection  of  the 
‘is'  of  identity  by  indicating  with  our  finger  the  different  orders  of 
abstractions,  in  the  meantime,  affecting  the  eye  while  we  repeat  ‘this 
is  not  this'.  We  utilize  the  kinesthetic  centres,  not  only  by  pointing  the 
finger  to  different  levels,  but  also  by  making  broad  motions  with  our 
hands,  indicating  the  stratifications.  We  should  train  in  both  horizontal 
and  vertical  stratifications,  always  using  the  hands.  The  horizontal 

ON  NON-ARISTOTELIAN  TRAINING 

stratification  indicates  the  difference,  or  ordering  of  different  order  ab¬ 
stractions;  the  vertical  stratification  indicates  the  difference  between 
‘man’  and  ‘animal’  and  the  differences  between  the  different  absolute 
individuals.  In  both  cases,  the  semantic  effect  of  the  ‘is’  of  identity  is 
counteracted. 

The  above  procedure  in  training  has  an  important  neurological 
foundation.  Besides  what  has  been  explained  already,  we  find  that  a 
word  has  four  principal  characteristics  with  corresponding  cortical  rep¬ 
resentations.  A  word  can  be  heard,  seen,  spoken,  and  written.  Lan¬ 
guage,  thus,  involves  many  nervous  functions ;  e.g.,  auditory,  visual,  and 
diversified  motor  nerve  centres,  interconnected  in  a  most  complex  net¬ 
work  of  ‘horizontal’  and  ‘vertical’  fibres.  The  use  of  the  Differential 
involves  all  available  nervous  channels;  we  see,  we  hear,  we  speak,  we 
move  our  hands,  indicating  stratification,  *non-allness’ . ,  engaging  large 
cortical  areas,  and  so  have  the  maximum  probability  of  affecting,  through 
non-el  methods,  the  organism-as-a-whole.  The  Differential  gives  us  a 
special,  simplified,  yet  advanced  interracial  structural  symbolism  (1933), 
which  affects  wide  nervous  areas  of  the  illiterate,  or  nearly  illiterate  per¬ 
son,  or  of  the  infant . ,  which  otherwise  could  not  be  affected.  It  is  known 
that  extensive  reading  and  writing,  as  well  as  speaking  a  number  of 
languages,  has  a  very  marked  cultural  effect  and  helps  visualization  and 
consciousness  of  abstracting.  The  reason  can  be  found,  perhaps,  in  the 
fact  that  a  learned  polyglot,  or  a  scholar,  utilizes  many  nerve  centres  in 
co-ordination.  In  the  older  days,  unless  one  became  a  scholar  of  some 
sort,  it  was  extremely  difficult  to  train  these  nerve  centres  in  co-ordina¬ 
tion.  With  the  Differential  we  can  train  simply,  and  comparatively 
quickly,  all  necessary  nerve  centres,  and  so  impart  to  children  and  to 
practically  illiterate  persons  the  cultural  results  of  prolonged  and  dif¬ 
ficult  university  training  without  any  complicated  technique.  This  last 
should  always  be  regarded  as  a  means  and  not  as  an  end. 

In  my  experience  with  children,  and  with  men  from  the  lowest 
‘mentality’  to  the  highest,  the  non-identity  of  different  orders  of  ab¬ 
stractions  is  usually  taken  lightly.  It  all  seems  so  simple  and  self-evident 
that  no  one  assumes  that  there  could  be  serious,  unconscious,  structural, 
semantic,  linguistic,  and  neurological  delusional  mechanisms  involved, 
which  cannot  be  reached  without  specially  devised  non-identity  training. 
The  delusional  feelings  of  ‘allness’  and  ‘identity’  are  peculiar  in  that,  like 
other  pathological  states,  they  tend  to  appear  as  all-pervading.  It  is  the 
most  difficult  in  daily,  as  well  as  in  medical,  experience  to  make  a 
breach  in  this  all-pervading  tendency,  but  once  this  delusional  state  is 
even  partially  replaced  by  glimpses  of  m.o  reality,  the  further  elabora- 

VI 1.  THE  MECHANISM  OK  TIME-BINDING 

tion  and  training  in  adjustment  to  ‘reality*  becomes  comparatively 
simple.  Thus,  in  practice,  if  we  start  with  ordinary  objects,  feelings, 
and  words,  and  train  in  the  non-allness  and  non-identity,  any  child,  or 
any  grown-up,  even  an  imbecile,  can  follow  this  easily.  Once  this  feel¬ 
ing  has  been  acquired,  and  in  most  cases  it  is  only  a  matter  of  method 
and  persistence  to  acquire  it,  the  main  semantic  blockage  has  been  elimi¬ 
nated,  and  the  rest  is  comparatively  easy.  I  have  had  no  opportunity  yet 
to  verify  it,  but  I  am  convinced  that  even  a  superior  imbecile  could  be 
trained  to  differentiate  between  descriptions  and  inferences,  after  he  has 
learned  to  differentiate  between  the  objective  levels  and  words.  In  such 
a  training  with  imbeciles  we  can  go  in  simplicity  as  far  as  desired ;  thus, 
if  the  given  individual  is  hungry  and  says  he  wants  ‘bread*,  we  hand  him 
a  label  which  is  attached  to  the  objective  bread,  and  he  would  be  quickly 
made  to  realize  that  the  symbol  is  not  the  thing  symbolized. 

It  should  be  realized  that  in  the  training  we  should  impart  the 
obvious  fact  that  words  or  labels  represent  conveniences,  and  are  not 
the  objects  or  feelings  themselves.  We  should  carry  the  labels  in  our 
pockets,  so  to  say,  as  we  carry  our  money,  or  checks  for  hats  or  trunks, 
and  not  identify  them  ‘emotionally*  with  what  they  eventually  stand  for, 
because  monetary  standards  change,  and  hats  and  trunks  get  exchanged, 
lost  or  burnt.  To  accomplish  this,  we  must  have  objective  labels ,  which 
we  may  handle  and  carry  in  our  pockets,  and  also  an  objective  something 
to  which  we  can  attach  the  labels.  In  the  present  ^-system  the  rejection 
of  the  ‘is*  of  identity  is  complete  and  applies  to  all  levels.  Thus,  the 
event  is  not  the  object ;  the  object  is  not  the  label ;  description  is  not 
inference ;  a  proper  name  is  not  a  class  name . ;  the  characteristics 
ascribed  to  events,  objects,  or  labels  are  not  identical,  an  object,  a  situa¬ 
tion,  or  a  feeling  is  not  identical  with  another  object,  situation  or  feel¬ 
ing  . ,  . ,  all  of  which  establishes  a  structure  of  horizontal  and  vertical 
stratification.  At  an  early  stage  of  the  training,  we  must  begin  with 
what  appears  the  simplest  and  most  obvious  to  the  child ;  namely,  the 
absence  of  identity  between  the  word  and  the  object,  or  that  the  word 
is  not  the  object.  We  accomplish  this  by  stressing  that  one  cannot  sit 
on  the  word  ‘chair*,  that  one  cannot  write  with  the  word  ‘pencil*,  or 
drink  the  word  ‘milk*, .  These  simple  facts  should  always  be  trans¬ 
lated  into  the  generalized  form ,  indicating  with  the  hand  the  two  levels 
on  the  Differential,  conjointly  with  the  fundamental  formula  ‘this  is  not 
this*.  We  should  always  tell  the  child  that  the  formula  is  entirely  gen¬ 
eral,  but  for  the  present  we  should  not  go  into  any  further  details. 

At  this  stage  we  can  advance  one  step  further,  still  using  only 
ordinary  objects  as  examples,  and  explain  the  un-speakable  character 

ON  NON-ARISTOTELIAN  TRAINING 

nf  the  object;  namely,  that  whatever  we  can  see,  taste,  smell,  handle., 
ih  an  absolute  individual  (demonstrated  empirically)  and  unspeakable . 
We  then  take  the  apple,  bite  it  (actually  performing),  and  explain  that, 
uH hough  the  object  is  not  words . ,  yet  we  are  very  much  interested,  and 
traditionally  so,  in  this  un-speakable  level.  Then  we  explain  repeatedly 
mid  at  length,  emphasizing  the  important  principle  of  evaluation,  that 
to  live  we  must  deal  with  the  objective  level;  yet  this  level  cannot  be 
reached  by  words  alone.  As  a  rule,  it  takes  a  few  weeks,  or  even  months, 
before  this  simple  s.r  is  established,  the  old  identification  being  psycho- 
physiologically  very  much  ingrained.  Once  this  is  established,  we  stress 
I  Ik*  fact  that  we  must  handle,  look,  and  listen  . ,  never  speak,  but  remain 
Nilcnt,  outwardly  as  well  as  inwardly,  in  order  to  find  ourselves  on  the 
objective  level.  Here  we  come  to  one  of  the  most  difficult  steps  in  the 
whole  training.  This  ‘silence  on  the  objective  level*  involves  checking 
upon  neutral  grounds  of  a  great  many  ‘emotions*,  ‘preconceived  ideas*,. 
'I  bis  step,  in  the  meantime,  appears  as  the  first,  the  simplest,  most  obvi- 
»  ms  and  most  effective  psychophysiological  ‘reality-factor*  in  eliminating 
t  lie  delusional  identifications. 

Once  the  child  is  thoroughly  aware  of  the  absence  of  identity  be¬ 
tween  words  and  objects,  we  may  attempt  the  expanding  of  the  notion 
‘object’  to  the  ‘objective  levels*.  Such  training  requires  persistence,  even 
though  it  seems  fundamentally  simple.  We  demonstrate  and  explain  that 
uction,  actual  bodily  performance,  and  all  objective  happenings,  are  not 
words.  At  a  later  stage  we  explain  that  a  toothache,  or  demonstrate  that 
the  actual  pain  of  a  prick . ,  are  not  words,  and  belong  to  the  objective 
unspeakable  levels .  Still  later,  we  enlarge  this  notion  to  cover  all  ordi¬ 
nary  objects,  all  actions,  functions,  performances,  processes  going  on 
outside  our  skin,  and  also  all  immediate  feelings,  ‘emotions’,  ‘moods*., 
going  on  inside  our  skins  which  also  are  not  words.  We  enlarge  the 
’silence’  to  all  happenings  on  the  objective  levels  and  the  animalistic, 
’human  nature’  begins  to  be  ‘changed’  into  quite  a  different  human 
nature. 

When  this  is  accomplished  the  rest  is  much  simplified,  although 
1 1 inch  more  subtle.  We  explain,  as  simply  as  we  can,  the  problems  of 
evaluation  and  s.r ,  stressing  and  making  obvious  the  fact  that  our  actual 
lives  are  lived  entirely  on  objective,  un-speakable  levels.  We  illustrate 
this  all  the  time  by  simple  examples,  such  as  our  sleeping,  or  eating,  any 
activities,  or  pain,  or  pleasure,  or  immediate  feelings,  ‘emotions*.,  which 
arc  not  words.  If  words  are  not  translated  into  the  first  order  unspeak¬ 
able  effects,  with  the  result  that  we  do  not  do  something,  or  do  not  feel 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

something,  or  do  not  learn  or  remember  something . ,  such  words  take 
no  effect  and  become  useless  noises. 

One  fact  should  be  stressed;  namely,  that  the  problem  is  not  one 
of  ‘inadequacy  of  words*.  We  can  always  invent  ‘adequate  words*,  but 
even  the  most  ideal  and  structurally  adequate  language  will  not  be  the 
things  or  feelings  themselves.  On  this  point  there  is  no  possible  com¬ 
promise .  Many  people  still  utter  quite  happily,  pessimistic  expressions 
about  the  present  language ,  based  on  silent  assumptions  connected  with 
unconscious  delusional  identification,  and  believe  that  in  an  ‘adequate* 
language  the  word  by  some  good  primitive  magic  would  be  identical  with 
the  thing.  The  more  the  denial  of  the  ‘is*  of  identity  is  driven  home,  and 
the  sooner  it  becomes  a  part  of  one*s  s.r,  the  sooner  the  ‘consciousness  of 
abstracting*  is  acquired. 

We  are  now  ready  to  go  further  into  the  theory  of  natural  evalua¬ 
tion  based  on  natural  order .  As  a  preliminary  step,  we  must  show  re¬ 
peatedly  the  difference  between  descriptions  and  inferences,  using  simple 
examples.  We  must  stress  the  fact  that  words,  as  such,  must  be  divided 
into  two  categories:  a  first,  of  descriptive,  in  the  main,  functional 
words ;  and  a  second,  of  inferential  words,  which  involve  assumptions  or 
inferences.  Thus,  ‘A  does  not  get  up  in  the  morning*  may  be  considered 
as  descriptive.  If  A  explicitly  refuses  to  get  up,  the  statement  ‘A  refuses 
to  get  up  in  the  morning’  may  also  be  considered  as  descriptive.  If  A  did 
not  explicitly  refuse,  this  statement  becomes  inferential,  because  A  may 
be  dead  or  paralysed.  If  we  would  say  simply,  ‘A  is  lazy*,  such  a  state¬ 
ment  represents  an  illegitimate  inference  of  high  orders  based  on  ignor¬ 
ance,  because  in  1933  it  is  known  that  ‘laziness*  represents  a  symptom  of 
physico-chemical,  colloidal,  or  semantic  disturbances.  It  should  be 
stressed  that  this  discrimination  between  descriptive  and  inferential 
words,  although  extremely  important,  is  not  based  on  any  ‘absolute* 
differences,  but,  to  a  large  extent,  depends  on  the  context.  I  shall  not 
analyse  this  problem  further,  because  any  parent  or  teacher  who  has 
acquired  the  consciousness  of  abstracting  himself  will  find  more  examples 
at  hand  than  are  needed. 

We  should  notice  here  a  very  vital,  yet  generally  diregarded,  struc¬ 
tural  fact — that  human  life  is  lived  under  conditions  which  establish  a 
natural  order  of  importance  between  different  orders  of  abstractions. 
This  natural  order  should  be  made  the  basis  of  natural  adaptive  evalua¬ 
tion  and  so  survival  s.r.  As  our  lives  are  lived  entirely  on  the  un-speak- 
able  level ,  which  includes  not  only  scientific  objects  and  ordinary  objects, 
but,  also,  actions,  functions,  processes,  performances,  feelings,  ‘emo¬ 
tions*.,  this  level  is  obviously  first  in  importance,  and  the  verbal  level. 

ON  NON-ARISTOTELIAN  TRAINING 

which  is  only  auxiliary,  comes  next  in  importance.  The  analysis  of  the 
relative  evaluation  between  description  and  inferences  appears  extremely 
complex  and  would  require  a  separate  volume,  beyond  the  scope  of  the 
present  work.  Here  we  may  assume  the  generally  accepted  opinion  that 
the  reliability  of  inferences  depends  on  the  reliability  of  the  descriptive 
premises,  and  that  description  is  more  reliable  than  inference.  In  im¬ 
portance  and  in  temporal  and  neurological  natural  order ,  description 
comes  first;  inferences,  next.  If  we  consider  different  orders  of  infer¬ 
ences,  or  inferential  words,  inferences  or  inferential  words  of  lower 
order  are  more  reliable  and  so  more  important  than  inferences  of  higher 
orders  (Inferences  from  inferences  of  lower  orders). 

As  science  is  a  racial  product  and  so  represents  structural  descrip¬ 
tions  and  inferences  of  an  enormous  amount  of  constantly  revised 
observations  and  formulations  of  past  generations,  this  racial  product, 
‘science',  is  more  reliable  and  important  in  principle ,  particularly  in  its 
negative  results,  than  the  individual  abstractions  of  individuals.  If  some 
individuals  happen  to  be  ‘geniuses',  who  upset  racial  scientific  abstrac¬ 
tions,  they  are  under  the  scrutiny  of  other  scientists  who,  no  matter  how 
biased  or  slow,  remain  judges  of  their  products.  In  1933  the  opinion 
of  scientists  is  the  most  dependable  opinion  we  have.  We  must  accept, 
at  a  given  date,  the  racial,  particularly  negative,  abstractions  as  more 
reliable,  establishing  in  evaluation  the  event  (scientific  object)  first,  and 
the  ordinary  object  next.  It  should  be  stressed  that  the  ‘object*  of  daily 
experience,  in  human  life,  is  by  far  not  so  reliable  as  that  in  the  life  of 
animals  entirely  without  human  interference.  Thus,  a  high  tension  wire, 
or  a  third  rail,  or  high  explosives  are  not  found  in  unaided  nature  and 
do  not  forewarn  us  as  ordinary  objects  do.  These  ‘objects'  possess 
characteristics  concealed  or  not  obvious  on  the  objective  level  of  our 
ordinary  inspection  of,  let  us  say,  sight,  hearing,  or  smell;  yet  these 
characteristics  appear  just  as  ‘real'  and  dangerous  as  ever.  It  appears, 
then,  that  the  ‘scientific  object',  or  the  event,  in  contradistinction  to  the 
ordinary  object,  is  more  important  than  the  daily  object,  no  matter  how 
important  the  latter  might  be.  In  fact,  the  only  macroscopic  importance 
of  objects,  outside  of  aesthetic  and  symbolic  values,  may  be  found  in 
those  not  obvious  physico-chemical,  microscopic,  and  sub-microscopic 
characteristics.  Thus  the  importance  of  food,  or  air,  or  a  chair  is  found 
precisely  in  these  physico-chemical  effects  which  result  from  eating,  from 
breathing,  and  from  resting  on  a  chair,  and  so  again  these  hidden  char¬ 
acteristics,  revealed  only  by  science,  appear  much  more  important  than 
the  gross  characteristics  manufactured  by  our  nervous  systems  which 
we  recognize  as  an  object 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

We  come  thus  to  a  natural  scale  of  a  definite  natural  order ,  which 
also  establishes  the  natural  order  of  genetic  importance  and  represents 
the  natural  base  for  survival  semantic  evaluation.  For  our  purpose  the 
relative  order  may  be  represented  as  the  scientific  object  or  the  event 
first,  ordinary  object  next ;  the  ordinary  object  first,  the  label  next ;  de¬ 
scription  first,  inferences  next,  extended  to  descriptive  and  inferential 
words. 

If  we  use  the  ‘is*  of  identity  and  identify  in  value  or  importance  the 
different,  ultimately  non-identical,  levels,  we  nullify  in  principle  the 
natural  order  of  evaluation,  which,  by  psychophysiological  necessity, 
appears  as  a  reversal  of  natural  order  in  various  degrees.  We  find  many 
reasons  for  this  curious  fact,  but,  for  our  purpose,  it  will  be  enough  to 
suggest  that :  ( 1 )  words  are  simpler  and  take  less  effort  to  handle  than 
objects ;  (2)  inferences  being  higher  order  abstractions  than  descrip¬ 
tions,  are  psycho-logically  closer  to  our  feelings  and  easier  for  any  indi¬ 
vidual  to  manage  than  impersonal  descriptions  which  require  developed 
linguistic  training,  power  of  observation,  self-mastery.,  and,  in  general, 
consciousness  of  abstracting.  The  reversal  of  the  natural  order  must  lead 
to  non-adjustment  and  results  in  pathological  symptoms  in  different 
degrees.  The  natural  order  consists  of  asymmetrical  relations  expressed 
by  an  ordered  series,  not  only  as  to  space-time,  but  as  to  values.  All  our 
experiences  and  all  we  know  indicate  definitely  that  ordinary  materials 
(‘objects*)  are  extremely  rare  and  very  complex  special  cases  of  the 
beknottedness  of  the  plenum ;  that  the  organic  world  and  ‘life*  represent 
extremely  rare  and  still  more  complex  special  cases  of  the  material 
world;  and,  finally,  so-called  ‘intelligent  life*  represents  increasingly 
complex  and  still  rarer  special  cases  of  ‘life*.  When  we  identify  the  mem¬ 
bers  of  these  series,  we  disregard  the  asymmetrical  character  of  this 
series  and  transform  it  into  a  fictitious,  or  delusional,  or  false  to  facts 
symmetrical  relation  of  identity.  It  becomes  also  obvious  why  in  the 
^-system,  which  did  not  allow  asymmetrical  relations,  proper  evaluation, 
adjustment,  and  sanity  in  general  were,  in  principle,  impossible. 

Although  the  language  used  in  this  connection  is  not  familiar,  it  is 
not  entirely  arbitrary.  It  appears  experimentally  that  four-dimensional 
order  has  physiological  importance  on  the  one  hand ;  on  the  other,  that 
on  the  psycho-logical  levels  it  involves  the  semantic  factors  of  evaluation. 
In  training  in  the  physiological  natural  order ,  we  train  the  evaluation  or 
appropriate  human  and  adult  s.r  on  the  psycho-logical  levels . 

In  the  difference  between  the  un-speakable  ‘scientific  object*  and 
the  ordinary  object,  the  objective  level  and  the  verbal  level,  we  find  the 
precise  spot  at  which  we  differ  most  radically  from  the  animals.  If  we 

ON  NON-AKISTOTELIAN  TRAINING 

disregard  these  differences  and  retain  the  ‘is’  of  identity,  we  must  some¬ 
how  copy  animals  in  our  nervous  processes.  Through  wrong  evaluation 
