we  are  using  the  lower  centres  too  much  and  cannot  'think*  properly. 
We  are  'over-emotional* ;  we  get  easily  confused,  worried,  terrorized,  or 
discouraged ;  or  else  we  become  absolutists,  dogmatists , .  The  results  of 
such  copying  of  animals  are  usually  tragic,  as  might  be  expected.  Owing 
to  wrong  evaluation  we  add  self-made  semantic  difficulties  to  the  dif¬ 
ficulties  which  we  actually  find  in  nature.  When  we  live  in  a  delusional 
world,  we  multiply  our  worries,  fears,  and  discouragements,  and  our 
higher  nerve  centres,  instead  of  protecting  us  from  over-stimulation, 
actually  multiply  the  semantic  harmful  stimuli  indefinitely.  Under  such 
circumstances  'sanity*  is  impossible. 

It  seems  that  here  in  the  elimination  of  the  'is*  of  identity  we  have 
put  our  hands  on  an  extremely  powerful  reflex-mechanism  for  the  edu¬ 
cation,  or  re-education,  of  our  'emotional1  life.  As  has  already  been  said, 
suppressing  or  repressing  our  feelings  is  dangerous,  and  should  be 
avoided.  The  old  animalistic  educational  systems  were  built  on  repres¬ 
sion  and  suppression,  with  sad  results.  But  since  we  had  no  other  means 
of  education,  we  had  to  use  the  older  means  or  else  abandon  this 
special  education  altogether.  Not  so  in  the  new  A  way  with  the  Struc¬ 
tural  Differential.  We  do  not  repress  or  suppress.  We  teach  silence  on 
the  objective  level  in  general ,  which  is  a  most  impressive  * emotional *  edu¬ 
cation,  on  perfectly  neutral  grounds,  one  of  the  consequences  of  the 
elimination  of  the  'is*  of  identity.  Any  bursting  into  speech  is  not 
repressed;  a  gesture  of  the  hand  to  the  labels  reminds  us  that  words 
are  not  objects,  or  action,  or  happenings,  or  feelings.  Such  a  procedure 
lias  a  most  potent  semantic  effect.  It  gives  a  semantic  jar ;  yet  this  jar  is 
not  repression,  but  the  realization  of  a  most  fundamental,  natural,  struc¬ 
tural  fact  of  evaluation  in  which  we  should  all  be  well  trained.  Dis¬ 
turbing  s.r  subside,  and  no  one  is  'hurt*.  It  takes  long  and  persistent 
training,  but  the  results  are  most  beneficial. 

We  must  note  an  important  difference  between  a  statement  involv¬ 
ing  the  'is*  of  identity,  that  'we  are  animals— which  has  nothing  to  do 
with  the  actual  facts;  all  of  us  (the  animals,  too)  are  not  words,  but  rep¬ 
resent  absolute  individuals  and  all  different — and  the  statement  that  we 
'copy  animals*  in  our  nervous  reactions.  In  the  first  case,  nothing  can 
be  done.  In  the  second  case,  although  the  results  are  equally  sad,  we 
can  stop  'copying  animals*  the  moment  the  mechanism  is  discovered  and 
we  begin  to  realize  that  we  are  doing  so.  Thus,  the  old  hopeless  becomes 
hopeful. 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  T1ME-B1NIM N(i 

I  have  already  mentioned  that  some  educators  may  assume  the 
eventual  harmfulness  of  training  in  the  consciousness  of  abstracting  on 
the  ground  that  children  should  be  kept  ‘close  to  reality’.  The  answer  to 
such  an  argument  can  be  found  in  the  recognition  that  what  in  the  older 
days  seemed  ‘reality'  must  now,  in  the  light  of  new  knowledge,  be  con¬ 
sidered  delusions,  and  the  older  training  as  preparatory  for  acquired 
un-sanity.  The  modern  conditions  of  human  life  appear  much  more 
complex  than  those  of  animal  life,  or  of  the  primitive  man.  Every  year, 
perhaps  even  every  month,  new  human  ‘realities'  make  their  appear¬ 
ance;  complexities  arise  and  our  educational  systems  do  not  equip  the 
children  semantically  to  meet  these  new  conditions.  After  investigation 
one  may  find  by  himself  that  the  older  ‘allness'  and  identifications  repre¬ 
sent  delusional  factors  found  nowhere  in  the  empirical  world,  and  thus 
have  to  conclude  that  if  we  train  children  in  such  delusions,  adjustment 
to  the  actual  world  is  made  extremely  difficult,  if  not  impossible.  It  is 
true  that  some  beneficial  results  do  not  appear  at  once,  but  only  after  the 
full  consciousness  of  abstracting  is  acquired.  Thus,  at  an  early  stage  of 
the  training,  when  the  student  begins  to  realize  the  delusional  character 
introduced  by  the  ‘is'  of  identity,  the  general  and  well-known  tendency 
may  struggle  hard  to  retain  the  delusions.  His  first  reaction  may  be  that 
of  disappointment,  with  its  many  concomitants,  depending  on  his  tem¬ 
perament,  metaphysics . ;  but  when  he  acquires  the  freedom  of  the  full 
consciousness  of  abstracting,  all  levels  will  be  evaluated  properly  and 
he  will  be  able  to  adjust  himself  to  conditions  of  m.o  reality  described 
in  the  present  work,  which  cannot  be  avoided  by  any  one.  ‘Knowledge’ 
or  ‘intelligence'  is  only  possible  with  abstracting,  and,  therefore,  it  fun¬ 
damentally  involves  ‘non-allness'.  ‘Omniscience’  would  involve  a  ‘knowl¬ 
edge’  of  every  point-event.  These  are  fundamentally  different,  and  such 
a  world  would  be  one  of  chaos,  where  knowledge  would  be  impossible. 
Life,  m.o  abstracting,  and  m.o  intelligence  start  together  and  are  con¬ 
ditioned  by  the  m.o  process  of  abstracting . 

Among  the  many  semantically  beneficial  results  of  such  training, 
besides  the  training  in  sanity  and,  therefore,  in  adjustment,  a  few  other 
benefits  should  be  mentioned.  Our  life,  our  m.o  mentation,  the  structure 
of  our  language,  with  its  syllogisms,  fallacies . ,  consist  for  the  most  part 
of  the  constant  utilization  of  the  different  levels  of  abstractions.  This 
appears  as  an  inherent  characteristic  of  ‘human  knowledge',  and,  there¬ 
fore,  we  cannot  abolish  it  without  abolishing  m.o  intelligence  altogether. 
Intelligence  requires  the  passing  from  level  to  level  in  both  directions. 
All  the  benefits  we  possess  follow  from  this;  but  also  many  semantic 
dangers  are  hidden  in  it.  Similar  remarks  could  be  made  about  an  auto- 

ON  NON-ARISTOTELIAN  TRAINING 

mobile , .  A  great  many  beneficial  results  foll.ow  from  the  use  of  auto¬ 
mobiles.,  but  there  are  also  great  dangers  involved.  For  instance,  at 
present  we  have  regulations  for  the  driving  of  an  automobile.  A  driver 
has  to  pass  his  examination,  demonstrate  his  practical  reflex-ability  in 
driving.,  before  he  is  allowed  to  drive  in  public.  Similarly  with  our 
language ;  we  find  the  greatest  benefits  in  it,  and  we  should  utilize  them. 
Proper  training  in  the  use  of  language  should  teach  us  how  to  avoid 
dangers.  Obviously,  ‘consciousness  of  abstracting*  teaches  us  how  to 
avoid  these  dangers ;  likewise,  once  we  become  trained  in  the  passing  to 
higher  and  higher  order  of  abstractions,  we  become  capable  of  the  per¬ 
formance  of  what  we  call  ‘high  intelligence*.  The  difference  between 
‘high  intelligence*  and  ‘low  intelligence*  consists  in  the  fact  that  a  high 
intelligence*  has  a  larger  outlook  backwards  as  well  as  forward ;  a  ‘low 

intelligence*,  as  suggested  in  Fig.  2, 
sees  only  a  little  backwards  (ignor¬ 
ance)  and  foresees  only  a  little.  A 
‘high  intelligence’  has  a  larger  span 
or  field;  it  knows  more  about  the 
past  and  looks  further  into  the 
future. 

‘Low  in-  ‘High 

telligence*  intelligence’ 

It  is  no  mystery  that  when  we 

Fig.  2 

want  to  look  further  into  the  past 

and  the  future  we  need  higher  and  higher  order  abstractions.  By  training 
in  this  passing  to  higher  and  higher  abstractions  we  train  the  ‘mind’  to 
be  more  efficient ;  this  ‘mental*  expanding  should  be  the  structural  and 

semantic  aim  of  every  education. 

Once  we  eliminate  identification,  we  must  accept  structure  as  the 
only  possible  content  of  ‘knowledge*  and  also  realize  that  no  ‘knowledge* 
is  ever  free  from  some  structural  assumptions.  Sometimes  it  is  pathetic 

to  watch  the  metaphysical  performances  of  some  otherwise  very  eminent 
scientists,  who  seem  entirely  innocent  of  these  facts.  They  often  attempt 
to  divorce  their  metaphysics  from  science,  and  miss  the  point  that  primi¬ 
tive  metaphysics  represents  ‘science*  or  the  structural  assumptions  of  that 
period,  whereas  modern  science  represents  structural  assumptions  or 
metaphysics  of  modern  ‘times*,  which  cannot  be  reconciled  with  the 
older  ‘science*.  The  difference  appears  in  dates,  not  in  kind.  The  real 
problem  before  mankind  presents  itself  in  the  selection  of  a  structural 
metaphysics.  If  we  select  the  primitive  structural  assumptions  and  have 
to  live  under  present  conditions,  we  must  become  a  split  personality 
which  cannot  adjust  itself.  If  we  accept  modern  structural  assumptions 
called  science,  we  may  adjust  ourselves.  In  no  case  can  we  free  ourselves 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

entirely  from  some  structural  assumptions.  The  problem  becomes  one  of 
dates ,  and  of  un-sanity  versus  sanity.  These  problems  appear  of  unusual 
importance,  because  the  difficult  scientific  technique  does  not  enter  into 
this  field  at  all,  and  the  few  structural  data  (1933)  can  be  given  in  the 
simplest  form  to  children  and  even  to  the  feeble-minded.  In  the  older 
days  this  problem  was  entirely  misunderstood.  We  tried  to  ‘popularize* 
science  in  the  sense  that  we  translated  structurally  correct  language  into 
the  daily  language  of  primitive  structure;  this  resulted  only  in  bewilder¬ 
ment  ;  we  did  not  analyse  the  structure  of  language  and  its  role  in  our 
lives  and  begin  with  a  structural  linguistic  revision.  Once  this  revision 
is  accomplished,  and  we  build  a  A  language,  the  semantic  background  is 
prepared  for  a  natural  acceptance  of  modern  structural  metaphysics 
(science)  of  each  date  and  the  older  ‘popularization*  becomes  unneces¬ 
sary.  Such  procedure  would  help  to  integrate  the  individual,  while  the 
older  methods  only  help  to  split  him. 

Let  us  recall  that  the  animal  stops  somewhere  in  his  abstracting. 
When  we  come  to  a  stop ,  and  consider  it  ‘final*  or  that  we  ‘know  all 
about  it*,  we  copy  animals  in  our  nervous  reactions.  Training  in  passing 
from  order  to  order  of  abstractions  as  such,  trains  the  particularly 
human ,  fluid,  non-blocked  s.r ,  counteracts,  and  ultimately  abolishes,  the 
animalistic  blockage.  In  a  language  of  a  given  structure  we  can  express 
ourselves  in  a  definite  way ;  and,  if  that  way  is  incomplete,  we  must  leave 
the  field  open,  for  in  a  structurally  different  language  the  issues  may 
look  entirely  different. 

It  is  fundamental  to  stress  that  the  old  ‘unknowable*  becomes  en¬ 
tirely  abolished.  This  ‘unknowable*  originated  in  the  primitive  identi¬ 
fication  and  elementalism.  Our  ancestors  could  not  miss  indefinitely 
that  identification  was  false  to  facts ;  yet  somehow  the  emphasis,  which 
the  ecclesiastical  authorities  (for  their  purpose)  laid  on  the  im¬ 
portance  of  the  A-system,  prevented  them  from  completely  rejecting  the 
‘is*  of  identity.  The  un-speakable  was  called  the  ‘unknowable’,  a  very 
gloomy  term,  indeed.  The  use  of  this  term  prevented  them  from  dis¬ 
covering,  long  ago, '  that  the  only  content  of  ‘knowledge*  appears  as 
structural,  with  all  the  following  non-el  consequences.  ‘Knowledge*  was 
expected  to  represent  somehow  more  than  ‘knowledge’ — a  silent  self- 
contradiction.  On  this  foundation  whole  systems  of  delusions  were  built. 
With  the  newer  realizations,  we  understand  that  the  only  possible  con¬ 
tent  of  ‘knowledge*  appears  as  structural,  so  that  we  can  know  all  which 
belongs  to  the  structural  legitimate  field  of  ‘knowledge*.  What  does  not 
belong  to  the  field  of  ‘knowledge*  must  be  considered  meaningless,  and 
making  noises  about  it,  one  way  or  another,  will  not  help  us  at  all ;  quite 

ON  NON-ARISTOTELIAN  TRA1 NINO 

the  contrary,  it  involves  us  in  delusional  states.  Students  of  the  history 
of  ‘philosophy’  may  realize,  in  this  case,  particularly,  the  drama  and  the 
dangers  which  the  playing  on  such  m.o  terms  as  ‘knowledge’  may  need¬ 
lessly  produce. 

Through  the  semantic  mechanism  which  it  involves,  ‘consciousness 
of  abstracting’  abolishes  many  fears,  despairs,  and  other  disturbances 
which  follow  from  the  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions.  We  became 
introverted  extroverts ;  in  other  words,  we  become  affectively  well-bal¬ 
anced,  and  ready  to  deal  with  empirical  first  order  effects  on  their  levels, 
and  with  verbal  problems  on  their  different  levels.  We  learn,  also,  to 
observe ,  as  soon  as  we  have  learned  ‘silence’  on  the  ‘objective  levels*. 
Realizing  that  we  abstract  in  different  orders,  we  slowly  acquire  the  most 
creative  structural  feeling  that  human  knowledge  is  inexhaustible;  we 
become  more  and  more  interested  in  knowledge ;  our  curiosity  becomes 
aroused ;  our  sporting  spirit  stimulated  and  our  level  of  m.o  intelligence 
raised. 

It  is  well  known  that  the  higher  intelligence  is  characterized  by  a 
critical  attitude.  By  training  with  the  Structural  Differential  until  the 
memory  of  the  characteristics  left  out  and  the  non-identity  become  a 
permanent  semantic  acquisition  with  us,  this  critical  attitude  is  also  devel¬ 
oped.  No  one  who  feels  habitually  these  ‘characteristics  left  out’ — ‘this 
is  not  this’ — will  ever  take  a  word  or  a  statement  for  granted .  He  will 
enquire,  investigate ;  will  always  ask  ‘what  do  you  mean’,  a  question 
which  automatically  leads  to  further  investigation,  and  finally  strikes 
the  bottom  of  the  undefined  terms  which  divulge  our  silent  structural 
creeds  and  metaphysics. 

We  should  avoid  the  mistake  of  assuming  that  the  average  man,  or 
a  moron,  does  not  ‘think*.  His  nervous  system  works  continually, 
as  does  that  of  a  genius.  The  difference  consists  in  that  its  working  is  not 
productive  or  efficient.  Proper  training  and  understanding  of  the  seman¬ 
tic  mechanism  must  add  to  efficiency  and  productiveness.  By  the  elimi¬ 
nation  of  semantic  blockings,  as  in  identification,  we  release  the  creative 
capacities  of  any  individual.  We  release  him  from  the  primitive  seman¬ 
tic  bondage  in  the  daily  and  constant  use  of  a  powerful  instrument  called 
language — full  of  benefits,  but  also  full  of  dangers — the  structure  of 
which  he  totally  misunderstands.  Such  misunderstanding  must  lead  to 
inefficiency  in  the  use,  and  so  to  the  abuse,  of  this  function.  Instead  of 
being  a  semantic  slave  of  the  structure  of  language,  he  becomes  its 
master. 

When  we  become  more  civilized  and  enlightened,  no  public  speaker 
or  writer  will  be  allowed  to  operate  publicly  without  demonstrating  first 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

that  he  knows  the  structure  and  semantic  functioning  of  the  linguistic 
capacities.  Even  at  present  no  professor,  teacher,  lawyer,  physician,  or 
chemist . ,  is  allowed  to  operate  publicly  without  passing  examination  to 
show  that  he  knows  his  subject.  The  above  statement  does  not  mean 
control  or  censorship.  Far  from  it.  Our  language  involves  a  much 
more  intricate,  beneficial,  or  dangerous  semantic  mechanism  than  any 
automobile  ever  had  or  will  have.  We  do  not  control  the  drivers  in  their 
destinations.  They  come  and  go  as  they  please,  but  for  public  safety  we 
demand  that  they  should  have  acquired  the  necessary  reflex-skill  for 
driving,  and  so  we  eliminate  unnecessary  tragedies.  Similarly  with  lan¬ 
guage,  of  which  the  ignorant  or  pathological  use  becomes  a  public  danger 
of  a  very  serious  semantic  character.  At  present  public  writers  or 
speakers  can  hide  behind  ignorance  (1933)  of  the  verbal,  semantic,  and 
neurological  mechanism.  They  may  ‘mean  weir ;  yet,  by  playing  upon 
.  the  pathological  reactions  of  their  own  and  those  of  the  mob,  they  may 
‘put  over’  some  very  vicious  propaganda  and  bring  about  very  serious 
sufferings  to  all  concerned.  But  once  they  would  have  to  pass  an  exami¬ 
nation  to  get  their  licence  as  public  speakers  or  writers,  they  could  not 
hide  any  longer  behind  ignorance.  If  found  to  have  misused  the  lin¬ 
guistic  mechanism,  such  an  abuse  on  their  part  would  be  clearly  a  wilful 
act ,  and  ‘well  meaning*  would  cease  to  be  an  alibi. 

We  must  accept  the  obvious  facts  which  make  the  older  theoretical 
‘democracy*  or  the  older  theoretical  ‘socialism*  a  scientific  impossibility. 
If,  m  1933,  99%  of  the  population  of  the  globe  appear  as  infantile  or 
‘mentally*  deficient,  how  can  any  one  expect  that  the  majority  or  the 
mass  could  ever  have  proper  evaluation  or  non-pathological  s.rl  All  his¬ 
tory  shows  at  present,  and  this  evidence  should  not  be  taken  lightly  by 
scientifically  enlightened  society,  that  the  majority  appears  ‘always 
wrong*,  and  that  all  that  we  call  ‘progress*,  ‘civilization*,  ‘science*. ,  has 
been  achieved  by  a  very  small  minority.  Such  an  understanding  should 
guide  our  future  conduct  if  we  desire  better  results  than  we  have  at 
present.  Under  A  conditions,  not  the  state,  nor  different  private  so¬ 
cieties,  but  professional  scientific  bodies  would  have  to  set  the  standards 
and  perfect  the  technique  of  the  linguistic  structural  examinations.  They 
would  also  select  members  who  would  serve  on  the  examination  boards. 
It  might  seem  that  such  a  A  innovation  would  not  be  important  or  far- 
reaching.  This  would  be  a  mistake.  It  seems  that  most  of  those  public 
writers  and  speakers  may  be  considered  privately  as  ‘honest*  men,  who 
do  not  realize  that  under  A  conditions  they  often  impose  on  defenceless 
masses  delusional  states  which  too  often  become  of  a  pronounced  morbid 
character.  Once  such  an  examination  would  force  them  to  look  into 

ON  NON- ARISTOTELIAN  TRAINING 

structural,  semantic,  and  linguistic  problems,  we  may  take  for  granted 
that  a  great  many  of  them  would  become  able  to  evaluate  properly  their 
own  activities  and  comprehend  the  harm  they  do.  As  a  result,  quite  prob¬ 
ably,  a  great  amount  of  useless,  befogging  issues,  delusional  writings 
and  speeches  would  not  be  produced,  with  great  benefit  to  all  concerned. 
No  one  would  censure  them.  Consciousness  of  abstracting  would  accom¬ 
plish  that.  They  would  become  their  own  censors,  aided,  also,  by  the 
newly  developed  consciousness  of  abstracting  on  the  part  of  some  mem¬ 
bers  of  the  audiences  or  readers. 

It  would  be  desirable  to  experiment  and  introduce  parallel  classes 
in  schools  for  a  while;  one  group  continuing  in  the  old  ^-system,  the 
other  being  trained  in  the  ^-system.  We  may  expect  that  at  the  end  of 
a  year  the  results  would  be  fairly  tangible.  The  ones  which  acquire  the 
‘consciousness  of  abstracting'  should  show  a  marked  improvement  in 
character,  should  behave  better,  and  should  also  show  better  results  in 
scholarship,  not  to  mention,  in  addition,  the  preventive  semantic  benefits 
in  their  future  life  and  adjustment.  Experimenting  under  various  con¬ 
ditions  is  very  desirable,  as  we  deal  with  such  a  tremendously  broad  and 
fundamental  structural  problem  that  it  is  impossible  at  present  to  foresee 
more  than  the  main  results  and  bearings. 

In  a  school  one  three-dimensional  Differential  should  be  enough,  but 
in  each  classroom  a  large  printed  diagram,  which  is  published  also,  should 
be  permanently  exhibited  on  the  walls  and  applied  in  all  studies.  This  is 
necessary,  not  only  because  such  a  reminder  makes  the  children  thor¬ 
oughly  familiar  with  the  ‘characteristics  left  out',  ‘natural  order'. ,  but 
also  because  the  children  will  discuss  it  and  settle  their  educational  and 
personal  difficulties  by  its  aid  and  so  train  themselves  in  A  reactions.  In 
my  practice,  I  have  found  that  one  of  the  main  difficulties  of  the  learner, 
or  in  ‘thinking’,  in  general,  consists  in  the  fact  that  in  any  verbal  discus¬ 
sion  we  must  utilize  different  orders  of  abstractions  and  m.o  terms.  If 
we  do  not  realize  this,  the  problem  often  seems  very  involved ;  once  we 
are  conscious  of  it,  however,  the  problem  becomes  simple.  In  fact,  it 
may  be  said  that  this  special  flexibility  which  is  entirely  absent  in  animals 
and  little  developed  in  the  primitive  man,  represents  the  working  mechan¬ 
ism  of  ‘high  intelligence*,  and  that  this  special  flexibility  can  be  acquired 
through  proper  A  training. 

The  dealing  with  reflex-reactions  and  with  experimental  theories  in 
general  has  one  very  encouraging  characteristic ;  namely,  that  no  matter 
how  difficult  the  theoretical  side  may  be,  the  practical  is  invariably  ex¬ 
tremely  simple.  Thus,  a  theoretical  treatise  on  the  Einstein  theory,  or 
the  new  quantum  mechanics,  or  on  an  automobile,  radio,  or  piano,  or 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OE  TIME-BINDING 

on  music,  or  the  conditional  reflexes  of  Pavlov.,  may  present,  and,  in 
fact,  generally  does  present,  difficulties,  because  it  is  formulated  on 
purely  verbal  and  analytical  levels.  But  these  levels  are  most  important, 
for  we  find  that  on  these  levels  the  full  evaluation,  and  so  the  full  realiza¬ 
tion,  of  existing  or  possible  relations  and  meanings  is  accomplished.  In 
these  verbal  levels  we  find  also  economical  and  effective  means  to  analyse 
further  developments  on  which  the  possible  range  of  applications  ulti¬ 
mately  depends.  Such  a  treatise  can  be  produced  by  a  single  man  and 
thereby  becomes  available  for  the  rest  of  us. 

A  description  of  the  application  is,  however,  very  simple ;  we  label 
the  related  parts  of  some  structure,  describe,  mostly  in  terms  of  order, 
their  interrelations,  and  then  give  instructions  how  to  act,  push,  pull,  or 
turn  a  given  part  to  get  such  and  such  results.  These  descriptions,  al¬ 
though  verbal,  refer  exclusively  to  some  physical  structure,  so  that  men 
of  very  low  ‘mentality’  can  soon  become  acquainted  with  the  practical 
problems  concerned.  When  the  reflex-handling  of  the  physical  structure 
is  acquired,  the  experimental  and  behaviouristic  aspects  become  child¬ 
ishly  simple.  A  child  can  see  the  experimental  results  of  any  theory,  or 
notice  the  ease  and  simplicity  of  the  reflex-adjustments  a  good  driver 
can  make. 

But  what  an  infant,  a  savage,  or  an  ignorant  man  can  not  do,  is 
appreciate  the  meanings  of  given  occurrences  and  evaluate  them ;  in  other 
words,  they  cannot  relate  the  given  occurrences  to  other  occurrences 
which  alone  give  the  significance  of  the  happenings.  Thus,  not  only 
physicists,  but  even  the  average  man,  knew  of  the  equality  of  gravi¬ 
tational  and  inertial  mass  \  it  took  the  genius  of  an  Einstein,  however, 
to  evaluate  properly,  to  have  the  proper  semantic  reaction  toward 
this  commonplace  fact1.  The  present  work  shows  clearly  that  all 
semantic  disturbances  exhibit  a  lack  of  proper  evaluation ;  or  in  getting 
hold  of  the  meanings,  or  relations,  or  order  of  different  order  abstrac¬ 
tions.  Only  a  full  theoretical  understanding  can  supply  us  with  those 
meanings  and  produce  in  us  the  proper  s.r  of  evaluation — a  necessary 
psychophysiological  step  for  further  advance,  and  for  full  application  of 
the  conquests  already  made. 

As  the  present  work  is  experimental  throughout,  and  deals  with 
verifiable  subjects,  such  as  the  structure  of  languages  on  record,  the 
natural  order  of  development,  the  pathological  reversal  of  order,  which, 
if  again  reversed,  restores  the  natural  order. ,  and,  when  applied,  brings 
about  most  beneficial  experimental  results,  all  that  has  been  said  about  s 
experimental  theories  applies  fully  in  our  case. 

UN  NON-AKISTOTELIAN  TRAINING 

Just  as  in  other  disciplines,  the  instructions  are  simple :  ‘push  these’, 
'pull  this’,  or  ‘turn  that’ ;  so,  in  our  case,  this  simple  descriptive  rule 
which  refers  to  the  objective  Differential  is  given  as :  ‘this  is  not  this’. 

( )nce  the  reflex -activities  have  been  acquired,  we  can,  for  instance,  enjoy 
the  pleasure  of  an  automobile  trip,  the  music  of  a  radio,  or  a  semantic 
trip  toward  sanity  in  harmony  with  ourselves  and  others,  very  simply, 
in  spite  of  the  underlying  theoretical  complexities  which  are  always 
means  and  not  ends  in  themselves. 

But  here  we  must  face  an  important  difference.  It  is  easy  to  dem¬ 
onstrate  empirically  to  the  majority  of  us  the  usefulness  or  pleasurable¬ 
ness  of  automobiles  and  radios,  but  it  is  very  difficult  to  demonstrate 
the  benefits  of  consciousness  of  abstracting  to  those  who  have  not  ac¬ 
quired  it.  Before  the  experimental  data  begin  to  accumulate  and  become 
common  knowledge,  the  main  evaluation  will  have  to  be  made  on  theo¬ 
retical  grounds.  Besides,  before  children  can  be  trained  by  the  simple 
and  easy  methods  outlined  above,  adults  must  first  re-train  and  re-shape 
their  own  s.r,  which  re-training  and  re-shaping  are  not  easy,  and  require 
even  more  difficult  theoretical  considerations.  Because  of  this,  the  present 
work  had  to  be  written  in  the  form  of  a  text-book  for  parents,  teachers, 
physicians,  and  workers  in  ‘mental’  hygiene,  and  for  future  students  and 
research  workers  in  psychophysiology  and  semantic  hygiene. 

At  the  beginning,  in  the  application  of  the  method,  a  number  of  dif¬ 
ficulties  will  be  discovered  which  will  have  to  be  overcome.  As  a  rule, 
the  training  in  non-pathological  s.r  proves  to  be  easiest  and  simplest  with 
very  young  children.  Most  of  it,  or  at  least  the  laying  down  of  the 
semantic  foundations  for  such  reactions,  should  be  accomplished  at  home 
by  specially  trained  teachers,  if  the  parents  are  unable  to  do  that  them¬ 
selves.  In  countries  or  communities  where  the  national  or  local  govern¬ 
ments  show  an  interest  in  the  health  of  the  population  by  providing,  for 
instance,  specialists  in  preventive  vaccination,  specialists  to  train  in  pre¬ 
ventive  measures  against  semantic  disturbances  will  probably  also  be 
provided. 

In  elementary  schools  the  teachers  at  first  will  have  to  train  them¬ 
selves  as  best  they  can  with  the  help  of  specialists;  but  in  high  schools, 
colleges,  and  universities,  special  instructors  will  have  to  be  employed. 

The  first  concern,  then,  is  to  start  the  education  and  training  of 
teachers.  With  this  end  in  view,  the  present  work  has  been  written  so 
«h  to  form  a  fairly  complete  outline  of  the  whole  problem;  reference 
literature  has  been  indicated,  so  that  any  one  who  wants  to  specialize  in 
the  subject  can  find  some  suitable  text-book  as  a  primer.  As  to  qualifica¬ 
tions  for  the  professional  A  instructors, — it  is,  at  present,  very  difficult 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

to  foresee  details,  but,  as  the  full  consciousness  of  abstracting  leads  to 
s.r  which,  also,  follow  unconsciously,  or  which  should  so  follow,  from 
the  study  and  acquiring  the  feel  of  the  calculus, — students  of  mathe¬ 
matics  would,  perhaps,  be  the  most  desirable.  Any  specialist  in  a  new 
line  of  work  has  to  learn  a  great  deal,  and  this  cannot  be  avoided ;  but 
it  makes  a  difference  what  kind  of  training  one  has  had  as  a  young  per¬ 
son.  Thus,  it  is  simpler  for  a  student  of  mathematics  to  learn  about 
psychiatry,  or  psycho-logics,  than  for  a  psychiatrist  or  a  psycho-logician 
to  learn  mathematics.  However,  for  a  person  with  university  training, 
this  is  less  important  than  a  genuine  willingness  to  master  the  subject. 
Once  the  consciousness  of  abstracting  has  been  acquired  by  such  a 
student,  his  semantic  blockages  will  be  eliminated.  He  will  then  have  no 
difficulties  whatsoever  with  details,  or  even  in  doing  creative  work 
along  this  line. 

With  very  young  children,  in  the  beginning  an  hour  a  day  for  sev¬ 
eral  months  should  be  devoted  to  the  subject.  When  they  have  acquired 
the  consciousness  of  abstracting,  the  results  should  not  be  entirely  trusted 
as  to  permanence,  but,  at  least,  once  a  week  the  problems  should  be 
recalled  to  them.  How  many  hours  a  week  should  be  devoted  to  it  in 
high  schools,  colleges,  and  universities  I  shall  not  venture  to  suggest, 
because  the  working  hours  in  these  institutions  are  already  very  crowded. 
The  training  in  consciousness  of  abstracting  automatically  eliminates  an 
enormous  amount  of  semantic  blockages,  and  would  facilitate  the  acqui¬ 
sition  of  learning  in  all  branches  of  knowledge,  and  so  save  ‘time’  and 
effort — the  more  so,  if  the  respective  teachers  themselves  were  to  become 
conscious  of  abstracting. 

The  beneficial  results  which  are  to  be  expected  may  be  found  in 
better  scholarship,  more  interest  in  studies,  improved  character,  higher 
m.o  intelligence,  and  a  better  general  adjustment.  All  of  this  seems  quite 
apart  from  the  preventive  character  of  the  training  as  a  protection 
against  many  semantic  disturbances  in  the  future.  But  when  teachers  of 
all  subjects  acquire  consciousness  of  abstracting  themselves,  they  will 
probably  discover  new  means  and  methods  of  conveying  mpre  simply 
and  more  effectively  what  they  wish  to  convey  to  their  pupils.  I  am 
convinced  that  the  hours  spent  on  semantic  training  would  actually  turn 
out  to  be  an  important  economy  of  efforts.  Moreover,  it  would  effec¬ 
tively  give  the  children  and  students  the  highest  grade  of  cultural  train¬ 
ing,  which  at  present  we  acquire  only  occasionally  and  with  difficulty, 
without  the  conscious  co-operation  of  our  teachers. 

CHAPTER  XXX 

IDENTIFICATION,  INFANTILISM,  AND  UN-SANITY 
VERSUS  SANITY 

Common  sense,  do  what  it  will,  cannot  avoid  being  surprised  occasionally. 
The  object  of  science  is  to  spare  it  this  emotion  and  create  mental  habits 
which  shall  be  in  such  close  accord  with  the  habits  of  the  world  as  to  secure 
that  nothing  shall  be  unexpected.  (457)  bertrand  russell 

Medicine  is  to-day  an  Art  or  Calling,  to  whose  exercise  certain  Sciences 
are  no  doubt  ancillary;  but  she  has  forfeited  pretension  to  be  deemed  a 
Science,  because  her  Professors  and  Doctors  decline  to  define  fundamentals 
or  to  state  first  principles,  and  refuse  to  consider,  in  express  terms,  the 
relations  between  Things,  Thoughts  and  Words  involved  in  their  com¬ 
munications  to  others.  <122)  f.  G.  crookshank 

Unless  physiology  like  any  other  of  the  sciences  basic  to  medicine  will 
teach  less  fact  and  more  method,  it  might  as  well  be  deleted  from  the 
catalogue. 

Can  anything  be  done  to  help  the  situation?  Not,  I  think,  without 
large  vision.  The  student  of  medicine  needs  not  more  external  but  more 
internal  discipline.*  martin  h.  fischer 

I  wonder  how  soon  we  shall  be  far  enough  along  to  have  the  physician 
ask:  How  much  and  what,  if  anything,  is  structural ?  how  much  functional, 
somatic  or  metabolic?  how  much  constitutional,  psychogenic  and  social?** 

ADOLF  MEYER 

Section  A .  General . 
