
The  name  of  Freud  is  usually  associated  with  the  term  ‘the  uncon¬ 
scious*.  This  term  appears  as  a  general  descriptive  term  standing  for  a 
great  many  psycho-logical  semantic  processes.  In  1933  the  work  of 
Freud  is  generally  accepted  as  important  and  very  suggestive,  although 
further  experiments  by  many  research  workers  and  practicians  have 
shown  that  the  freudian  formulations  have  not  the  exclusiveness  for¬ 
merly  assumed  for  them. 

It  is  useless  to  deny  that  the  term  ‘unconscious*  is  fundamental  and 
necessary.  The  use  of  the  term  is  best  shown  in  the  study  of  hypnotic 
phenomena.  Some  patients  do  certain  things  under  hypnotic  influence, 
and  then  seemingly  lose  all  memory  traces  of  such  doings  upon  emerging 
from  hypnosis.  Careful  experiments  showed  that  after  prolonged  efforts 
these  recollections  could  be  made  accessible  to  the  patients*  waking  con¬ 
sciousness.  The  difficulty  in  recalling  was  not  ordinary  ‘forgetting*. 
What  is  ‘forgotten*  can  also  be  spontaneously  ‘recollected*.  Here  the 
situation  seemed  different,  in  that  these  lost  ‘memories*  required  con¬ 
siderable  work  and  effort  for  their  reconstruction.  The  psycho-logical 

♦Teaching  of  Physiology.  Jour.  Asso.  Med.  Colleges.  Apr.  1929. 

**The  “Complaint”  as  the  Center  of  Genetic-Dynamic  and  Nosological  Teaching  In  Psychiatry 
New  Eng.  Jour .  of  Med .  Aug.  23,  1928. 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

state  in  such  cases  of  perfected  ‘forgetting’  was  called  ‘unconscious’, 
which,  as  a  descriptive  term,  is  very  satisfactory. 

The  origin  of  the  freudian  theory  of  the  unconscious  was  strictly 
scientific.  The  theory  was  a  new  generalization  in  a  new  structurally 
appropriate  language  to  account  for  experimental  facts.  Subsequently,  a 
large  number  of  other  experimental  facts  showed  that  the  work  of 
Freud  was  sound  as  far  as  it  went.  Different  workers,  from  different 
sets  of  facts,  amplified  or  reshaped  the  freudian  theories.  At  present, 
there  are  several  schools  that  differ  widely  in  language,  all  of  them  based 
on  the  fundamental  system-function  of  Freud,  however. 

In  reading  the  literature  of  the  subject,  one  finds  most  diversified 
material.  Seemingly,  there  are  facts  which  prove  ‘beyond  doubt’  each 
and  every- theory ,  no  matter  how  widely  they  differ  among  themselves. 
It  is  also  easy  to  find  experimental  facts  which  can  be  accounted  for  by 
several  different  theories. 

Such  a  situation  appears  unsatisfactory.  This  lack  of  generality 
conceals  a  very  important  and  workable  semantic  mechanism,  which, 
under  A  identification,  ‘allness’,  and  elementalism,  becomes  pathological, 
resulting  in  arrested  or  regressive  symptoms.  Once  we  pass  to  a  ^-sys¬ 
tem  free  from  the  above  harmful  semantic  factors  of  delusional  evalua¬ 
tion,  the  difficulties  do  not  arise.  The  more  my  enquiry  progressed,  the 
more  it  became  obvious  that  the  underlying  mechanism  appears  similar 
in  all  psychoanalytical  theories.  It  seems  that  the  general  problem  may 
be  formulated  as  the  need  to  discover  methods  for  non-delusional  evalua¬ 
tion  affecting  our  s.r ,  and  so  be  able  to  make  the  ‘unconscious’  ‘conscious’. 

The  term  ‘consciousness’  is  an  incomplete  symbol,  as  it  lacks  con¬ 
tent.  If  we  use  the  term  ‘consciousness  of  abstracting’,  we  ascribe 
content  and  also  gain  empirical  means  to  bring  under  educational  control 
a  vast  array  of  important  psycho-logical  processes.  The  negative  term 
‘unconscious’  does  not  imply  specific  content,  and  the  main  difficulty  in 
its  practical  application  is  to  find  its  content,  or  to  ascribe  content  to  it. 
Once  this  is  achieved,  the  ‘unconscious’  becomes  ‘conscious’.  A  patient 
whose  unconscious  semantic  difficulty  is  made  conscious  either  improves 
or  is  entirely  relieved.  For  a  general  theory,  we  must  find  general  struc¬ 
tural  means  of  ascribing  semantic  content  to  the  ‘unconscious’.  Different 
schools  have  elaborated  different  means  of  discovering  this  desired  content. 
All  schools  agree  that  the  behaviour  difficulties  are  due  to  experiences 
hidden  in  the  ‘unconscious’  and  that  bringing  them  to  ‘consciousness’ 
seems  the  main  goal.  The  diverse  schools  have  an  unduly  bitter  atti¬ 
tude  toward  one  another,  and  have  not  attempted  to  analyse  the  prob¬ 
lems  at  hand  from  a  more  general,  more  workable  non-el  structural, 

UN-SANITY  VKRSUS  SANITY 

semantic,  system-function,  and  linguistic  point  of  view.  Whether  or 
not  the  term  ‘consciousness’  has  any  content  besides  ‘consciousness  of 
abstracting’  may  be  disregarded  for  the  moment.  At  any  rate,  the  term 
‘consciousness  of  abstracting’  gives  very  vital  and  workable  psycho- 
physiological  means  of  analysis,  of  an  impersonal,  and  general  structural, 
and  semantic  character.  Enquiry  into  the  clinical  cases  and  literature 
shows  that  pathological  cases,  amenable  to  treatment,  appear  improved 
by  a  similar  evaluational  treatment ;  namely,  the  correction  in  some  form 
or  another  of  the  semantic  disturbance  of  the  lack  of  ‘consciousness  of 
abstracting’. 

‘Mental’  illnesses  (infantilism  included)  appear  as  semantic  arrested 
development  or  a  regression  to  lower  levels,  to  those  of  the  primitive 
man,  the  infant,  the  animal.  The  animal  is  not  conscious  of  abstracting ; 
man  can  become  so.  Here  we  find  the  precise  mechanism  of  a  decisive 
nature  which  not  only  supplies  us  with  preventive  measures,  but  which 
should  also  become  of  therapeutic  value. 

All  life  exhibits  conservative  characteristics  acquired  during  the 
long  periods  of  its  development.  In  the  facts  of  heredity  and  embry¬ 
ology,  we  have  an  excellent  evidence  of  this.  In  its  development,  the 
germ  cell  of  an  animal  or  man  repeats  in  a  very  abbreviated  way  the 
structures  of  forms  from  which  it  descended.  The  ever-changing  envir¬ 
onmental  conditions,  although  they  affect  each  organism  to  a  large  extent, 
produce  extremely  few  hereditary  changes,  which  again  may  be  con^ 
sidered  an  indication  of  the  conservative  characteristics  of  life. 

As  we  have  already  explained,  life,  abstracting,  and  ‘intelligence’ 
started  together,  and  are  consequences  of  the  physico-chemical  colloidal 
structure  of  the  protoplasm.  Psychiatry  also  assumes  that  ‘the  uncon¬ 
scious’,  ‘tendencies’,  and  ‘impulses’  originated  with  life  itself.  From  this 
point  of  view  the  past  piled  up  structurally  upon  the  past  until  the  highly 
complex  organism  called  Smith  made  its  appearance.  In  this  process 
of  evolution  the  ‘instincts’  and  ‘impulses’  have  had  an  important  role,  not 
only  conservative,  but  also  compensatory  and  protective.  In  man,  s.r 
should  be  based  on  proper  evaluation  and  so  play  both  a  stimulating  and 
protective  role.  Under  A  conditions  of  delusional  evaluation,  the  pro¬ 
tective  role  appears  practically  non-existent ;  the  human  organism,  under 
modern  conditions,  becomes  over-stimulated,  resulting  often  in  patho¬ 
logical  conditions.  Consciousness  of  abstracting,  or  the  elimination  of 
delusional  evaluation,  abolishes  man-made,  artificial,  and  harmful 
irritants. 

I  shall  borrow  from  Jelliffe  an  excellent  diagram  to  illustrate  the 
evolution  of  the  periods  of  growth  and  shall  follow  closely  his  exposition.1 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

9  mos. _ 7  years _ 7-14  years _ 14  yr.  and  on 

iiiiiim 

Archaic  Organ  erotic  or  Narcissistic  Social 

100,000,000  yr.  Autoerotic  100,000  yr.  10,000  yr. 

1,000,000  yr. 

Fig.  1 

Some  such  classification  of  the  periods  of  growth  has  been  forced  upon 
psychiatrists  by  the  study  of  ‘mental’  ills,  and  is  justified  by  embryology 
and  an  endless  chain  of  empirical  observations. 

The  first  period  represents  the  archaic  period  and  is  of  the  greatest 
antiquity.  In  it  the  past  is  roughly  recapitulated  from,  let  us  say,  the 
beginning  of  unicellular  life  to  the  anthropoid  ape.  At  the  fertilization  of 
the  egg  the  hereditary  constitution  is  established,  and  during  the  gesta¬ 
tion  period  all  prenatal  influences  are  laid  down.  The  life  of  the  baby 
before  birth  may  be  described  as  a  vegetative  existence  of  full  indolence 
with  all  needs  supplied  by  the  mother’s  body. 

At  birth,  the  first  ‘struggle  for  existence’  begins,  the  struggle  for 
air,  as  symbolized  by  the  first  cry.  At  this  epoch  the  baby  already  appears 
as  a  self -running  organism  with  some  s.r.  His  vegetative  nervous  system 
is  integrated  and  functioning.  He  begins  to  ‘feel’.  Pleasure  and  pain 
begin  to  be  significant  semantic  factors.  This  period  is  called  the  organ 
erotic  or  autoerotic,  since,  as  with  animals,  its  main  interests  are  ‘sense* 
gratifications.  Many  millions  of  ‘sense’  receptors  suddenly  have  thrust 
upon  them  from  the  environment  a  mass  of  energy  with  which  the 
organism  has  to  deal  somehow.  At  first  there  is  a  rivalry  between  differ¬ 
ent  ‘senses’.  Later,  co-ordination  appears.  Each  group  of  receptors 
establishes  its  own  semantic  values  for  itself,  depending  upon  its  own 
cell  growth.  This  period  may  be  divided,  schematically,  from  birth  to 
seven  years,  and  corresponds  roughly  to  the  evolution  from  the  higher 
animals  to  primitive  man.  This  period  is  extremely  important  from  a 
semantic  and  educational  point  of  view.  At  this  stage  in  the  human 
child  the  nervous  system  is  not  fully  developed;  and  different  environ¬ 
mental  influences  (language,  doctrines  included)  may  twist  this  develop¬ 
ment,  so  that  irreparable  harm  can  easily  be  done. 

The  narcissistic  period  is  named  after  the  Greek  mythical  figure, 
Narcissus,  who,  seeing  his  reflection  in  a  pool  of  water,  became  so  en¬ 
grossed  in  self -adoration  that  he  rejected  the  attentions  of  Venus  and 
was  killed.  In  another  version  of  the  myth  his  punishment  was  loss  of 
sight.  This  period  covers,  more  or  less,  from  seven  years  to  fourteen 
years.  As  the  name  indicates,  it  represents  a  semantic  period  of  self-love. 

UN-SANITY  VERSUS  SANITY 

The  child  has  not  entered,  as  yet,  into  a  social  stage  of  development. 
I  le  remains  egotistical,  egoistical,  self-centred,  and  asocial. 

At  about  fourteen,  the  social  semantic  period  begins,  which  leads, 
when  ‘normal’,  to  the  adult  socialized  individual. 

We  should  realize  that  these  semantic  stages  are  ‘normal’  when 
they  are  lived  through  within  the  age  limits  indicated  here.  Even  if  chil¬ 
dren  show  some  characteristics  which  are  not  desirable  (organ  erotic  or 
autoerotic,  narcissistic),  this,  in  itself,  does  not  constitute  a  danger, 
provided  they  outgrow  these  undesirable  manifestations.  The  serious 
dangers,  and  even  tragedies,  begin  when  some  of  the  infantile  or  nar¬ 
cissistic  semantic  characteristics  are  carried  over  into  the  life  of  the 
grown-ups. 

Not  only  ‘intellectual’  growth  but  also  ‘emotional’  development  may 
be  arrested  on  some  earlier  lower  level.  In  such  cases  we  speak  of  idiots, 
imbeciles,  and  morons  on  the  ‘mental’  levels;  and  of  moral  imbecility, 
infantilism,  narcissism,  and,  in  general,  of  ‘mental’  illness  on  the  ‘emo¬ 
tional’  levels. 

Besides  arrested  growth,  or  under-development  in  some  respect, 
cases  of  so-called  regression  are  frequently  encountered.  Regression  fol¬ 
lows  the  general  scheme  as  outlined  in  Fig.  1,  but  in  a  reversed  order. 
The  following  diagram.  Fig.  2,  is  also  taken  from  Jelliffe,  with  slight 
modifications. 

As  processes,  life,  development,  or  regression  are  best  represented 
as  ‘vector  quantities’  which  have  direction  and  magnitude.  In  one  type 
of  cases  of  regression  the  progressive  tendency  or  energy  is  strong;  yet 
the  obstacle  is  also  very  great,  so  that  the  progressive  tendencies  may  not 
he  strong  enough  to  carry  over  the  obstacle  or  to  conquer  it.  Again,  the 
progressive  tendency  or  energy  may  be  weak,  and  the  obstacle  corre¬ 
spondingly  slight,  yet  strong  enough  to  start  the  regressive  movement. 

In  the  healthy  individual  the  progressive  tendency  is  not  easily 
diverted  from  its  forward  course.  He  conquers  his  obstacles  (C)  and 
goes  on  (arrow  A).  Weaker  individuals  (A')  may  surmount  their 
obstacles  with  more  difficulty  or  may  start  regression  on  smaller  ob- 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

stacles,  as  indicated  by  arrows  (B).  In  such  cases  they  may  regress  to 
different  levels,  developing  a  neurosis  or  a  psychosis,  in  accordance  with 
the  degree  of  regression.  It  is  extremely  instructive  to  study  these  dif¬ 
ferent  phases  in  regression  and  to  watch  how  the  symptoms  arrange 
themselves  in  a  perfectly  orderly  manner.  In  some  instances  the  regres¬ 
sion  goes  so  far  as  to  bring  the  patients  to  the  foetal  level.  Such  a  patient 
sits  in  a  dark  corner  in  the  foetal  position  with  the  head  covered  with  a 
rag.  His  ‘mentality’  and  semantic  responses  are  similar  to  those  of  the 
foetus,  practically  none. 

Regressions  to  the  archaic  level  are  usually  hopeless  of  improve¬ 
ment,  so  that  I  shall  not  analyse  them  in  this  work.  We  are  mostly 
interested  in  under-development,  or  in  regression  not  further  than  to 
the  autoerotic  or  the  narcissistic  semantic  levels,  in  which  treatment  ir 
many  instances  yields  curative  results. 

Jelliffe  gives  among  others  a  very  instructive  diagram  as  a  method 
of  showing  how  the  personal  make-up  of  an  individual  can  be  plotted 
(psychogram).  These  diagrams  afford  excellent  graphic  means  for 
orientation.  One  of  them  I  reproduce  on  the  opposite  page  (Fig.  3). 2 

The  circular  form  of  the  diagram  is  particularly  appropriate,  as  it 
shows  clearly  how  the  horizons,  activities,  and  interests  widen  from  the 
archaic  (animal?)  through  the  child  and  savage,  to  the  adult  socialized 
individual.  The  dips  in  the  eye,  stomach,  and  bladder  sectors  correspond 
to  definite  symptoms.  In  the  eye  sector  the  dip  goes  to  the  narcissistic 
semantic  level.  Whenever  this  patient  is  riding  in  an  automobile  and 
another  car  is  coming  close,  so  that  a  collision  seems  possible,  the  patient 
experiences  a  compulsory  shutting  of  the  eyes,  a  typical  narcissistic 
semantic  symptom  which  symbolizes  that  something  which  one  cannot 
see  cannot  happen.  The  patient  did  not  regress  to  the  organ  erotic  level 
and  become  actually  blind  or  deaf  (psychic  or  rather  semantic  blindness 
or  deafness)  ;  so  the  dips  are  not  plotted  to  the  organ  erotic  level.  Ir 
the  bladder  and  nutritive  sectors  we  see  that  the  curve  sinks  as  low  as 
the  organ  erotic  level.  These  dips  correspond  to  striking  semantic  symp¬ 
toms.  When  the  patient  drives  in  her  car  and  is  held  by  the  traffic,  she 
has  an  involuntary  passage  of  urine.  The  dip  in  the  nutritive  sector 
corresponds  to  the  symptom  that  after  eating  certain  foods  the  patient 
is  able  to  bring  them  back  into  her  mouth  (selective  rumination). 
Analysis  by  Doctor  Jelliffe  has  revealed  that  in  the  case  of  the  passage 
of  urine  when  the  patient  is  held  up  in  traffic,  her  unconscious  organ 
erotic  semantic  fantasy  triumphs  over  the  need  for  self-control,  and 
she  asserts  her  mastery  through  the  early  and  necessary  mastery  acquired 
over  the  control  of  the  bladder.  Since  she  is  prevented  from  doing  one 

UN-SANITY  VERSUS  SANITY 

genital,  urinary  eroticism.  The  deep  incision  in  a  fairly  well  socialized  nutri¬ 
tive  ‘libido’  represents  an  ‘emotionally’  conditioned  s.r  for  selective  rumination 
of  individual  ingredients  in  the  stomach.  The  patient  appears  as  a  severely  sick 
individual  on  the  border  of  a  psychotic  reaction.  Present  nosological  schemes 
would  call  this  an  anxiety-hysteria  or  a  manic-depressive  psychosis  if  the 
semantic  compensation  should  break  and  further  regression  occur.  (After 
Jelliffe.) 

thing,  her  power  of  doing  gets  semantic  expression  through  a  substitute 
act  which  cannot  be  prevented  by  outside  interference.  The  selective 
rumination  symptom  also  goes  back  to  the  nursing  semantic  period. 
When  suckling  she  would  vomit  after  a  full  meal,  and  demand  another 
nursing,  to  which  the  mother  foolishly  acceded.  Vomiting  then  became 
her  semantic  way  of  controlling  ‘reality*.  She  used  that  as  a  weapon  in 
getting  her  wishes  with  her  family.  She  has  amplified  and  refined  the 
methods  of  semantic  expression  of  this  old  mastery  over  ‘reality*,  and 
the  selective  rumination  seems  one  of  the  results. 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

The  patient  also  exhibits  other  neurotic  semantic  symptoms.  She  is 
too  impatient  to  read  and  does  not  remember  what  she  has  read.  She 
can  never  remain  quiet.  She  is  very  keen-sighted  to  find  fault  in  others, 
very  acute  to  hear  the  last  verbal  equivocations,  and  very  neat  and  clean 
with  reference  to  her  bodily  secretions.  Here  we  see  clearly  the  seman¬ 
tic  mechanism  of  infantilism  and  the  contradictions  between  the  con¬ 
scious  performance  and  the  unconscious  fantasies. 

In  an  hypothetically  healthy  individual,  his  make-up  could  be  repre¬ 
sented  graphically  by  a  circle  on  the  social  level  of  adjustment.  He  would 
have  outgrown  the  passing  semantic  stages  of  the  archaic,  organ  erotic, 
and  narcissistic  periods. 

Failure  in  semantic  adaptation  to  ‘reality*  might  be  represented  by 
dips  in  the  curve  to  such  a  level  as  the  individual  fixation  or  regression 
has  put  him.  By  such  means  we  have  an  excellent  method  to  represent 
clearly  the  weak  spots  and  to  show  the  focal  semantic  points  of  conflict 
in  evaluation  where  energy  is  diverted  to  useless  or  harmful  fantasy 
ends. 

When  the  dips  or  deviations  are  few  and  slight,  we  call  them  idio¬ 
syncrasies  ;  for  instance,  such  a  habit  as  the  narcissistic  tactile  fantasy  of 
toying  with  a  button,  a  moustache,  or  eyebrow.  When  the  number  of 
failures  is  larger  and  the  semantic  symptoms  go  to  lower  levels  of  devel¬ 
opment,  we  speak  of  hysteria,.  When  the  level  of  regression  is  still 
lower  (organ  erotic  or  archaic),  we  are  usually  entitled  to  speak  of  a 
psychosis.8 

We  have  already  emphasized  over  and  over  again  that  the  organism 
works  as-a-whole,  and  that,  therefore,  any  el  splittings  cannot  lead  to 
satisfactory  results.  The  verbal  division  of  ‘body’  and  ‘mind’  remains 
verbal,  and  also  involves  a  language  whose  structure  does  not  correspond 
to  the  structure  and  functioning  of  the  organism.  A  language  is  like  a 
map ;  it  is  not  the  territory  represented,  but  it  may  be  a  good  map  or  a 
bad  map.  If  the  map  shows  a  different  structure  from  the  territory 
represented— for  instance,  shows  the  cities  in  a  wrong  order ,  or  some 
places  east  of  others  while  in  the  actual  territory  they  are  west . , — then 
the  map  is  worse  than  useless,  as  it  misinforms  and  leads  astray.  One 
who  made  use  of  it  could  never  be  certain  of  reaching  his  destination. 
The  use  of  el  language  to  represent  events  which  operate  as-a-whole  is, 
at  least,  equally  misguiding  and  semantically  dangerous. 

With  this  in  mind,  let  us  briefly  analyse  the  ‘obstacle'  in  Fig.  2.  As 
we  deal  with  ‘obstacles*  in  a  life  sense,  we  can  generalize  the  obstacle 
to  some  semantic  factors  involving  meanings  and  evaluations  which  may 
arrest  the  development  as  well  as  result  in  regression. 

UN-SANITY  V  HRS  US  SANITY 

From  the  non-el  point  of  view  every  obstacle  and  difficulty  involves 
semantic  evaluation.  Any  and  all  reactions  to  lower  order  abstractions 
involve  the  cyclic  chain  of  higher  order  abstractions,  no  matter  how 
imperfectly.  In  ordinary  language,  a  physical  occurrence  with  which 
we  become  acquainted  through  lower  nerve  centres  involves  our  ‘men¬ 
tal’  attitudes,  doctrines . ,  in  general,  s.r  influenced  by  the  activities  of  the 
higher  centres.  From  this  non-el  point  of  view,  surprise,  fear,  fright . , 
enter,  and  usually  do  the  harm.  Physical  pain  seldom,  if  ever,  leads  to 
semantic  disturbances,  but  fear,  fright . ,  and  surprise  usually  do.  An¬ 
ticipation  of  danger,  or  proper  evaluation  of  a  situation,  has  a  protective 
effect,  as  it  usually  tends  to  diminish  or  abolish  the  fear,  fright . ,  or 
surprise .  The  outside  world  is  full  of  devastating  energies,  and  an 
organism  may  only  be  called  adapted  to  life  when  it  not  only  receives 
stimuli  but  also  has  protective  means  against  stimuli.  Now  such  antici¬ 
pation  or  expectation  makes  an  organism  prepared,  and  the  difference 
between  a  prepared  and  an  unprepared  organism  in  the  face  of  danger 
or  pain  may  turn  the  scale  of  the  outcome. 

Section  B.  Consciousness  of  abstracting. 

It  is  obvious  that  in  the  human  organism  the  field  for  stimulations 
is  vastly  greater  than  in  animals.  We  are  subjected  not  only  to  all 
external  stimuli  but  also  to  a  large  number  of  permanently  operating 
internal  semantic  stimuli,  against  which  we  have  had,  as  yet,  very  little 
protective  psychophysiological  means.  Such  structurally  powerful  seman¬ 
tic  stimuli  are  found  in  our  doctrines,  metaphysics,  language,  attitudes , . 
These  do  not  belong  to  the  objective  external  world,  and  so  the  animals 
do  not  have  them  in  a  like  degree.  As  our  enquiry  has  shown,  in  practi¬ 
cally  all  ‘mental’  ills,  a  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions  appears  as  a 
factor.  When  we  confuse  the  orders  of  abstractions  and  ascribe  objective 
reality  to  terms  and  symbols,  or  confuse  conclusions  and  inferences  with 
descriptions . ,  a  great  deal  of  semantic  suffering  is  produced. 

Obviously,  in  such  a  delusional  world,  different  from  the  actualities, 
we  are  not  prepared  for  actualities ,  and  then  always  something  unex¬ 
pected  or  ‘frightful*  may  happen.  The  organism  cannot  adjust  itself 
to  such  fictions;  it  is  not  prepared  to  face  oo-valued  m.o  realities  and 
must  suffer  from  constant  surprises  and  painful  semantic  shocks,  which 
do  the  harm. 

As  we  have  already  seen,  the  general  preventive  psychophysiological 
discipline  in  all  such  cases  of  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions  is  found 
in  ‘consciousness  of  abstracting*.  When  conscious  of  abstracting  we 
cannot  identify  the  symbol  with  the  thing , .  In  the  case  just  described, 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

the  difficulties  of  the  patient  were  precisely  in  intensified  mis-evcduation 
— the  confusion  of  the  symbol  on  the  infantile  semantic  level  with  m.o 
reality — and  this  persisted,  in  spite  of  later  serious  inconvenience  and 
difficulties  when  the  symbol  did  not  any  longer  produce  the  desired 
submission  of  others  and  became  in  itself  a  nuisance. 

We  could  analyse  from  this  semantic  point  of  view  all  psychiatry, 
and  we  would  find  that  the  intensified  mis-evaluation  or  confusion  of 
orders  of  abstractions  is  always  very  prominent  in  ‘mental’  illnesses. 
This  characteristic  is  very  general,  and  the  suffering  these  confusions 
produce  is  very  acute.  The  general  protective  psychophysiological  meas¬ 
ure,  however,  is  very  simple ;  namely,  ‘consciousness  of  abstracting’. 

A  fundamental  difference  between  ‘man*  and  ‘animal’  is  found  in 
the  fact  that  a  man  can  be  conscious  of  abstracting,  and  an  animal  can¬ 
not.  This  last  statement  could  be  reformulated:  that  animals  are 
‘unconscious  of  abstracting’.  Now  consciousness  of  abstracting  is  not 
inborn  as  a  rule,  but  becomes  a  s.r  acquired  only  by  education  or  through 
very  long,  and  usually  painful,  experience  in  evaluation.  If  we  are 
unconscious  of  abstracting,  we  obviously  copy  animals  in  our  ‘mental* 
processes  and  attitudes  and  cannot  completely  adapt:  ourselves  to  the 
structurally  more  complex  human  world  (with  higher  order  abstrac¬ 
tions),  so  that  some  arrested  or  regressive  processes  are  bound  to  result. 
In  such  a  more  complex  world  we  need  protection  against  semantic  over¬ 
stimulations,  which  the  animals  in  their  simpler  world  do  not  need.  If, 
therefore,  we  copy  animals  in  our  ‘mental’  processes,  we  could,  perhaps, 
live  in  their  simpler  world,  but  cannot  adapt  ourselves  easily  to  a  struc¬ 
turally  more  complex  human  world. 

We  see  here  the  general  semantic  mechanism  of  human  adaptation. 
Our  human  world  is  more  complex ;  the  number  of  stimuli  is  enormously 
increased.  Against  this  excessive  stimulation  we  need  protection,  which 
is  found  in  the  consciousness  of  abstracting.  One  adjusts  oneself  by 
increasing  the  field  of  ‘consciousness*,  and  by  giving  it  properly  evalu¬ 
ated  content  as  against  the  vast  ‘unconscious’  which  covers  the  animal’s 
life  and  our  own  past.  In  ‘mental’  ills  we  find  the  arrested  or  regressive 
stages,  with  a  vast  and  harmful  unconscious.  ‘Mental*  therapy  always 
has  the  semantic  aim  and  method ;  namely,  to  discover  the  unconscious 
material  and  make  it  conscious,  and  so  make  proper  evaluation  possible. 

It  is  quite  remarkable  that  ‘mental’  therapy,  which  actually  is  a  form 
of  semantic,  non-el  re-education,  is  only  successful  when  it  succeeds  in 
making  the  patient  not  only  ‘rationalize*  his  difficulties  but  also  makes  him 
‘emotionally’  revive — live  through  again,  so  to  say,  and  evaluate  anew — 
his  past  experiences.  This  process  can  be  compared  with  a  glass  of  water 

UN-SANITY  VERSUS  SANITY 

in  which  some  chalky  sediment  lies  on  the  bottom.  In  semantic  dif¬ 
ficulties  the  different  ‘hurts’. ,  may  be  compared  to  the  water  and  the 
sediment.  ‘Rationalization’,  alone,  is  like  throwing  away  the  clean  water 
and  letting  the  sediment  remain.  No  improvement  follows ;  the  semantic 
sediment  of  earlier  evaluation  is  still  there  and  does  its  work.  But  if  we 
stir  up  the  water  and  the  chalk,  then  we  can  throw  out  both  and  a  clear¬ 
ing  up  will  follow.  The  non-el  ‘living  through*  of  the  past  experiences 
is  equivalent  to  this  semantic  stirring-up  of  meanings  before  eliminating 
the  immature  evaluations. 

This  semantic  mechanism  is  well  recognized,  yet  puzzling.  It  shows 
that  it  is  more  difficult  to  influence  the  affective  than  to  affect  the 
‘rationalization*.  One  may  ‘rationalize’  perfectly  well;  yet  his  lower 
centres  will  not  be  affected  sufficiently.  It  is  possible  that  the  confusion 
of  orders  of  abstractions  or  identification  is,  in  the  main,  responsible  for 
it.  With  the  use  of  the  Structural  Differential  and  with  training  in  the 
orders  of  abstractions  and  in  silence  on  the  objective  levels,  we  gain 
seemingly  extremely  powerful  psychophysiological  means  of  an  entirely 
general  character  to  influence  directly  the  affective  responses,  in  which 
we  are  aided  by  the  utilization  of  all  available  nerve  centres.  It  also 
shows  once  more  how  persistent  is  the  working  of  the  organism-as-a- 
whole.  The  harm  was  done  by  organism-as-a-whole  methods  (affecting 
higher  and  lower  centres) ;  the  protective  semantic  agencies  should  em¬ 
ploy  similar  means . 

In  the  older  ‘mental’  therapy  we  tried  to  bring  the  unconscious  or 
buried  material  into  the  conscious,  but  each  psychiatrist  proceeded  by  a 
private  method,  and  according  to  a  special  theory.  Such  procedure  is 
obviously  not  general  enough  for  simple  preventive  training  on  a  large 
scale.  The  present  system  offers  such  general  and  effective  semantic 
psychophysiological  means.  By  making  ourselves  conscious  of  abstract¬ 
ing  we  prevent  the  animalistic  unconsciousness  of  abstracting,  and  so 
prevent  arrested  development  or  regression.  We  bring  into  conscious¬ 
ness  some  of  the  most  fundamental  human  characteristics,  of  which 
animals  are  wnconscious,  and  so  prevent  arrestment  or  regression  to 
lower  levels.  The  method  is  entirely  general  and  simple,  based  on  the 
elimination  of  identification,  introducing  natural  and  so  adaptive  evalua¬ 
tion  which  should  not  stir  up  resistance  in  the  child. 

In  the  freudian  theory  the  famous  Oedipus  complex  purported  to 
explain  the  often  unconscious  hostility  of  the  son  toward  the  father  and 
his  excessive  attachment  to  the  mother.  The  researches  of  the  anthro¬ 
pologist  Malinowski  show  that  in  primitive  matriarchal  societies  the 
biological  father  is  not  recognized  as  such  and  is  only  a  kind  of  friend 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

and  nurse  to  his  son.  The  other  functions  which  the  father  has  in 
patriarchal  societies  are  here  performed  by  the  mother's  brother.  The 
taboos  which  apply  to  the  mother  in  patriarchal  societies  apply  to  the 
sister  in  such  matriarchal  societies. 

The  results  are  quite  interesting.  Malinowski  found  that  seem¬ 
ingly  similar  unconscious  semantic  mechanisms  are  at  work.  But  the 
hostility  is  toward  the  uncle,  and  the  excessive  attachment  is  directed 
toward  the  sister. 

Malinowski  concludes  that  the  freudian  mechanisms  are  thus  proven. 
According  to  the  present  theory  these  facts  are  very  important  and  show 
clearly  that  ‘sex',  as  such,  has  nothing  or  very  little  to  do  with  these 
'complexes',  but  that  the  active  unconscious  agents  appear  as  semantic 
and  doctrinal.  Doctrines  and  their  meanings  to  the  individual,  their 
applications,  identifications . ,  make  the  father  in  one  case,  and  the  uncle 
in  the  other,  the  dreaded  .  ,  member  of  the  family.  Because  of  lack  of 
consciousness  of  abstracting  the  child  reacts  to  such  application  of  doc¬ 
trines  with  some  'complex',  or  semantic  state,  based  on  identification, 
non-mature  evaluation,  involving  non-mature  non-el  meanings,  in  spite 
of  el  theories  and  languages. 

Similarly,  some  spanking  or  other  pain  in  childhood  may  later 
result  in  a  neurosis.  A  successful  analysis  can  usually  trace  neuroses 
back  to  some  such  experiences.  What  did  the  harm  ?  Was  it  the  burning 
