physical  feeling?  Obviously  not;  for  any  child  has  had  in  its  childhood 
many  more  painful  experiences,  and  yet  no  semantic  harm  has  followed. 
So  we  must  look  in  another  direction,  and  the  elimination  of  identifica¬ 
tion  or  of  the  confusion  of  order  of  abstractions  at  once  offers  a  solution. 
The  'spanking*  had  many  factors;  some  of  them  were  'physical',  some 
‘mental’.  If  we  consider  among  the  'mental'  factors  the  objectifications 
of  'authority*,  'hell',  'sin',  and  other  terms  of  evaluation,  these  result  in 
fright  and  other  semantic  shocks,  which  ultimately  lead  to  the  neurosis. 
We  know  from  our  own  experience  how  little  affected  we  are  by  an 
accidental  hit.  Such  a  purely  physical  experience  which  does  not  give  a 
xii  semantic  shock  cannot  product  a  neurosis. 

It  is  not  difficult  to  see  that  an  investigation  of  ‘hurts',  ‘emotional 
shocks',  'fear',  'fright',  'surprise'. ,  must  lead  to  a  more  general  enquiry 
into  the  structure  of  'human  knowledge',  meanings,  evaluation,  s.r . , 
which  must  include  the  structure  of  science  and  mathematics. 

In  the  disregard  of  the  stratification  of  human  knowledge,  or  in 
identification  or  the  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions,  we  find  an 
ever-present  and  abundant  semantic  source  of  human  suffering,  which 

UN-SANITY  VERSUS  SANITY 

increases  unnecessarily  the  internal  stimulations  and  so  disturbs  the 
efficient  working  of  the  organism-as-a-whole. 

Psychiatrists  in  purely  pathological  fields  have  also  discovered  differ¬ 
ent  sources  of  human  difficulties.  They  discovered  that  the  ‘unconscious' 
seems  quite  a  dangerous  affair,  and  that  ‘mental*  ills  exhibit  symptoms 
of  an  arrested  or  regressive  process. 

This  present  investigation,  as  well  as  the  psychopathological  ones 
here  referred  to,  although  conducted  on  entirely  different  grounds,  one 
more  general  than  the  other,  has  discovered  very  similar  mechanisms ; 
namely,  the  benefit  in  enlarging  the  field  of  ‘consciousness*,  by  bringing 
into  ‘consciousness'  important  factors  of  the  ‘unconscious*  and  thereby 
counteracting  the  semantic  possibility  for  arrested  development  or 
regression. 

With  such  divergence,  both  in  methods  and  in  material  used,  the 
similarity  of  results  indicates  strongly  the  soundness  of  the  conclusions. 

( ienerality  offers,  also,  a  criterion  of  practical  simplicity  and  workability ; 
and  on  these  grounds  the  more  general  semantic  A  discipline  commends 
itself. 

Because  of  this  generality  the  present  theory  has  not  only  a  simple 
but  also  an  impersonal  character  which  makes  it  available  as  a  preventive 
measure  in  elementary  education.  With  the  older  theories  we  deal  in 
practice  with  personal  responses  to  meanings ;  in  our  case  we  deal  with 
the  s.r  in  general  and  with  their  psychophysiological  mechanism  in  par¬ 
ticular. 

The  present  enquiry  started  with  the  search  for  a  sharp  difference 
between  Fido  and  Smith.  This  was  found  in  the  fact  that  Smith  func¬ 
tions  as  a  ‘time-binder*,  while  Fido  does  not.  Further  investigation  into 
the  mechanism  of  the  time-binding  function  revealed  that  its  most 
important  characteristic  is  found  in  its  peculiar  stratification  into  many 
orders  of  abstractions.  The  realization  of  this  stratification  eliminates 
identification  and  leads  to  the  ‘consciousness  of  abstracting',  thus  ascrib¬ 
ing  a  permanent,  strictly  human  content  to  ‘consciousness*,  and  so  auto¬ 
matically  eliminating  such  animalistic,  and,  therefore,  arresting  or 
regressive,  ‘wwconsciousness*.  It  is  found,  also,  that  in  the  consciousness 
of  abstracting  we  find  a  general  and  simple  psychophysiological  semantic 
method  for  the  elimination  of  the  majority  of  human  difficulties.  In  the 
training  in  this  consciousness  of  abstracting  we  find  a  workable  physio¬ 
logical  tool  with  which  to  integrate  the  functioning  of  the  human  nervous 
system.  We  use  organism-as-a-whole  methods  and  achieve  organism- 
as-a-whole  results.  We  find  in  the  language  of  ‘semantic  reactions',  *non- 
elementalistic  meanings’.,  psychophysiological  means  to  integrate  the 

VII.  the  mechanism  of  time-binding 

‘emotional’  with  the  ‘intellectual’,  which  was  hampered,  to  say  the  least, 
by  the  old  el  languages  and  methods  and  systems.  The  organism  by 
structural  necessity  acts  as-a-whole,  but  the  old  elementalism  with  its 
psychophysiological  effects  prepared  the  semantic  background  for  split 
personalities,  which  a  nan-el  system  helps  to  re-integrate.  We  find  a 
rather  astonishing  result ;  namely,  that  the  structure  of  human  achieve¬ 
ments  corresponds  to  the  principle  of  stratification  with  the  resulting 
consciousness  of  abstracting,  usually  limited  to  the  special  field.  The 
majority  of  individual  and  group  difficulties  are  found,  also,  to  be  due 
to  the  very  general  disregard  of  this  principle. 

By  the  scientific  data  of  1933  it  seems  well  established  that  the 
enlargement  of  the  field  of  'consciousness’  is  extremely  desirable.  With 
this  aim,  a  more  general  enquiry  into  the  character  of  the  ‘unconscious’ 
may  also  be  worth  while.  Let  us  investigate  the  structure  of  science 
(1933),  and  see  if  some  ‘unconscious’  factors  cannot  be  found  there. 
We  find  a  curious  fact,  that  mathematicians,  in  addition  to  their  other 
activities,  make  a  business  of  unravelling  hidden  unconscious  assump¬ 
tions.  Their  enquiries  have  led  to  a  thorough  investigation  of  the  struc¬ 
ture  of  their  language  in  two  directions:  one,  investigation  of  the 
underlying  assumptions ;  the  other,  working  out  the  ‘implications’. 

Let  us  give  a  simple  structural  example  of  this.  Two  assumptions 
are  said  to  be  equivalent  when  each  of  them  can  be  deduced  from  the 
other  without  the  help  of  additional  new  assumptions.  For  instance: 
(a)  The  fifth  postulate  of  Euclid — ‘If  a  straight  line  falling  on  two 
straight  lines  make  the  interior  angles  on  the  same  side  less  than  two 
right  angles,  the  two  straight  lines,  if  produced  indefinitely,  meet  on  that 
side  on  which  are  the  angles  less  than  the  two  right  angles’,  (b)  ‘Two 
straight  lines  parallel  to  a  third  are  parallel  to  each  other’,  (c)  Through 
a  point  outside  a  straight  line  one  and  only  one  parallel  to  it  can  be 
drawn*.  Each  assumption  silently,  unconsciously,  presupposes  the  other, 
so  that  they  can  be  deduced  from  each  other.  They  actually  are  different 
forms  of  the  same  propositional  function. 

Another  case  is  equivalence  relatively  to  a  fundamental  set  of  as¬ 
sumptions  A,  B,  C,  .  .  .  M.  It  might  happen  that,  in  diminishing  the  fun¬ 
damental  set,  two  assumptions  which  were  formerly  equivalent  cease  to 
be  so.  For  instance,  the  following  assumptions  are  mutually  equivalent 
and  also  equivalent  to  the  fifth  postulate  of  Euclid,  (a)  ‘The  internal 
angles,  which  two  parallels  make  with  a  transversal  on  the  same  side,  are 
supplementary.’  (Ptolemy.)  ( b )  ‘Two  parallel  straight  lines  are  equi¬ 
distant.’  (c)  ‘If -a  straight  line  intersects  one  of  two  parallels,  it  also 
intersects  the  other.’  (Proclus.)  (d)  ‘A  triangle  being  given,  another 

UN-SANITY  VKKSUS  SANITY 

triangle  can  be  constructed  similar  to  the  given  one  and  of  any  size  what¬ 
ever/  (Wallis.)  (e)  ‘Through  three  points,  not  lying  on  a  straight  line, 
a  sphere  can  always  be  drawn/  (W.  Bolyai)  , . 

But  the  following  two  assumptions  are  only  equivalent  to  the  E 
fifth  postulate  if  we  retain  the  postulate  of  Archimedes* :  (a)  ‘The  locus 
of  the  points  which  are  equidistant  from  a  straight  line  is  a  straight  line’ ; 
(b)  ‘The  sum  of  the  angles  of  a  triangle  is  equal  to  two  right  angles/ 
(Saccheri.)4 

The  crucial  point  of  this  discussion  is  that  all  that  has  been  said  here 
is  not  obvious  even  to  the  attentive  and  intelligent  reader,  nor  to  many 
mathematicians.  It  took  nearly  two  thousand  years  and  some  of  the 
efforts  of  the  best  scientists  of  the  world  to  discover  these  connections 
and  implications .  The  above  examples  illustrate  a  general  underlying 
structure  of  all  our  languages.  They  have  inherent  interconnection,  un¬ 
derlying  assumptions  and  implications,  the  analysis  of  which,  outside  of 
mathematics,  is  seldom,  if  ever,  carried  far  enough.  Now  these  structural 
assumptions  and  implications  are  inside  of  our  skin  when  we  accept  a 
language — any  language.  If  unravelled,  they  become  conscious ;  if  not, 
they  remain  unconscious.  In  the  present  work  we  have  already  had  an 
opportunity  to  become  acquainted  with  unconscious  implications  which 
are  concealed  in  the  structure  of  any  language.  We  saw  that  we  must 
start  with  undefined  terms,  which  represent  structural  assumptions  and 
postulates,  as  we  have  no  means  to  explain  them  or  define  them  at  a 
given  date.  We  found  that  these  undefined  terms  represented  our  un¬ 
conscious  metaphysics,  and  that  the  way  to  make  this  unconscious 
metaphysics  conscious  was  to  start  explicitly  with  undefined  terms,  pro¬ 
duce  a  system  of  postulates . ,  a  procedure  which  is  completely  fulfilled 
only  in  mathematics. 

It  should  be  noticed  (as  this  is  very  important)  that  the  undefined 
terms,  being,  undefined,  are  overloaded  with  € emotional *  values.  As  the 
higher  nervous  centres  cannot  handle  them,  the  lower  nerve  centres  work 
upon  them  overtime.  If  we  do  not  analyse  our  languages  into  their 
undefined  terms  and  structural  postulates,  our  strongest  ‘emotional’  and 
semantic  components,  which  made  these  languages,  remain  hidden  and 
unconscious. 

♦The  Postulate  of  Archimedes  is  stated  by  Hilbert  thus :  Let  At.  be  any  point 
upon  a  straight  line  between  the  arbitrarily  chosen  points  A  and  B.  Take  the  points 
A a,  A 3,  ...  so  that  Ax  lies  between  A  and  Aa,  A2  between  Ax  and  A3 .  ;  moreover, 
let  the  segments  AAlf  AtA2 ,  A2A3;  ...  be  all  equal.  Then,  among  this  series  of 
points,  there  always  exists  a  certain  point  An,  such  that  B  lies  between  A  and  An. 

This  hypothesis  is  used  by  Saccheri  in  its  intuitive  form ;  namely,  a  segment, 
which  passes  continuously  from  the  length  a  to  the  length  b,  different  from  a,  takes, 
during  its  variation,  every  length  intermediate  between  a  and  b? 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

Here  we  are  face  to  face  for  the  first  ‘time*  with  a  wider,  more  gen¬ 
eral,  and  impersonal  'unconscious',  which  underlies  the  structure  of  any 
language,  and  so  is  operative  in  every  one  who  uses  a  language.  We 
may  call  this  general  form  the  scientific,  or  public,  or  linguistic,  or  seman¬ 
tic,  or  by  preference,  as  a  term,  the  structural  unconscious.  It  embodies 
the  underlying  structural  assumptions  and  implications  which  are  silently 
hidden  behind  our  languages  and  their  structures.  These  assumptions . , 
may  be  called  'unconscious',  because  they  are  totally  unknown  and  un¬ 
suspected ,  unless  uncovered  after  painful  research. 

Any  form  of  representation  has  its  own  structural  assumptions  at  its 
basis,  and  when  we  accept  a  language  we  unconsciously  accept  sets  of 
silent  structural  assumptions  of  which  we  become  semantic  victims.  For  a 
long  while,  the  white  race  has  been  the  victim  of  the  unconscious  assump¬ 
tions  and  metaphysics  which  underlie  the  A,  E ,  and  N  systems.  It  has 
needed  a  structural  revision  of  these  systems,  culminating  in  E,.R,  and, 
finally,  A  systems.  These  non-systems  are  characterized  not  by  the 
introduction  of  new  assumptions,  but  by  making  the  older  unjustified, 
primitive,  unconscious  structural  assumptions  conscious,  and  so  helping 
us  in  eliminating  the  semantically  undesirable  reactions.  We  have  already 
seen  how  fallacies  and  taboos  (1933)  can  be  and  were  manufactured 
unconsciously  by  semantic  processes ;  these  start  with  more  general,  more 
natural,  and  more  fundamental  structural  errors,  such  as  the  primitive 
'identification',  for  instance,  which  are  due  to  pre-human  ways  of  'think¬ 
ing'  and  which  result  in  semantic  difficulties  and  regression  even  today. 

Let  us  assume,  as  an  illustration,  that  the  fifth  postulate  of  Euclid 
is  a  false  assumption,  seriously  detrimental  to  human  life  and  comparable 
to  some  of  the  false  doctrines  that  underlie  the  morbid  symptoms  with 
which  psychiatrists  deal  every  day.  Let  us  assume,  further,  that  a  doctor, 
ignorant  of  the  structure  of  ‘human  knowledge',  s.r ,  and  the  equivalence 
of  assumptions,  succeeds,  after  painful  and  laborious  efforts,  in  eliminat¬ 
ing  from  a  patient  this  special  vicious  assumption.  Yet,  because  of  his 
oversight,  he  pays  no  attention  to  another  assumption  equivalent  to  the 
first,  and  does  not  eliminate  it.  In  such  a  case,  rationalization  about  the 
first  false  doctrine  would  probably  make  the  treatment  a  failure,  as  the 
other  unconscious  and  equivalent  doctrine  would,  in  virtue  of  the  ex¬ 
tremely  formal,  one-,  and  two- valued  character  of  the  unconscious,  per¬ 
form  its  task  and  make  the  treatment  ineffective.  The  tangle  of  equivalent 
structural  assumptions  in  daily  life  is  still  unanalysed.  For  instance,  it 
is  extremely  difficult  to  attempt  to  impart  ‘proper  evaluation'  without 
eliminating  identification , . 

UN-SANITY  VERSUS  SANITY 

The  higher  and  lower  order  abstractions  seem  structurally  and 
neurologically,  as  well  as  functionally,  interconnected  in  a  cyclic  chain, 
and  so  can  never  be  entirely  divided.  A  language — any  language — in¬ 
volves  undefined  terms  which,  with  the  structure  of  the  given  language, 
express  the  silent  and  unconscious  metaphysics  underlying  it.  A  lan¬ 
guage,  for  its  maximum  serviceability,  must,  at  least,  have  the  structure 
of  the  events  it  attempts  to  describe;  and  so  science  must  first  discover 
the  structure  of  events,  for  only  then  can  we  shape  our  languages  and 
give  them  the  necessary  structure.  Any  advance  in  our  knowledge  of 
nature  is  strictly  connected  with  new  languages  of  similar  structure 
which  reflect  the  structure  of  the  world.  This  last  "knowledge’  at  each 
date  represents  again  "modern  metaphysics’.  In  all  such  enquiries  we 
have  to  struggle  with  the  older,  mostly  primitive  structural  metaphysics 
and  unconscious  linguistic  semantic  consequences.  Enquiry  into  these 
subjects  must  throw  new  light  on  the  unconscious  processes,  and  so 
diminish  the  vast  field  of  the  unconscious. 

The  structural  unconscious  seems  to  be  more  general,  more  fun¬ 
damental  than  the  special,  or  individual,  psychiatrical  one,  because 
analysis  shows  that  the  latter  follows  from  the  former.  As  the  reader 
may  recall,  life,  "intelligence’,  and  abstracting  in  different  orders  started 
together.  Without  abstracting,  recognition,  and,  therefore,  selection 
would  not  be  possible.  The  world  of  the  animal,  as  well  as  of  man, 
represents  nothing  else  than  the  structural  results  of  abstracting,  without 
which  life  itself  would  be  totally  impossible.  Man  alone  has  the  power 
of  extending  the  orders  of  abstractions  indefinitely.  When  Smith  has 
produced  an  abstraction  of  some  order,  perhaps  by  making  a  statement, 
he  has  the  potential  capacity  of  analysing  and  contemplating  this  state¬ 
ment,  which  has  become  a  fact  on  record,  and  so  he  can  abstract  to 
a  still  higher  order.,  without  known  limits.  It  is  this  capacity  which 
crowds  the  world  of  Smith  with  endless  "facts’  belonging  to  very 
different  orders  of  abstractions.  The  animal’s  capacity  for  abstracting 
ceases  on  some  level,  and  is  never  extended  without  a  change  in  the 
nervous  structure.  So  the  animal’s  world  is  comparatively  simple,  the 
world  structure  of  man  being,  by  comparison,  indescribably  more  com¬ 
plex.  Man’s  problems  of  adjustment,  therefore,  also  become  more  com¬ 
plex.  Human  medicine  is  much  more  complex  than  veterinary  science, 
although  the  higher  animals  differ  very  little  in  their  gross  anatomical 
structure  from  humans.  The  structural  m.o  facts,  which  resulted  from 
abstracting  in  different  orders,  differ  in  number  as  well  as  in  complexity. 
The  human  capacity  for  expanding  indefinitely  the  orders  of  abstrac¬ 
tions  brings  about  this  peculiar  stratification  of  "human  knowledge’. 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

It  appears  as  a  product  of  evolution  just  as  stratified  as  rocks  appear. 
This  stratification  appears  as  a  crucial,  structural  m.o  fact,  though  gen¬ 
erally  disregarded,  except  partially  in  mathematics  and  psychiatry.  Its 
realization  necessitates  the  elimination  of  the  ‘is*  of  identity  and  results 
in  the  consciousness  of  abstracting,  so  fundamental  for  sanity. 

Section  C.  Infantilism. 

As  has  already  been  mentioned,  the  main  symptoms  of  physical  and 
‘mental’  illnesses  are  few  and  simple.  This  would  suggest  the  possibility 
of  simple  and  more  general  theories  relating  to  the  fundamental  symp¬ 
toms,  The  colloidal  structure  of  protoplasm  accounts  for  this  peculiar 
simplicity  and  for  the  small  number  of  the  fundamental  symptoms.  In 
the  ‘mental’  field  these  fundamental  symptoms  are  accounted  for  by  a 
simple  structural,  functional  principle  of  ‘copying  animals’  in  our 
nervous  processes,  which  must  be  harmful,  and  which  is  characterized 
by  the  lack  of  consciousness  of  abstracting,  implying  colloidal  disturb¬ 
ances.  Psychogalvanic  experiments  show  clearly  that  every  ‘emotion’  or 
‘thought’  is  always  connected  with  some  electrical  currents,  and  that 
electricity  seems  fundamental  for  colloidal  behaviour,  and,  therefore,  for 
physical  symptoms  and  the  behaviour  of  the  organism. 

In  the  colloidal  processes  we  find  the  bridge  between  the  ‘physical' 
and  the  ‘mental’,  and  the  mutual  link  seems  mainly  electricity.  It  is  more 
than  mere  coincidence  that  all  illnesses,  ‘physical’  or  ‘mental’,  have  only 
a  few  fundamental  symptoms ;  and  we  should  no  longer  be  surprised  to 
find  that  physical  ills  result  in  ‘mental’  symptoms,  and  that  ‘mental’  ills 
may  also  involve  ‘physical’  symptoms. 

If  a  simple  symptom  is  completely  general,  it  indicates  that  it  is 
structurally  fundamental,  and  we  shall  be  repaid  if  we  devote  special 
attention  to  it.  As  a  rule,  in  ‘mental’  ills  we  observe  a  striking  appear¬ 
ance  of  symptoms  which  have  a  sinister  parallel  with  the  behaviour  of 
infants.  Arrested  development  or  regression  in  grown-ups  also  exhibits 
these  infantile  characteristics.  In  other  words,  whenever  infantile  char¬ 
acteristics  appear  in  grown-ups  it  indicates  that  the  ‘adult’  has  not  grown 
up  fully  in  some  semantic  respects,  or  has  already  started  on  the  way 
of  regression,  implying  some  colloidal  or  m.o  structural  injury. 

When  we  speak  of  ‘infantilism’  in  ‘adults’,  we  include  symptoms 
which  belong  to  the  period  of  childhood  in  its  organ  erotic  or  autoerotic 
and  narcissistic  stages.  It  should  be  recalled  that  in  children  these 
semantic  phases  are  natural;  they  become  pathological  only  when  the 
individual  does  not  outgrow  them  and  exhibits  them  as  a  grown-up.  The 
term  ‘infantilism’  is  a  rather  sinister  one,  and  should  never  be  applied  to 

UN-SANITY  VERSUS  SANITY 

children.  Children  behave  like  children,  and  that  ends  the  subject.  But 
children  have  fewer  responsibilities,  their  sex  impulses  are  undeveloped . , 
and  so  their  behaviour  cannot  be  equally  dangerous  to  themselves  and 
others.  But  not  so  with  grown-ups.  They  have  responsibilities,  duties, 
often  strong  sex  impulses . ,  which  make  out  of  the  infantile  ‘adult’  an 
individual  dangerous  to  himself  and  others.  The  term  ‘social*  period,  or 
‘socialized’  individual,  is  sometimes  wrongly  interpreted.  The  fact  that 
human  achievements  and  capacities  are  accumulative  and  depend  on 
achievements  of  others  makes  us,  by  necessity,  a  social  time-binding 
class  of  life,  which  again  involves  more  complex  modes  of  adjustment. 
Whether  we  approve  or  disapprove  the  existing  legal  and  police  regula¬ 
tions  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  fact  that  in  a  social  class  of  life  some 
restrictions  are  necessary.  Our  present  commercial  ‘civilization’  can  be 
characterized  as  of  an  infantile  type,  governed  mostly  by  structurally 
primitive  mythologies  and  language  very  often  involving  primitive  s.r. 
One  need  but  read  the  speeches  of  different  merchants,  presidents,  and 
kings  to  be  thoroughly  convinced  of  this.  The  rules  and  regulations  are 
naturally  antiquated,  and  belong  to  the  period  to  which  the  underlying 
metaphysics  and  language  belong.  The  ‘adult’  or  scientific  semantic  stage 
of  civilization  would  be  precisely  the  ‘social’  stage  of  complete  evaluation 
of  our  privileges  and  duties . 

In  speaking  about  infantilism,  it  should  be  remembered  that  the 
child  has  an  advantage  over  the  imbeciles,  idiots,  and  ‘mentally’  ill  who 
have  stopped  development  or  have  regressed  to  the  age  of  the  infant  or 
the  child.  The  ‘normal’  child  profits  by  experience  and  outgrows  the 
semantic  characteristics  that  are  natural  to  a  given  age.  In  cases  of 
arrested  development  or  regression,  the  undesirable  infantile  character¬ 
istics  persist  in  the  grown-ups  and  are  a  source  of  endless  difficulties  and 
suffering  to  them  and  their  associates.  Thus,  in  our  childhood  we  all 
have  had  experiences  similar  to  that  of  the  patient  of  Dr.  Jelliffe,  and 
are  no  worse  off  because  of  them.  But,  if  the  reader  should  imagine 
himself  in  the  position  of  the  patient  with  those  infantile  characteristics, 
he  would  realize  that  an  enormous  amount  of  suffering,  fear,  shame, 
bewilderment . ,  results  for  the  patient.  The  worst  feature  in  such  cases 
is  found  in  the  fact  that  an  infantile  type  usually  cannot  ‘outgrow’  or 
alter  such  characteristics  by  himself,  and  needs  very  wise  and  patient 
outside  help  in  re-training,  or  medical  assistance,  if  he  is  ever  to  over¬ 
come  earlier  inappropriate  s.r .  But  if  we  start  the  education  of  an  infant 
with  appropriate  s.rf  such  a  procedure  must  play  a  most  important  pre¬ 
ventive  evaluational  role. 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

We  should  remember  that  the  nervous  system  of  the  human  child 
is  not  finished  at  birth.  The  extension,  the  growth,  and  the  multiplica¬ 
tion  of  the  appendages  of  the  neurones . ,  go  on  after  birth.  The  nervous 
system  of  an  adult  shows  striking  differences  in  the  length  and  com¬ 
plexity  of  the  nerve  cells  over  that  of  the  infant.  The  researches  of 
Hammarberg  showed,  in  all  the  cases  of  idiocy  he  investigated,  an  arrest 
of  development  in  a  more  or  less  large  part  of  the  cortex,  at  a  stage 
corresponding  to  either  an  embryological  period,  or  to  the  period  of 
early  infancy.  Only  a  small  number  of  cells  had  reached  their  full  de¬ 
velopment  during  the  growth  of  the  cortex.  The  psycho-logical  defects 
were  in  direct  proportion  to  the  defects  of  the  development  of  the  cells, 
and  were  the  greater  the  earlier  the  period  of  arrest  of  development.® 
In  extreme  congenital  imbecility  the  cortex  is  poorly  organized,  is  thin 
and  deficient  in  nerve  cells.  Bolton's  second  layer  of  pyramidal  cells 
matures  last  ;  and  its  development  in  different  mammals  corresponds  to 
the  degree  of  their  ‘intelligence'.  In  humans,  its  degree  of  deficiency 
corresponds  to  the  degree  of  ‘mental'  arrest  or  regression.  In  organic 
‘mental'  diseases  very  diffuse  cortical  lesions,  when  present,  impair  ‘intel¬ 
ligence'.  Affective  disturbances  depend  upon  even  smaller  brain  lesions, 
particularly  when  the  thalamic  regions  are  affected.7  In  general,  lesions 
in  the  basal  ganglia  diminish  the  energy  of  the  impulsive  life  (sleeping 
sickness).  Lesions  at  the  base  of  the  frontal  lobe,  and  some  brain 
tumours,  lead  to  euphoric  excitement,  which  gives  a  feeble,  stupid  expres¬ 
sion,  facetiousness,  and  a  tendency  to  teasing.  Other  lesions  in  the  basal 
ganglia  lead  to  a  labile  affectivity.  All  destructions  of  parts  of  the  brain 
usually  lead  to  irritability  and  moodiness.  In  different  focal  lesions  of 
the  brain  the  disturbances  lead  to  anger  and  rage.8 

Among  other  results  of  organic  brain  diseases  we  find  semantic  dis¬ 
turbances,  absence  of  critical  faculty,  and  a  disturbance  of  judgement; 
complicated  situations  can  no  longer  be  grasped,  the  evaluation  of  rela¬ 
tions  is  impaired , .  In  cases  of  labile  affectivity  the  special  ‘emotion' 
dominates  the  patient  completely.  Trifles  make  him  either  very  happy 
or  desperate.  Because  of  the  decrease  in  association  or  deficiency  in  the 
process  of  relating,  the  patient  often  appears  indifferent,  although  the 
defect  is  not  primarily  in  the  affective  field.  Similar  difficulties  in  asso¬ 
ciation  or  relating  make  many  patients  appear  egotistic  in  their  s.r  and 
behaviour.  Since  the  patients  have  lost  their  insight  in,  and  evaluation 
of,  different  life  situations,  their  actions  appear  un-ethical.  Tenderness, 
consideration,  tact,  aesthetic  sensibility,  sense  of  duty,  sense  of  right, 
feeling  of  shame . ,  may  all  disappear  at  any  moment,  though  they  would 
otherwise  naturally  be  present.  Any  kind  of  impulse  may  be  translated 

UN-SANITY  VERSUS  SANITY 

into  action  without  restraint.9  Hemorrhages  in  the  thalamic  region  often 
result  in  marked  lability  of  affects.  Diffuse  nutritional  disturbances  of 
the  cortex  usually  give  similar  symptoms,  as  in  organic  brain  diseases  ,  .10 

It  should  be  remembered  that  in  the  human  nervous  system  the 
co-ordinated  working  of  the  higher  and  lower  centres  is  a  necessity  for 
the  optimum  working  of  the  whole.  In  cats  and  dogs  deprived  of  the 
association  areas  of  the  cortex,  the  difference  is  not  so  marked.  They 
still  behave  in  a  co-ordinated  way,  provided  the  thalamic  regions  are 
intact.  Even  in  a  child  without  a  cortex,  we  find  facial  grimaces  if  we 
give  him  something  bitter,  but  higher  adjustments  are  impossible.11  The 
general  ‘inhibitory’  and  regulative  action  of  the  higher  centres  increases 
with  the  differentiation  of  the  nervous  system ;  and  in  man  this  becomes 
of  paramount  importance.  This  has  been  shown  empirically.  For  in¬ 
stance,  in  man  and  dogs  strong  negative  action  on  the  flow  of  gastric 
juices  may  be  ‘psychic'  in  origin.  This  negative  action  is  weak  in  the 
guinea  pig,  although  it  is  discovered  on  decerebration.  With  the  tortoise, 
also,  there  is  some  acceleration  of  the  movements  of  the  stomach  after 
decerebration,  but  in  a  frog  we  do  not  find  any  negative  influence 
at  all.12 

The  facts  given  above  were  established  through  anatomical  and 
physiological  structural  examinations.  If  the  functioning  of  the  nervous 
system  is  examined  from  the  point  of  view  of  colloidal  chemistry,  the 
gross  non-surgical  lesions  become  interpretable  as  the  result  of  changes  in 
colloidal  behaviour.  Thus  Doctors  Wilder  D.  Bancroft,  J.  Holmes  Rich¬ 
ter,  H.  Beckett  Lang,  John  A.  Paterson,  Walter  Freeman,  and  others 
demonstrated  that  it  is  possible  to  find  a  correlation  between  the  func¬ 
tional  psychoses  and  the  state  of  dispersion  of  the  nerve  colloids.  For 
instance,  in  dementia  praecox  the  nervous  system  appears  in  a  state  of 
colloidal  over-dispersion ;  and  in  manic  depressive  psychoses,  in  a  state 
of  decreased  dispersion.13  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  in  infants  the 
colloids  appear  more  dispersed  than  in  grown-ups  and  probably  similar 
conditions  will  be  found  in  cases  of  infantilism.  The  above-mentioned 
scientists  have  found,  also,  that  the  colloidal  behaviour  of  the  nervous 
system  can  be  altered  by  special  chemical  treatment  with  drugs,  carbon 
dioxide,  oxygen . ,  with  specific  reactions  on  the  psycho-logical  level.  As 
s.r  involve  electrical  occurrences  fundamental  in  colloidal  behaviour, 
similar  symptoms  on  psycho-logical  levels  may  imply  corresponding  sub- 
microscopic  colloidal  states.  Taking  into  consideration  the  structural 
characteristics  of  colloidal  behaviour  and  the  elaboration  of  technical 
means,  we  may  discover  that  semantic  re-education  must  involve  differ¬ 
ences  in  electrical  potentials . ,  and  result  in  differences  in  colloidal  be- 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

haviour  in  different  regions  of  the  nervous  system.  Experiments  should 
be  made  in  combining  chemical  means,  which  effects  are  not  lasting,  but 
which  might  facilitate  the  semantic  approach,  with  semantic  re-education, 
which  results,  once  achieved,  often  become  lasting.  Colloidal  and  psycho¬ 
galvanic  investigations  of  a  given  patient  before  and  after  the  semantic 
re-education  should  also  be  made. 

Let  me  emphasize  once  more  that  from  the  colloidal  point  of  view 
free  from  identification,  the  ‘body-mind*  problem  ceases  to  be  a  puzzle, 
as  we  have  a  well-established  electrodynamic,  structural  colloidal  back¬ 
ground  which  can  account  perfectly  for  the  experimental  facts  of  ‘mind*. 
The  subtleties  of  the  sub-microscopic  structure  involve  an  endless  array 
of  possibilities.  At  present  we  lack  detailed  knowledge  of  this  structure ; 
for  the  colloidal  developments  are  very  recent,  and  in  this  special  field 
very  little  experimentation  has  been  done. 

If  we  accept  the  non-el  point  of  view,  and  all  known  evidence 
seems  to  demand  it,  we  must  conclude  that  if  different  macroscopic, 
microscopic,  and  sub-microscopic  lesions  of  the  nervous  system  result  in 
quite  definite  psycho-logical  symptoms,  which  on  the  semantic  levels 
appear  as  a  lack  of  evaluation  of  relations;  then,  vice  versa,  the  use  of 
linguistic  systems,  which  systematically  train  the  immature  nervous  sys¬ 
tem  of  the  child  and  of  the  grown-ups  in  delusional  evaluation,  must  result 
in  at  least  colloidal  disturbances  of  the  nervous  system.  These  functional 
colloidal  disturbances  become  superimposed  upon  the  inborn  eventual 
deficiencies  of  the  nervous  system,  and  the  end-results  may  be  quite  out 
of  proportion  to  the  seemingly  slight  induced  discrepancy.  The  actual 
behaviour,  adjustment,  sanity.,  may  be  considerably  impaired. 

Before  birth,  the  child  can  be  considered  as  in  ideal  conditions.  He 
floats  comfortably  in  a  fluid  of  a  temperature  equal  to  his  own.  All  his 
wants  are  satisfied,  as  everything  is  supplied  to  him  by  the  maternal 
body.  At  birth,  the  child  must  begin  to  breathe,  and  a  little  later  he  must 
take  food,  digest , .  External  influences  begin  to  impinge  on  him,  and 
he  must  begin  to  adjust  himself.  Very  soon  the  average  infant  finds  that 
he  can  get  what  he  wants,  within  certain  limits,  by  certain  movements 
or  by  crying.  For  the  infant,  a  cry  or  a  word  becomes  semantic  magic. 
In  Pavlov’s  language,  a  word  governs  a  conditional  reflex.  In  psychiatry, 
a  definite  series  of  such  conditional  s.r  of  animalistic  low  order  of  con¬ 
ditionality  is  called  a  ‘complex*.  In  Pavlov’s  experiments  a  dog  is  shown 
food  and  a  bell  rung  simultaneously.  At  the  sight  of  food,  saliva  and 
gastric  juice  flow.  Associations  soon  relate  the  ringing  of  the  bell  and 
the  food,  and,  later,  simply  the  ringing  of  the  bell  will  produce  the 
flow.  In  another  animal  some  other  signal,  a  whistle,  for  instance,  would 

UN-SANITY  VERSUS  SANITY 

produce  similar  effects.  In  different  people,  through  experience,  associa¬ 
tions,  relations,  meanings,  and  s.r  are  built  around  some  symbol.  Obvi¬ 
ously,  in  grown-up  humans  the  identification  of  the  symbol  with  the 
thing  must  be  pathological.  But  in  infancy  the  confusion  of  orders  of 
abstractions  must  be  considered  as  an  entirely  natural  semantic  period. 
The  infant  'knows*  nothing  about  science  and  events.  Objects  and  'sense 
perceptions’  ‘are’  the  only  'reality*  he  knows  and  cares  about ;  so  he  does 
not  and  cannot  discriminate  between  events  and  objects.  By  necessity, 
he  identifies  unknowingly  two  entirely  different  levels.  As  his  symbol 
