usually  means  a  satisfaction  of  his  wants,  naturally  he  identifies  the  sym¬ 
bols  with  the  objects  and  events.  At  this  stage,  also,  he  cannot  know 
that  the  orders  of  his  abstractions  can  be  extended  indefinitely,  or  that 
his  most  important  terms  have  the  multiordinal  character.  It  is  impor¬ 
tant  to  notice  that  objectification,  and,  in  general,  identification  or  con¬ 
fusion  of  orders  of  abstractions,  are  semantically natural  for  the  infant. 
The  more  the  child  comes  in  touch  with  'reality*,  the  more  he  learns,  and 
in  a  'normal*  child  the  ‘pleasure  principle’,  which  was  established  as  a 
method  of  adjustment  on  the  infantile  level,  is  slowly  displaced  by  the 
'reality  principle*,  which  thus  becomes  the  semantic  method  of  adjust¬ 
ment  of  the  complete  adult.  Science  alone  gives  us  full  knowledge  of 
current  ‘reality*.  But  science  represents  a  social  achievement,  and,  there¬ 
fore,  a  complete  adult,  in  growing  up  to  the  social  level,  must  become 
aware  of  the  latest  stages  of  m.o  reality.  These  are  given  by  the  current 
scientific  methods  and  structural  notions  about  this  world,  and  gradually 
become  incorporated  in  the  structure  of  the  language  we  use,  always 
deeply  affecting  our  s.r . 

It  is  important  that  in  the  twentieth  century  we  should  realize  that 
the  work  of  Einstein  and  the  four-dimensional  space-time  continuum 
establishes  a  language  of  different  structure,  closer  to  the  facts  we  know 
in  1933,  and  that  it  gives  us  a  new  semantic  method  of  adjustment  to  a 
new  'reality*  (see  Part  IX). 

The  semantic  stages  of  the  development  of  the  child  must  naturally 
pass  through  the  stages  outlined  above.  When  he  begins  to  differentiate 
himself  from  the  environment,  he  is  self-centred  and  concentrated  on  his 
‘sensations*  (autoerotic).  Later  he  projects  his  own  sensations  on  the 
outside  events;  he  personifies.  This  semantic  trait  is  often  found  in 
incomplete  adults,  when  in  anger  they  break  dishes  or  furniture. 

The  child  is  interested,  first,  in  himself  (autoerotic)  ;  then  in  chil¬ 
dren  like  himself  (homosexual).  Slowly  his  interests  turn  away  to 
persons  less  similar  to  himself,  to  the  opposite  sex,  and  so  he  enters  the 
semantic  period  of  the  race  development. 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

Similar  semantic  processes  are  to  be  seen  in  the  racial  developments 
as  given  by  anthropology,  and  are  reflected  in  the  structure  of  the  lan- 
guages.  In  the  archaic  period  of  one-valued  *pre-logical  thinking’,  which 
is  found  among  primitive  peoples,  the  ‘consciousness  of  abstracting*  is 
practically  nil.  The  effect  produced,  by  something  upon  an  individual 
inside  his  skin  is  projected  outside  his  skin,  thus  acquiring  a  demonic 
semantic  character.  The  ‘idea*  of  an  action  or  object  is  identified  with 
the  action  or  the  object  itself.  Identification  and  confusion  of  orders  of 
abstractions  have  full  sway. 

The  paralogical  stage  is  a  little  more  advanced.  In  it  the  identifica¬ 
tion  is  based  on  similarities ,  and  differences  are  neglected  (not  con¬ 
sciously,  of  course).  Levy-Bruhl  describes  this  primitive  semantic  period 
by  formulating  the  ‘law  of  participation’,  by  which  all  things  which  have 
similar  characteristics  ‘are  the  same'.14  A  primitive  syllogism  runs  some¬ 
what  as  follows :  ‘Certain  Indians  run  fast,  stags  run  fast ;  therefore, 
some  Indians  are  stags’.  This  semantic  process  was  entirely  natural  at  an 
early  stage  and  laid  a  foundation  for  the  building  of  language  and  higher 
order  abstractions.  We  proceeded  by  similarities,  much  too  often  con¬ 
sidered  as  identities ,  with  the  result  that  differences  were  neglected.  But 
in  actual  life,  without  some  primitive  metaphysics,  we  do  not  find  iden¬ 
tities,  and  differences  become  as  important  as  similarities.  The  former 
primitive  emphasis  on  identity,  later  enlarged  to  similarities,  must,  at 
some  stage  of  human  development,  become  semantically  disastrous  and 
the  optimum  adjustment  an  impossibility. 

In  building  a  ^-system,  we  have  to  stress  differences,  build  a  ‘non¬ 
system’  on  ‘non-allness’,  and  reject  identity.  The  older  semantic  inclina¬ 
tions  and  infantile  or  primitive  tendencies  were  a  necessary  step  in 
human  evolution.  For  sanity,  we  must  outgrow  these  infantile  semantic 
fixations.  Similarly,  for  civilization,  we  must  grow  out  from  primitive 
structural  fixations,  primitive  metaphysics,  taboos,  and  other  primitive 
s.r.  These  primitive  habits,  languages,  and  structural  metaphysics  and 
reactions  have  been  extremely  ingrained  in  us  through  the  ages,  and  it 
requires  effort  and  new  semantic  training  to  overcome  them. 

In  the  ‘mentally’  ill  we  find  sinister  and  very  close  parallels  to  the 
behaviour  of  the  primitive  man  and  the  infant,  not  only  in  the  ‘mental’ 
and  ‘emotional’  responses,  but  even  in  physical  behaviour,  postures, 
drawings,  and  other  modes  of  expression.  These  parallels  are  today 
recognized  by  practically  all  scientific  workers  and  are  analysed  in  many 
excellent  volumes. 

We  should  notice  that  in  this  maze  of  observational  material,  one 
general  rule  holds;  namely,  ‘consciousness  of  abstracting’  offers  a  full 

UN-SANITY  VERSUS  SANITY 

semantic  solution .  In  it  we  find  not  only  a  complete  foundation  for  a 
theory  of  sanity,  but  also  the  semantic,  psychophysiological  mechanism 
for  the  passing  from  the  infantile,  or  primitive-man,  level  to  the  higher 
level  of  complete  adulthood  and  civilized  social  man. 

The  following  drawing  is  taken  from  Bleuler’s  Textbook  of  Psychi- 
atry  (p.  402)  and  was  made  by  a  very  ill  patient  (chronic  catatonic) 
who  could  formerly  draw  well;  yet  this  drawing  is  obviously  childish . 
The  literature  of  psy¬ 
chiatry  abounds  in  such 
productions,  and  they 
confirm  fully  the  pro¬ 
cesses  as  described  in 
psychiatry. 

Adult  infantilism 
becomes  usually  a  potent 
wrecker  of  individual 
lives,  and,  when  viewed 
from  a  social,  national, 
or  international  point 
of  view,  accounts,  also, 
for  the  majority  of  our 
semantic  difficulties  in 
the  social,  economic, 
and  political  fields. 

Although  we  treat 
infantile,  arrested,  and 
regressive  symptoms  to¬ 
gether,  it  is  important 
to  realize  that  most  of 
these  characteristics  are 
normal  with  the  primi¬ 
tive  man,  and  the  infant, 
provided  the  child  out¬ 
grows  them.  The  differ-  Fig.  4 

ence  between  arrested 

development  and  regression  seems  somewhat  like  that  between  a  poor 
man  and  one  who  has  lost  his  fortune.  In  the  first  case,  the  functioning 
of  the  nervous  system  is  unsatisfactory  through  some  deficiency ;  in  the 
second,  the  potentialities  for  efficient  working  were  there,  but  some 
semantic  obstacle  originated  the  regression,  or  else  some  degenerative 
neural  process  set  in. 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

In  the  field  of  higher  abstractions  the  train  of  ‘ideas’  of  children, 
imbeciles,  and  idiots  is  restricted.  Uncommon  ‘ideas’  are  left  out,  and 
only  those  which  originated  in  immediate  ‘sense  perception’  are  easily 
grasped.  Until  lately,  even  in  science,  such  an  attitude  was  noticeable, 
as,  for  instance,  in  gross  empiricism,  or  in  the  case  of  the  physicist 
already  mentioned  who  was  willing  to  ‘fight’  to  prove  that  he  ‘saw’  the 
electron , .  He  did  not  realize  that  inferential  entities  are  just  as  good 
abstractions  as  those  he  ‘sees’.  The  attitude  of  the  ‘practical  man’  who 
pooh-poohs  science  and  the  ‘highbrows’  may  serve  also  as  an  example. 

Children,  idiots,  and  imbeciles  cannot  comprehend  anything  com- 
plicated;  they  see  some  elements,  but  miss  the  relative  wholes.  We  have 
elaborated  a  racial  language  of  ‘senses’  and  elementalism.  Similarly  in 
schizophrenics  the  relative  whole  is  disregarded,  while,  on  the  other 
hand,  a  single  semantically  effective  characteristic  is  sufficient  to  connect 
the  most  heterogeneous  abstractions  in  an  unnatural  whole.  Word- 
relations  have  a  predominance  over  actualities  (identification).  Thus, 
a  patient  looks  anxiously  at  a  moving  door  and  exclaims  ‘Da  fressen  mich 
die  Thiiren’*  and  refuses  to  pass  through  the  door-way.  Here  we  see 
the  identification  of  words  with  objects  carried  to  the  limit.  In  general, 
the  s.r  of  the  schizophrenic  seem  such  that  he  identifies  intensely  his 
higher  abstractions  with  the  lower.18 

Much  excellent  material  on  infantilism  can  be  found  in  Dr.  Joseph 
Collins’  The  Doctor  Looks  at  Love  and  Life,  particularly  in  his  chapter 
on  Adult  Infantilism,  from  which  much  of  the  following  material  is 
taken,  and  which  I  acknowledge  gratefully. 

Children  and  idiots  live  in  the  present  only  and  do  not  concern  them¬ 
selves  with  the  past  and  the  future  beyond  their  immediate  gratification. 
Infantile  types  also  want  all  the  "sense*  enjoyment  of  the  moment,  never 
enquiring  about  the  sufferings  of  others  or  of  the  consequences  for 
themselves  in  the  future.  Indeed,  their  attitude  is  often  hostile  toward 
those  who  take  into  consideration  a  larger  field.  ‘Apres  nous  le  deluge' 
represents  their  royal  semantic  motto.  On  national  and  commercial 
grounds,  they  devastate  their  natural  resources,  since  they  are  interested 
only  in  some  immediate  and  selfish  advantage.  They  love  praise  and  hate 
blame,  not  realizing  that  a  critical  attitude  gives  the  foundation  for 
proper  evaluation  and  becomes  a  semantic  characteristic  of  maturity  and 
that,  generally,  it  is  more  beneficial  in  the  long  run.  They  thrive  and 
thrill  on  commendations  and  compliments,  and  shiver  and  shrink  at  dis¬ 
approval.  Such  characteristics  are  found  even  in  whole  nations.  They 

*Animal  -- Thier,  Door  —  Thiir,  so  that  the  unconscious  play  upon  words  gives 
the  meaning;  ‘Doors  devour  me',  for  ‘Animals  devour  me'.  g 

UN-SANITY  VERSUS  SANITY 

are  self-satisfied,  and  keep  aloof  from  others  in  international  affairs,  not 
realizing  that  this  is  impossible,  and  that  the  attempt  is  ultimately  harm¬ 
ful  to  them.  They  assume,  as  an  excuse,  the  superiority  of  their  institu¬ 
tions  . ,  and  the  ‘righteousness’  of  their  own  conduct. 

Children  and  superior  idiots  appreciate  resemblances  more  readily 
than  differences.  Simple  generalizations  are  possible,  but  often  they  are 
hasty  and  faulty.  A  child’s  pride  and  self-respect  are  hurt  if  he  is  con¬ 
sidered  different  from  other  children,  or  is  dressed  differently.  Original¬ 
ity  and  individuality  are  tabooed  among  children.  Because  of  semantic 
undevelopment,  differences  become  a  disturbing  factor  to  them;  they 
want  everything  standardized.  On  national  grounds,  the  adult  infants 
standardize  all  they  can  and  have  even  a  kind  of  hostility  to  anything 
which  has  an  individual  flavour.  For  instance,  those  who  wear  straw 
hats  after  an  arbitrary  date  are  attacked  on  the  streets.  Not  wanting  to 
‘think’,  or  to  bother  about  differences,  they  fancy  that  they  can  regulate 
life  by  legislation  and  they  keep  busy  manufacturing  ‘laws’,  which  are 
very  often  impracticable  and  self-contradictory.  When  they  pass  sev¬ 
eral  thousand  ‘laws’  a  year,  these  become  a  maze  and  a  joke.  The  ulti¬ 
mate  semantic  result  of  such  over-legislation  is  a  complete  lack  of  justice 
or  of  any  respect  for  ‘law’.  Not  being  able  to  ‘think’  for  themselves, 
they  leave  that  bothersome  function  to  politicians,  priests,  newspaper¬ 
men,.  Under  such  conditions  life  is  impossible  without  expensive 

lawyers.  .  . 

Not  having  the  critical  semantic  capacity  for  proper  evaluation,  their 
likes  and  dislikes  are  very  intense.  They  cannot  differentiate  the  essen¬ 
tial  from  the  unimportant.  The  immediate  ‘sense’  perception  or  ‘emo¬ 
tion’  unduly  influences  their  actions.  Impulses  to  copy  others  dominate 
them.  They  are  often  prejudiced.  This  results  in  weak  judgement,  over- 
suggestiveness,  ‘emotional’  outbreaks,  exaggerated  sensibility,  variability 
of  affective  states . ,  and,  finally,  in  an  attitude  toward  life  devoid  of 
proper  evaluation.  Their  moods  are  changeable;  their  attention  readily 
gained  and  as  readily  diverted.  They  become  easily  intimidated  and 
frightened,  and  easily  influenced  by  others. 

The  above  semantic  characteristics  are  sponsored  by  commercialism, 
and  build  up  the  kind  of  methods,  advertisements,  and  business  policies 
which  we  see  about  us.  This  also  introduces  a  semantic  factor  of  disin¬ 
tegration  into  human  relationships,  as  it  leads  to  methods  of  trickery,  to 
‘putting  something  over*  on  the  other  fellow,  and  appeals  to  self-indul¬ 
gence  , .  When  such  commercial  tactics  are  national,  their  sinister  educa¬ 
tional' effect  is  pronounced.  Children,  from  the  age  when  they  begin 
to  read,  are  impressed  by  such  practices  as  normal  and  take  them  as 

518  VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

semantic  standards  for  their  own  further  orientations.  Unfortunately, 
even  psychiatrists  have  not,  as  yet,  analysed  the  semantic  influence  of 

such  advertisements  on  the  building  and  preserving  of  infantile  char- 

acteristics. 

Children  lack  moderation  and  a  semantic  sense  of  proper  evaluation. 
1  olerance  is  not  one  of  their  characteristics.  To  them  persons  and  'ideas’ 
are  evaluated  m  extremes,  either  good,  ‘wonderful’,  or  bad,  ‘terrible’ 
Their  s.r  appear  dogmatic  and  stubborn,  as  in  all  the  unexperienced.’ 
They  talk  too  much  or  are  silent ;  they  praise  too  much  or  blame  too 
much ;  they  work  too  hard  or  play  too  hard,  and  know  no  middle  ground, 
the  whole  life  of  a  nation  may  be  coloured  by  such  semantic  attitudes. 
Nations  become  boastful  of  their  own  possessions  and  achievements,  and 
happily  borrow  and  forget  the  achievements  of  others.  They  pride  them¬ 
selves  on  having  the  largest  airships,  the  largest  cities,  the  highest  build¬ 
ings,  the  longest  bridges , .  They  know  no  moderation  in  food  or  drink  • 
they  eat  or  drink  too  much  or  become  total  ‘prohibitionists’.  They  ex¬ 
hibit  quick  friendships  and  quick  dislikes.  They  are  solemn  in  their 
games,  like  children  who  are  playing  father  and  mother,  and  make  out 
of  games  a  national  event.  The  childish  pleasure  of  defeating  an  adver- 
saij  accounts  for  national  crazes,  like  racing,  boxing,  football,  baseball, 

and  similar  sports,  which  often  overshadow  in  public  attention  all  really 
important  issues.  y 

Qnldren  and  many  idiots  are  incapable  of  any  choice  which  involves 
meaning8  and  evaluation.  When  confronted  with  a  situation  in  which 
they  have  to  choose  between  two  alternatives,  they  have  difficulties,  and 
often  want  both.  Similarly  with  ‘ideas’;  they  often  keep  sets  of  entirely 
self-contradictory  ‘ideas’  Even  scientists  of  an  infantile  type  do  so,  and 
en  publish  manifestos  in  which  they  try  to  justify  such  behaviour  and 
semantic  attitudes.  Merchants  train  salesmen  especially  to  induce  cus¬ 
tomers  with  such  infantile  s.r  to  buy  what  they  do  not  need.  This  atti¬ 
tude  is  often  extended  to  marriage.  Any  man  and  woman  may  marry 
simply  because  they  come  across  each  other;  then,  when  they  meet  some¬ 
body  else,  they  soon  change  the  object  of  their  sentiments. 

..  fh11  C!asses  of  feeble-minded  and  children  show  marked  credulity  • 
they  hke  fany  tales  and  fantastic  stories.  Free  inventions,  by  a  proems 
of  objectification,  are  taken  as  experience.  Children  and  schizophrenics 
pun  and  play  on  words-  They  build  up  languages  of  their  own  Per¬ 
severation  and  stereotypy  in  speech  are  also  found  among  them.  National 
commercialism  utilizes  this  principle  in  advertisements  and  tries  to  run 
a  country  by  verbal  slogans  and  play  on  words. 

UN-SANITY  VERSUS  SANITY 

Many  children  and  feeble-minded  show  distinct  acquisitiveness. 
Like  some  animals,  they  show  a  tendency  for  collection  of  objects,  and 
value  their  collections  highly.  It  is  a  well-known  childish  game  to  claim 
the  best  morsel  of  some  food  because  one  has  put  one’s  hand  on  it  first. 
Acquisitiveness  is  made  a  national  slogan  and  proclaimed  a  highest  aim, 
which,  of  course,  becomes  a  semantic  source  of  endless  wars  and  mis¬ 
eries.  Infantile  legalistic  ‘putting  hands  first’,  on  a  piece  of  paper  as  a 
title  to  land,  or  some  such  similar  form  of  a  ‘claim’,  becomes  a  source  of 
ridiculous  fortunes  for  the  few  and  of  unbearable  life-conditions  for 
the  many. 

Children  are  gregarious  and  afraid  to  be  alone.  Similar  tendencies 
are  carried  on  by  Rotary  and  other  clubs  and  lodges.  Infantile  grown¬ 
ups  are  too  empty  in  their  heads  to  desire  to  be  alone.  Children  seldom 
stick  to  anything  for  long.  They  hunt  for  new  excitements,  and  the  old 
toys  are  often  soon  forgotten.  Similarly,  grown-up  infants  hunt  for  new 
excitements,  for  new  toys,  whether  they  be  a  house  or  an  automobile,  a 
wife  or  a  lover. 

In  children  and  the  feeble-minded,  we  seldom  find  such  feelings  as 
shame,  aesthetic  sentiments,  or  appreciation  of  beauty.  They  like  things 
bizarre,  grotesque,  glittering,  and  enormous,  things  which  attract  and 
hold  their  attention.  Similar  characteristics  are  found  in  incomplete 
adults.  Children  and  the  feeble-minded  are  usually  untidy  and  noisy. 
Visiting  a  public  park,  or  witnessing  a  ‘celebration’,  will  show  an  observer 
clearly  how  infantile  grown-ups  behave. 

Children  like  to  domineer  over  their  younger  brothers  and  sisters 
and  to  play  the  leading  part  in  a  game.  Similar  semantic  characteristics 
are  carried  into  adult  life,  sometimes  taking  the  form  of  sadism.  We 
often  see  infantile  docility  or  resentment,  as  expressed  in  sentimental 
approval  or  bitter  disillusionment,  both  generally  unjustified. 

Self-respect  is  little  developed  in  the  idiot,  but  plays  an  important 
semantic  role  in  the  life  of  imbeciles  and  children.  The  infantile  adult 
also  shows  an  exaggerated  self-respect.  Bus  conductors  and  university 
professors  label  themselves  with  a  title — even  if  it  is  only  Mr.  John 
Smith,  as  if  being  called  simply  ‘John  Smith’  would  be  offensive  to  him. 
An  adult  evaluates  a  man  by  what  he  has  in  his  head  or  character,  but 
the  infantile  type  largely  judges  him  by  the  symbols  (money)  which  he 
has,  or  the  kind  of  hat  or  clothes  he  wears.  Since  commercialism  cannot 
sell  brains,  but  can  sell  trousers  or  a  dress,  it  establishes  semantic 
standards  whereby  a  man  is  evaluated  by  his  clothes  and  hats. 

In  speaking  of  exaggerated  self-regard  based  on  improper  self- 
evaluation,  we  touch  the  problems  of  infantile  self-love  and  self-impor- 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

tance.  Infantile  grown-ups  carry  these  even  further,  and  are  unable  to 
make  dependable  attachments  to  other  persons.  The  love  of  parents 
toward  their  child  is  largely  because  it  is  their  child;  and  infantile  A 
loves  B,  only  because  B  ‘adores’  A  and  gives  up  his  individuality.  The 
moment  something  changes  in  B,  all  the  ‘love’  A  had  disappears.  The 
unbelievable  bitterness  which  appears  in  divorce-court  scenes  shows 
clearly  the  value  of  infantile  ‘love’.  Such  ‘love’  is  often  based  on  purely 
egoistic  grounds.  They  ‘love’  what  they  represent  to  themselves,  what 
they  once  represented,  what  they  would  like  to  represent.  Infantile 
parents  see  all  kinds  of  perfections  in  their  babies,  although  a  sober  out¬ 
sider  does  not  share  these  opinions.  An  infantile  mother  treats  her  child 
1!.k?  a.do11,  plays  anc* is  thrilled  with  it,  but  soon  gets  tired  as  the  respon¬ 
sibilities  become  irksome.  An  infantile  father  sees  in  the  child,  first,  a 
toy,  and,  later,  a  nuisance.  ’  ’ 

Infantile  adults  have  little  regard  for,  or  endurance  of,  life  respon¬ 
sibilities.  They  tire  quickly,  are  easily  discouraged  and  frightened.  They 
are  thus  irresponsible,  unreliable,  and  a  source  of  suffering  for  those 
connected  with,  or  dependent  on,  them.  This  permanent  suspense  for 
others  produces,  perhaps,  one  of  the  most  serious  sources  of  worries  and 
unhappiness.  Since  it  is  persistent,  it  gives  continual,  painful  nervous 
shocks,  the  cumulative  effect  of  which  is  bound  to  be  harmful. 

The  infantile  individual  himself  cannot  fail  to  notice  that  something 
is  wrong,  for  life  makes  him  quickly  aware  of  it.  But,  in  his  self-love, 
exaggerated  self-esteem . ,  he  overlooks  his  own  shortcomings,  and 
blames  everybody  and  everything  but  himself.  In  the  face  of  ‘injustice’, 
he  becomes  discouraged,  timid,  or  bitter  and  pessimistic.  He  is  unable 
to  discharge  his  duties,  and  becomes  a  disappointment  as  a  father,  hus¬ 
band,  friend,  and,  ultimately,  as  a  human  being  and  citizen.  Bitterness, 
disappointment,  and  painful  semantic  shocks  pile  up  on  all  sides  under 
such  conditions. 

One  of  the  important  characteristics  of  infantilism  of  all  degrees 
takes  the  form  of  exhibitionism,  an  impulse  for  showing  off,  even  by 
crude  display  of  himself,  his  body, .  This  tendency  is  very  common,  and 
leads  to  many  results  of  a  very  undesirable  social  character.  Infantile 
men  and  women  are  primarily  in  love  with  themselves  and  care  only  how 
pretty  they  are.  They  spend  large  portions  of  their  income  and  life  on 
dresses  and  grooming,  which,  of  course,  have  no  social  value.  Such 
types  live  in  an  infantile  world  and  are  socially  useless,  often  parasitic 
on  the  social  body.  Often  those  who  support  them  ruin  their  lives  to 
satisfy  these  infantile  semantic  characteristics. 

UN-SANITY  VERSUS  SANITY 

Infantile  exhibitionism  leads,  also,  very  often  to  a  selection  of  a 
career.  Most  diplomats,  politicians,  professional  military  men,  preachers, 
actors,  boxers,  wrestlers,  athletes,  many  lawyers  and  public  speakers, 
to  list  only  the  more  important  professions,  select  their  professions  be¬ 
cause  of  this  infantile  tendency.  We  should  notice  that  in  this  list  we 
find  the  most  important  professions  which,  as  yet,  have  shaped  our  des¬ 
tinies.  Royalty,  hereditary,  potentates,  and  many  plutocrats  live  under 
such  infantile  fairy-tale  conditions  that  they  necessarily  become  seman¬ 
tically  twisted. 

This  pathological  tendency  probably  accounts  for  our  so-called 
civilization  being  at  an  infantile  asocial  level,  based,  as  it  is,  on  selfish¬ 
ness,  ‘sense*  gratification,  might,  brutal  competition,  acquisitiveness,. 
We  should  notice  that  whole  ‘philosophies*,  such  as  theism,  the  older 
ontology,  teleology,  materialism,  solipsism,  the  Anglo-Saxon  philosophy 
of  selfishness,  and  different  military  and  commercial  philosophies,  clearly 
display  these  infantile  characteristics.  Commercialism,  the  ‘law  of  supply 
and  demand*,  as  a  by-product,  also  follows  from  infantile  world-out¬ 
looks.  Those  who  are  interested  in  problems  of  politics,  economics, 
sociology,  war,  and  peace . ,  should  investigate  their  problems  from  this 
semantic  point  of  view.  As  Burrow  well  said,  the  problems  of  war  are 
more  the  problems  of  psychiatry  than  of  diplomacy.16 

Many  women  at  present  are  still  infantile,  very  little  developed  as 
human  beings ;  they  are  themselves  exhibitionists  and  also  sponsor  exhi¬ 
bitionism.  It  should  not  surprise  us  to  find  that  these  characteristics,  the 
lavishing  of  ‘love’  on  shiny  buttons  and  on  regiments  marching  to  their 
destruction,  have  favoured  wars.  During  the  Russian  revolution  of  1905, 
the  czar’s  soldiers  were  on  the  streets.  But  women  did  not  love  them 
then.  Little  children  spat  on  them  from  behind  corners.  The  result  was 
that  very  soon  the  soldiers  refused  to  carry  on  this  unapproved  service . 
I  know  many  cases  connected  with  the  World  War,  where,  in  spite  of 
unspeakable  horrors,  many  regretted  the  ending  of  the  war  because  of  the 
infantile  approval  shown  by  their  women  for  their  ‘glory  and  the 
infantile  thrill  the  soldiers  themselves  experienced  because  of  the  shiny 
buttons,  martial  music,  and  parades.  In  the  old  system,  militarism,  re¬ 
ligionism,  legalism,  and  commercialism  are  strictly  interconnected  by 
similar  s.r.  Eliminate  any  one  of  them  for  good,  and  the  others  would 
become  obsolete  or  would  disintegrate.  Our  infantile  women,  no  doubt, 
have  sponsored  through  the  ages  these  infantile  social  cancers. 

The  future  war  will,  perhaps,  automatically  bring  these  problems  to 
the  foreground.  It  will  be  an  extremely  devastating  (and  less  pictur¬ 
esque)  aerial  war,  in  which  women  and  children  will  not  be  spared. 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

Then,  perhaps,  some  of  these  infantile  women  will  begin  to  face  m.c 
reality,  and  so  will  help  to  start  a  new  era  of  human  adulthood.  Men 
will  always  depend  in  their  standards  on  the  wishes  of  women. 

In  infantile  nations  we  witness,  also,  a  great  deal  of  exhibitionism, 
a  craze  for  athletics,  clothes,  sumptuousness,  noisy  behaviour,  parades, 
uniforms,  ‘military  academies’,  military  drills , .  ‘Serious’,  yet  infantile, 
business  men’  love  to  parade  on  the  streets  dressed  up  like  little  boys  or 
circus  performers,  give  themselves  some  ‘mysterious’  high-sounding  and 
empty  high  titles,  play  with  swords  which  they  do  not  know  how  to 
handle,.  In  international  affairs,  of  course,  a  nation  of  a  more  pro¬ 
nounced  infantile  semantic  tendency  will  seek  to  keep  away  from  adult 
international  associations.  The  attitude  of  the  United  States  towards 
the  League  of  Nations  and  that  of  Great  Britain  towards  the  project' 
of  a  confederated  Europe  suggest  themselves  at  once  in  this  connection. 

Infantilism  has  another  serious  and  detrimental  connection  with 
race  problems ;  namely,  through  the  sex  glands  or  gonads  in  their  effect 
upon  ‘love’  and  other  activities.  We  should  realize  and  emphasize  that 
the  sex  glands  do  not  function  only  as  ‘sex’  glands  in  the  common  mean¬ 
ing  of  the  word,  but  even  more  as  internal  secretion  glands  with  an  enor¬ 
mous  bearing  on  all  life  and  ‘mental’  processes ;  a  A,  non-el  orientation 
should  never  forget  that. 

The  various  consequences  of  castration  are  well  known,  and  need 
not  be  repeated  here.  But  the  interrelation  of  the  gonads  with  the  thymus 
and  with  thyroid  glands  is  of  interest  to  us.  The  term  gonad  means 
reproductive  gland,  which  produces  the  egg  cells  or  the  sperms.  The 
thymus  is  a  term  applied  to  a  light  pink  gland  situated  in  the  superior 
and  anterior  part  of  the  thorax.  It  extends  up  into  the  roots  of  the  neck 
and  comes  close  to  the  thyroid  gland.  The  thyroid  gland  is  a  term 
applied  to  a  deep  red  glandular  mass  consisting  of  two  lobes  which  lie, 
one  on  each  side  of  the  upper  part  of  the  trachea  and  lower  part  of  the 
larynx.  In  women  and  children  the  thymus  is  relatively  larger  than  in 
the  adult  male. 

In  humans  the  thymus  grows  up  to  the  second  year  of  life  and 
then  rapidly  diminishes,  so  that  only  traces  of  it  are  found  at  puberty. 
In  certain  cases  of  arrested  development  or  of  general  weakness  in  young 
people  the  thymus  has  been  found  to  be  persistent.  Castration  at  an  early 
age  leads  to  the  persistence  of  the  thymus  gland.  Normally,  the  gland 
atrophies  before  the  gonads  come  to  maturity  and  begin  to  function.  In 
some  of  the  lower  mammals  the  gland  does  not  disappear  as  early  as  it 
does  in  humans.  The  thymus  of  the  calf  is  popularly  called  the  ‘chest 
sweetbread’.17 

UN-SANITY  VERSUS  SANITY 

Atrophy  of  the  thyroid  in  the  adult  is  usually  followed  by  blunting 
of  ‘mental'  capacity.  Speech  is  slow,  and  cerebration  delayed.  If  the 
secretions  are  lacking  in  childhood  we  have  what  is  known  as  cretinism. 
Excessive  activity  of  the  thyroid  produces  a  condition  known  as  exo¬ 
phthalmic  goitre.  In  many  females  at  each  menstruation  the  thyroid  is 
perceptibly  enlarged.  Extirpation  of  the  thyroid  before  puberty  brings 
about,  among  others,  signs  of  cretinism,  failure  of  development  of  the 
ovaries . ,  so  that  puberty  is  delayed  partially  or  completely.18 

Even  these  few  particulars  are  sufficient  to  make  us  understand 
that  when  we  begin  to  deal  with  ‘infantilism',  ‘arrested  development ,  or 
‘regression',  or  ‘adulthood',  we  deal  with  fundamental  non-el  semantic 
life-problems  which  are  connected  structurally  with  the  organism-as-a- 
whole.  Bleuler  describes  disturbances  of  affectivity  thus :  ‘The  so-called 
psychopaths  are  really  nearly  all  exclusively  or  mainly  thymopaths.  Fur¬ 
thermore,  since  affectivity  dominates  all  other  functions,  it  assumes  a 
prominent  role  in  psychopathology  generally,  even  in  slight  deviations, 
not  only  on  account  of  its  own  morbid  manifestations,  but  even  more 
because  in  disturbances  in  any  sphere,  it  is  the  affective  mechanisms  that 
first  create  the  manifest  symptoms.  What  we  call  psychogenic  is  mostly 
thymogenic.  The  influence  of  the  affects  on  the  associations  produces 
delusions,  systematic  splittings  of  personality,  and  hysteroid  twilight 
states ;  repressed  pain  is  the  source  of  most  neurotic  symptoms,  while 
displacements  and  irradiations  produce  compulsive  ideas,  obsessive  acts, 
and  sirnilar  mechanisms.' 19 

The  thymus  appears  not  only  as  a  childhood  gland,  but  the  adult 
gonads  begin  to  function  when  the  thymus  ceases  to  function.  When 
the  thymus  persists,  we  often  find  arrested  development  and  psycho- 
pathological  disturbances  connected  with  infantilism.  It  should  be  re¬ 
