membered  that  in  the  organism  not  all  ‘cause  and  effect'  sequences  appear 
as  one-to-one,  but  mostly  as  many-to-one  relations.  Therefore,  no  stan¬ 
dard  mechanism  can  be  readily  assigned  to  a  semantic  disturbance.  But 
there  are  enough  structural,  functional,  and  colloidal  mechanisms  known 
to  account  for  most  disturbances,  although  the  precise  working  is  not 
known,  1933,  in  most  cases. 

Psychopathology  and  experience  show  that  the  ‘self-love',  ‘self- 
sufficiency'.  ,  of  infantilism  are  usually  accompanied  by  marked  sex  dis¬ 
turbances,  which,  from  a  racial  point  of  view,  are  just  as  important  as 
the  semantic  disturbances. 

Infantile  types  often  have  ‘charming'  qualities.  The  women  ‘are 
sweet’,  ‘nice' ;  the  men  seem  ‘good  mixers'  and  ‘popular'.  The  opposite 
sex  often  likes  these  characteristics.  In  men  a  feeling  of  sympathy  is 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

aroused  for  the  ‘helpless  little  girl*,  or  else  pedophilic  tendencies  are 
released.  (Pedophilia  is  used  as  the  name  of  a  ‘mental*  disturbance  or 
desire  for  relations  with  children,  often  found  among  senile  dementia 
and  imbeciles.)  In  women,  often  a  feeling  of  motherhood  leads  them 
to  like  infantile  males.  The  charm  of  the  child  lies,  to  a  great  extent,  in 
his  narcissism,  his  self-sufficiency,  and  inaccessibility.  Certain  animals, 
such  as  cats  and  larger  beasts  of  prey,  fascinate  us,  as  they  do  not  con¬ 
cern  themselves  with  us  and  are  inaccessible.  But  this  ‘charm*  has 
another  and  very  tragic  side.  Such  infantile  types  cannot  stand  respon¬ 
sibilities  ;  their  affections  are  shallow  and  unreliable ;  they  know  how  to 
take,  but  do  not  know  how  to  give,.  In  life,  such  connections  lead 
invariably  to  great  unhappiness,  and  often  to  disasters.  The  children 
produced  by  such  infantile  types  are  usually  completely  ruined  by  the 
lack  of  parental  understanding  or  lack  of  care.  Instead  of  liking  such 
types,  men  and  women  of  semantic  maturity  should  either  avoid  them 
or  suggest  psychiatrical  consultation. 

Infantile  types  invariably  show  some  sex  disturbances,  which  also 
add  greatly  to  family  and  social  difficulties.  The  men  are  often  impotent ; 
the  women,  frigid.  Onanistic  and  homosexual  habits  or  tendencies  per¬ 
sist,  although  such  an  adult  infant  is  married  and  has  an  opportunity  for 
normal  life.  A  very  important  A,  non-el  fact  should  be  noticed.  Since 
the  organism  works  as-a-whole,  ‘mental*  components  should  be  consid¬ 
ered  in  connection  with  sex  life.  An  infantile  type  appears  still  in  an 
organ  erotic  stage.  He  wants  only  sense  gratification.  From  a  theory  of 
sanity  point  of  view,  prostitution  appears  as  a  substitute  for  onanism. 
In  adult  infants,  we  very  often  find  either  impotence,  frigidity,  onanism, 
homosexualism,  as  simple  forms  of  arrested  development  or  regression, 
or  more  extreme  forms,  like  many  cases  of  prostitution.  Infantiles  not 
only  indulge  in  promiscuity,  but  build  up  fanciful  rationalizations  and 
represent  their  own  infantile  tendencies  by  ‘theories*  as  ‘normal’  con¬ 
duct.  Many  criminals,  professional  ‘vamps*,  and  professed  ‘heart- 
breakers*  belong  to  this  type.  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  many  ‘mental’ 
illnesses  are  connected  with  different  onanistic  rationalizations.  Often 
excessive  cleanliness,  continual  washing  of  hands . ,  appears.  If  a  schizo¬ 
phrenic  onanist  has  a  melancholic  make-up,  he  rationalizes  his  problems 
that  he  is  ‘rotting  because  of  his  sins*.  If  he  has  a  manic  make-up,  he 
feels  that  he  ‘is  a  saviour  of  mankind’.20 

In  all  such  cases  family  life  is  very  unhappy,  and  the  future  of  the 
children  bred  under  such  conditions  is  usually  gloomy.  Children  need 
healthy  family  and  semantic  conditions  to  develop  into  healthy  indi¬ 
viduals. 

UN-SANITY  VERSUS  SANITY 

The  majority  of  professional  criminals  and  prostitutes  have  an 
infantile  make-up.  No  matter  how  cunning,  they  usually  show  little 
foresight.  They  appear  egotistic,  boastful,  exhibitionistic , .  Gangsters 
love  pomp;  their  funerals  are,  as  a  rule,  very  expensive, — they  want, 
even  after  death,  to  ‘show  off’.  Criminals  seldom  become  good  fathers  or 
mothers.  They  treat  each  other  brutally  and  are  generally  promiscuous. 
Ethically,  they  behave  usually  as  ‘moral  imbeciles1,  not  realizing  fully 
what  they  do.  I  am  not  advocating  the  abolishment  of  the  death  penalty 
on  sentimental  grounds,  but  an  enlightened  society  should  abolish 
any  penalty  on  sick  individuals.  The  ‘mentally’  ill  criminal  type  should 
be  either  taken  care  of  or  else  eliminated  with  some  scientific  benefit, 
but  not  as  a  penalty .  Professional  criminals  can  hardly  ever  become 
‘morally  reformed’  or  useful  members  of  society,  unless  the  application 
of  medical  science  can  alter  their  pathological  s.r .  Without  scientific 
attendance,  they  would  practically  always  remain  socially  dangerous  in¬ 
dividuals.  If  we  want  to  grow  out  of  the  present  infantilism,  experi¬ 
mentation  on  humans  should  be  encouraged.  Modern  experimentation 
on  animals  is  very  humane,  and  suffering  is  eliminated.  Criminals  who 
are  condemned  to  death  should  be  given  to  science  for  experimenting. 
They  would  not  suffer.  Ultimately,  they  would  probably  die,  but  the 
benefits  to  the  rest  of  mankind  through  scientific  discoveries  would  be 
very  important.  Under  present  conditions,  we  ‘take  revenge  on’,  ‘pun¬ 
ish’.  ,  mostly  sick  individuals,  with  seriously  brutalizing  semantic  effects 
on  the  rest  of  us.  There  is  not  the  slightest  doubt  that  experimentation 
confined  solely  to  animals,  no  matter  how  useful,  will  not  solve  many 
problems  of  Smith.  Experimentation  on  humans  is  essential,  and  must 
be  permitted.  Most  of  the  notorious  criminals  who  go  to  the  gallows 
appear  at  least  infantile.  How  instructive  it  would  be  to  make  experi¬ 
ments  on  such  individuals  in  respect  to  their  thymus,.  The  list  of 
experiments  which  science  ought  to  make  is  very  long,  but  material  is 
lacking  for  such  experimentation.  Let  me  repeat  that  modern  science 
can  conduct  its  experiments  without  suffering  to  the  individual,  in  spite 
of  the  fact  that  some  of  these  experiments  would  be  dangerous  and 
might  easily  end  in  the  painless  death  of  the  subject.  The  killing  off  of 
criminals  (sick  individuals)  as  a  ‘revenge’  or  ‘punishment’  or  ‘justice* 
is  really  too  antiquated  and  too  barbaric  and  wasteful  for  an  enlightened 
society.  If  society  wants  to  eliminate  them,  society  can  do  it;  but,  at 
least,  let  us  do  it  without  such  brutalizing  morbidity,  and  with  as  great 
benefit  to  knowledge  as  possible. 

The  elimination  of  infantilism  must  be  considered  more  than  a 
personal  issue  with  individuals;  it  becomes  an  international  semantic 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

problem;  and  such  an  international  body  as  the  League  of  Nations  might 
originate  a  new  era  by  starting  a  fundamental  enquiry  into  this  subject. 

Infantilism  in  its  national  aspects  is  hot  equally  distributed.  Some 
countries  are  more  infantile  than  others.  In  some  countries  even  the 
university  students  show  marked  under-development  for  their  age. 

urrow  reports  that  a  questionnaire  among  students  of  a  prominent 
university  in  the  United  States  of  America  shows  a  surprisingly  large 
percentage  of  onanism  and  homosexualism.21 

We  should  notice  that  not  even  all  scientists  are  free  from  infantil¬ 
ism.  Many  of  them  are  childlike  in  that  they  do  not  really  care  for 
science,  or  civilization,  or  society,  but  are  asocial  and  merely  like  to  play 
with  their  toys.  As  an  excuse  (rationalization  of  tendencies  and  ‘emo¬ 
tions  ),  they  usually  profess  ‘science  for  science’  sake’,  not  realizing 
that  a  complete  adult  must  become  a  socialised  individual  and  cannot 
keep  aloof  from  general  human  interests,  and  that  science  represents  a 
public,  time-binding  activity  and  concern,  not  the  private  pleasure  or 
benefit  of  some  one  person. 

Section  D.  Constructive  suggestions . 

As  we  have  already  seen,  a  young  child  cannot  be  ‘conscious  of 
abstracting’,  but  he  can  acquire  it  gradually  with  experience.  Racial, 
ordered  experience  is  called  science.  Every  one  of  us  has  the  tendencies! 
and,  to  some  extent,  the  capacities,  for  developing  science.  The  main  aim 
of  such  racial,  ordered  experience  is  to  save  effort  and  unnecessary 
experiences,  so  that  a  child  may  start  where  the  father  leaves  off  (time- 
binding).  The  problems  of  consciousness  of  abstracting  should  be 
formulated  by  science  and  made  available  for  semantic  training.  This 
would  fulfill  the  main  requirements  of  science,  to  save  experience  and 
effort,  and  to  predict  the  future,  to  help  in  the  mastery  over  external 
and  internal  ‘nature’,  and  so  to  produce  semantic  and  physical  adjustment. 

If  we  teach  and  train  the  children  in  the  consciousness  of  abstract¬ 
ing,  we  save  them  an  enormous  amount  of  the  effort  which  would  be 
necessary  to  acquire  it  eventually  by  themselves,  and  we  also  eliminate 
a  great  deal  of  unnecessary  sufferings  and  disappointments.  There  is  no 
danger  of  taking  ‘the  joy  out  of  life’;  the  opposite  is  true.  With  the 
consciousness  of  abstracting,  the  joy  of  living  is  considerably  increased. 
We  have  no  more  ‘frights’,  bewilderments,  or  similar  undesirable  seman¬ 
tic  experiences.  We  grow  up  to  full  adulthood;  and  when  the  body  is 
matured  for  the  taking  up  of  life  and  its  responsibilities,  we  accomplish 
that,  and  find  joy  in  it,  as  our  ‘mind’  and  ‘emotions’  have  also  matured. 
Such  a  consciousness  of  abstracting  leads  to  an  integrated,  semantically 

UN-SANITY  VERSUS  SANITY 

iMdanced  and  adapted  adult  personality.  Joys,  pleasures,  and  ‘emotions’ 
Are  not  abolished,  as  this  cannot  be  done,  given  the  structure  of  our 
»ervous  system  and  ‘mental’  health,  but  they  are  ‘sublimated’  to  higher 
Adult  human  semantic  levels.  Life  becomes  fuller,  and  the  individual 
ceases  to  act  as  a  nuisance  and  a  danger  to  himself  and  others. 

In  the  racial  aspects,  if  the  development  of  the  individual  became 
normal,  we  should  grow  beyond  infantile  organ  erotic  fixations  and  el 
languages  and  infantile  systems  in  all  fields.  A  ^-system,  in  accordance 
with  science  1933  ( E ,  N  systems),  would  be  the  human  link  supplying 
scientific  standards  of  evaluation  to  the  affairs  of  Smith. 

With  the  older  infantilism  and  the  practically  general  lack  of  full 
consciousness  of  abstracting,  the  fears,  frights,  painful  ‘emotional’ 
shocks  under  which  mankind  lived  were  bound  to  have  a  marked,  lasting, 
and  sinister  semantic  and  neurological  effect  upon  the  race.  The  race 
has  never  had  an  opportunity  to  develop  in  an  adult  way.  What  will  be 
the  results  for  the  race  of  such  a  transformation  it  is  impossible,  at 
present,  to  foresee ;  but  one  thing  is  certain,  that  the  results  are  bound 
to  be  very  far-reaching. 

To  afford  a  better  appreciation  of  what  the  consciousness  of  ab¬ 
stracting  can  accomplish,  two  more  points  should  be  explained.  Most 
young  fish  do  not  know  their  parents,  and,  from  the  beginning,  their 
life  is  independent  of  parental  influences.  The  human  child  is  helpless, 
and,  for  a  comparatively  long  period,  is  under  parental  influence.  His 
s,r  are  consequently  moulded,  ‘mentally’,  ‘emotionally’,  by  the  doctrines, 
taboos,  structure  of  language . ,  of  the  parents , .  When  we  speak  of  a 
human  child,  we  should  never  consider  him  in  a  fictitious  isolation,  which 
has  nothing  to  do  with  m.o  reality.  Both  parents  and  child  should  be 
made  ‘conscious  of  abstracting’.  Only  under  such  semantic  conditions 
can  the  full  benefit  be  reached.  If  parents  are  conscious  of  abstracting, 
and  realize  that  their  child  represents,  also,  an  abstracting  in  higher 
orders  organism,  which  consciously  or  unconsciously  registers  in  one  form 
or  another  all  happenings,  the  majority  of  the  present  unfortunate  con¬ 
ditions,  ‘complexes’. ,  could  not  possibly  arise. 

An  important,  yet  usually  disregarded,  characteristic  should  be  men¬ 
tioned  here.  It  is  known  that  repeated  ‘emotional  shocks’  in  childhood 
do  harm.  As  the  experiments  of  Watson  show,  the  child  is  usually  born 
without  ‘fears’  and  without  ‘frights’.  Now  ‘fears’  and  ‘frights’  are  not 
simply  additive  (a  linear  function)  but  follow  some  other  more  complex 
function  of  higher  degree.  If  we  denote  the  constitutional  potentialities 
of  the  child  by/,  and  the  given  event  by  x,  the  result  of  the  impact  of 
x  on  the  life  of  the  child  would  be  a  reaction  /(at)  *=*  Fx.  This  Fx  desig- 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

nates  what  his  make-up  would  make  out  of,  or  abstract  from,  *.  When 
another  event  y  happens,  the  reaction  of  the  child  is  no  longer  f(y), 
because  this  new  event  is  usually  taken  by  the  child  in  the  light  of  the 
former  experience  f(x)—F1.  Thus,  the  effect  on  the  child  would  be 
different;  namely,  Fi(y)  —  F2.  If  a  new  event  s  should  happen,  the 
child  would  react  in  his  ‘feelings’. ,  as  F,(g)  -Fs>.  We  see,  then,  that 
hurts  and,  in  general,  s.r  are  not  simply  additive  but  may  follow  some 
other  higher  degree  function.  This  process  appears  general,  perhaps 
necessary,  and  yet  it  involves  many  dangers  which  can  be  completely 
eliminated  only  by  the  acquired  consciousness  of  abstracting, 

.  Prat-f’ce>  when  we  train  a  child  in  the  consciousness  of  abstract¬ 
ing,  we  begin  to  check  this  devastating  semantic  process  of  piling  up 
hurts  on  ‘hurts’.  Let  us  assume  that  before  we  begin  to  train  the  child, 
the  child  has  already  had  painful  experiences.  His  memories  are  still 
fresh,  still  fluid ;  he  has  little  difficulty  in  dwelling  on  them.  With  the 
consciousness  of  abstracting,  and  so  proper  evaluation,  dawning  upon 
him,  further  ‘hurts’  would  ‘hurt’  less  and  less  until  the  hurting  process 
would  stop  altogether.  In  case  some  semantic  harm  had  been  done  to  the 
child  before  he  became  conscious  of  abstracting,  the  memories  would  be 
still  fresh  and  he  could  apply  his  newly  acquired  semantic  evaluational 
immunity  to  the  harmful  ‘hurts’.  New  ‘hurts’  in  practice  are  usually 
related  or  similar  to  the  old  ones ;  they  would  ‘revive’  the  older  hurts 
Accordingly,  he  could  not  only  ‘live  through’  the  older  experiences  but  at 
once  revise  them,  and  after  re-evaluation  eliminate  the  harmful  effects. 

Semantic  emotional  pains’  absorb  nervous  energy  and  prevent  a 
full  development  of  our  capacities.  Directly  the  consciousness  of  ab¬ 
stracting  is  acquired,  the  vast  field  of  ‘unconsciousness’  is  diminished, 
and  the  nervous  energy  which  was  engaged  in  fighting  semantic  phan¬ 
toms  is  released.  We  should  expect  keener  and  sustained  attention, 
strengthened  interest,  and  other  creative  manifestations.  Consciousness 
of  abstracting,  as  it  leads  to  proper  evaluation,  not  only  eliminates  many 
unnecessary  sufferings  and  semantic  disturbances,  but,  by  doing  so, 
actually  releases  stores  of  energy  for  useful  and  creative  purposes. 

The  human  brain  has  vast  areas  which,  at  present,  have  no  definitely 
known  functions.  Perhaps,  with  the  older  lack  of  consciousness  of 
abstracting,  the  flow  of  nervous  energy  was  misdirected  or  absorbed  by 
the  older  ways  of  ‘feeling’  and  ‘thinking’  in  the  lower  centres.  Thus,  the 
available  energy  left  was  not  sufficient  to  utilize  the  higher  centres  to  the 
full  extent. 

Personal  semantic  difficulties  always  seem  very  personal,  and  no 
outsider  can  ever  fully  grasp  the  situation.  One  of  the  benefits  of  the 

UN-SANITY  VERSUS  SANITY 

present  method  of  training  in  sanity  consists  in  the  fact  that  we  do  not 
4weil  upon  the  personal  affairs  of  the  individual,  but  that  we  give, 
instead,  a  general  structural  semantic  method ,  by  the  aid  of  which  every 
gone  can  solve  his  problems  by  himself . 

We  have  established  sharp  differences  between  ‘man  and  animal . 
These  differences  must  be  considered  of  higher  order,  as  the  terms 
•man'  and  ‘animal’  are  applied  to  abstractions  of  higher  orders.  We 
iound  that  ‘man’  through  ignorance  and  inappropriate  s.r  can  copy 
tnimals  in  his  nervous  reactions.  Such  copying  appears  either  as  ar- 
fested  development  or  as  regression.  In  dealing  with  the  terms  ‘con¬ 
scious’  and  ‘unconscious’,  we  discovered  a  general  and  human  content 
for  human  ‘consciousness’ ;  namely,  the  ‘consciousness  of  abstracting . 
The  ascribing  of  a  general  content  abolishes  a  vast  field  of  ‘unconscious¬ 
ness’,  and  so  tends  to  prevent  arrested  development,  infantilism,  regres¬ 
sion  . ,  whenever  this  is  possible.  The  problem  of  making  the  structure 
of  language  similar  at  a  given  date  to  the  structure  of  the  events  it 
symbolizes,  is  introduced.  The  conquests  of  science  become  incorporated 
into  daily  life  by  the  use  of  the  new  language.  The  structure  common 
to  both  science  and  language  appears  to  be  the  intimate  bond  between 
science  and  human  life.  The  masses  gain  simple  structural  and  semantic 
means  for  adjustment. 

A  theory  of  sanity  must  draw  attention  to  problems  involving 
•truth’,  ‘falsehood’,  ‘repressions’, .  Since  the  main  usefulness  of  the 
theory  is  to  help  in  attaining  the  most  efficient  working  of  the  nervous 
system  by  the  elimination  of  disturbing  semantic  factors,  attitudes , 
doctrines . ,  we  must  investigate  the  effect  false  (or  repressed)  state¬ 
ments  may  have  on  the  working  of-  the  nervous  system. 

For  instance,  if  we  see  that  A,  B,  and  C  are  given  in  the  order 
A,B,C,  such  lower  abstractions  start  cycles  of  nervous  currents,  which 
correspond  to  the  seen  order.  If  we  see  the  order  A,B,C,  and  Jay  un¬ 
truthfully  that  the  order  appears  as  C,B,A,  this  statement  results,  also, 
from  some  cyclic  nerve  currents.  Obviously,  we  have  some  conflict  and 
disturbance  in  the  working  of  the  system .  If  we  make  a  mistake,  the 
situation  is  different.  Let  us  say  that  many  observers  definitely  estab¬ 
lish  the  given  order  as  A,B,C.  A  new  observer  sees  by  mistake  the  order 
as  C,B,A.  His  nervous  currents  correspond  to  his  error,  and  when  he 
makes  a  truthful  statement  that  he  has  seen  C,B,A,  this  statement  also  is 
connected  with  the  appropriate  nerve  currents  and  there  is  no  conflict  or 
disturbance  between  the  corresponding  nerve  currents.  The  seen  and 
reported  correspond  to  each  other. 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

It  is  easy  to  conclude  that  mistakes  and  deliberate  falsehoods  have 
a  different  mechanism.  A  mistake,  which  leads  to  a  subjectively  true  but 
objectively  false  statement,  has  no  nervously  disturbing  factors.  Delib¬ 
erate  false  statements  about  facts  involve  semantic  conflicts  and  disturb¬ 
ances  in  the  functioning  of  the  nervous  system.  Similarly,  with 
repressed’  material,  permanently  conflicting  nervous  currents  are  pres¬ 
ent.  The  nervous  energy  is  spent  on  conflicts  and  struggles,  while  all  of 
it  is  needed  for  constructive  purposes. 

In  scientific  work  we  have  similar  problems.  We  gather  different 
abstractions  of  lower  orders  and  then  make  higher  abstractions  about 
them  When  these  two  different  orders  of  abstractions  fit  nicely  struc¬ 
turally,  we  are  satisfied  and  enjoy  the  resultant  harmony.  If  they  conflict 
we  feel  restless.  Often  scientists  spend  years,  or  even  a  lifetime,  formu- 
atmg  higher  order  abstractions  which  do  not  conflict  structurally  with 
the  lower  abstractions.  Then  they  feel  satisfied.  Scientists  know  well 
the  feelings  of  ‘mental’  pain  and  discomfort.  Creative  work  is  carried 
out  because  of  such  discomfort.  Those  who  are  not  creative  do  not 
experience  this,  but  they  also  do  not  produce  important  work. 

The  problems  of  structure,  of  correct  symbolism,  of  evaluation  of 
the  production  of  higher  order  abstractions  which  are  structurally  simi¬ 
lar  to  the  lower  order  abstractions . ,  must  have  a  neurological  signifi¬ 
cance  and  should  be  investigated  from  this  point  of  view.  Scientists 
should  try  to  eliminate  these  unnecessary  conflicts.  Those  who  feel  no 
conflicts  may,  nevertheless,  be  so  involved  in  it  that  they  have  no  free 
nervous  energy  left  to  overcome  it.  Some  such  attempt  is  being  made 
empirically  in  semantic  therapy.  The  psychiatrist  tries  to  discover  and 
eliminate  the  semantic  conflict,  thus  freeing  nervous  energy  which  may 
then  be  spent  on  useful  work. 

In  racial  and  national  levels,  systems  of  politics,  economics. ,  which 
are  based  on  falsehoods  and  repression  of  truth,  must  unbalance  the 
working  of  the  nervous  systems  of  the  people.  Since  they  are  the  result 
of  the  infantile  s.r  of  the  race,  they  propagate  the  arrested  or  regressive 
development  in  the  part  of  the  race  whose  s.r  they  influence.  As  usual 
the  vicious  circle  is  working  here  also.  A  ^-system  throws  an  entirely 
new  light  on  the  significance  of  science  in  human  life.  Radios,  with  their 
attendant  possibilities  of  hearing  jazz  or  a  delusional  ‘revivalist’,  and  the 
invention  of  bigger  and  better  means  for  killing  people,  do  not  repre¬ 
sent  the  mam  practical  importance  of  science.  Generalised  science  means 
scientific  method  and  the  discovery  of  the  structure  of  events,  to  which 
the  structure  of  our  language  must  be  adjusted  if  this  daily  tool  of  every- 
body  is  not  to  play  dangerous  semantic  tricks. 

UN-SANITY  VERSUS  SANITY 

A  ‘science  of  man*  must  follow  science  (1933)  in  its  structure 
and  method.  Only  by  accepting  the  current  ‘scientific  metaphysics’  as 
given  by  science  at  a  given  date  is  sanity  possible.  The  passing  from  an 
infantile  ‘civilization*  to  an  adult  civilization  of  fuller  human  life  and 
happiness  will  come  with  the  development  of  a  scientific  civilization 
which  has  scientific  standards  of  evaluation.  But  the  passing  will  not 
be  so  easy.  As  we  have  already  seen,  science  contains  affective  factors, 
and  many  scientists  still  appear  infantile.  In  order  to  enter  upon  an 
adult  civilization,  we  must  first  have  non-infantile  leaders,  who  must 
be  produced  by  appropriate  training.  This  involves  much  research  work 
along  the  lines  sketched  in  the  present  work,  and  the  establishment  of 
chairs  of  general  semantics  and  psychophysiology  in  universities.  Edu¬ 
cational  methods  must  be  radically  revised,  and  experimentation  encour¬ 
aged  in  the  widest  sense. 

In  1933  we  know  positively  that  in  the  physico-chemical  and  col¬ 
loidal  structures  we  find  conditions  of  practically  endless  possibilities 
corresponding  to  the  very  large  numbers  of  semantic  states  and  re¬ 
actions.  Medical  practice  shows  experimentally  that  a  great  many 
physical  symptoms  involving  some  colloidal  states  are  produced  by  se¬ 
mantic  disturbances ;  because,  once  these  disturbances  are  eliminated,  the 
physical  symptoms  vanish.  The  enormous  numbers  of  observed  and  pos¬ 
sible  different  s.r  could  not  be  accounted  for  by  the  older,  still  prevailing, 
el,  A,  and  two-,  or  three-valued  outlook,  and  the  cumbersome,  extremely 
limited,  and  necessarily  slow  chemical  ‘passing  of  different  substances* 
through  the  nervous  system. 

It  is  true  that  every  student  of  medical  science  is  acquainted  with 
colloidal  behaviour,  but  this  knowledge  has  been  neither  emphasized  nor 
consistently  applied,  because  colloidal  behaviour  represents  physico¬ 
chemical  processes  involving  electromagnetic,  high  pressure . ,  manifesta¬ 
tions  which  cannot  be  dealt  with  at  all  by  el,  A  means.  Thus,  a  physician 
who  is  not  trained  in  A  general  semantics,  cannot  ‘think*  in  colloidal  and 
physico-chemical  terms,  which  in  1933  are  the  only  modern  ways  of 
dealing  with  the  organism-as-a-whole.  This  is  much  more  serious  than 
the  layman  or  even  the  physicians  realize,  and  accounts  for  the  fact  that, 
in  spite  of  different  special  achievements  and  different  discoveries,  the 
practice  of  medicine  is  becoming  more  and  more  unsatisfactory.  It  also 
explains  why  the  average  physician  cannot  grasp  the  importance  of 
psychiatry  for  general  medicine,  and  why  some  psychiatrists  indulge  in 
very  unscientific  and  doubtful  metaphysics.  Thus,  a  general  physician 
who  ‘thinks*  uniquely  in  seriously  antiquated  chemical  and  physiological 
terms,  deals  with  a  non-existent,  fictitiously  isolated  A  «ad  el  ‘body*. 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

and  cannot  grasp  the  necessity  for  a  non-el.  A,  and  a  physico-chemical, 
colloidal  outlook,  which  integrates  ‘body’  and  ‘mind’.  The  majority  of 
psychiatrists  in  their  turn,  and  for  similar  reasons,  often  have  a  highly 
metaphysical  outlook,  repulsive  to  the  general  physician.  They  do  not 
seem  to  realize  that  they  have  at  their  disposal  colloidal  and  physiological 
mechanisms  as  well  as  physico-mathematical  formulations  based  on  four¬ 
dimensional  order,  and  that  they,  therefore,  do  not  need  any  doubtful 
metaphysics.  With  A  modem  semantics,  the  only  possible  scientific  out¬ 
look  (1933)  must  be  colloidal,  physico-chemical  and  physico-mathemati¬ 
cal,  in  which  the  long  sought  for  non-el  solution  of  the  ‘body-mind’  is 
found.  The  difficulties  I  am  dealing  with  are  general  and  depend  on 
fundamental  principles,  the  disregard  of  which  introduces  semantic 
blocking  factors,  at  present  imposed  on  the  medical  students,  and  from 
which  only  a  few  exceptional,  scientifically  inclined  individuals  are 
capable  of  breaking  away.  From  the  present  point  of  view  the  older 
reflexology  is  also  unsatisfactory  and  requires  a  A  reformulation. 

The  present  system,  although  far  from  complete,  already  suggests 
many  most  important  structural  issues  which  should  be  verified  empir- 
ically.  Experiments  alone  can  decide  which  verbal  structures  are  similar 
t°  empirical  structures,  and  experimentation  should  be  encouraged  in  the 
widest  sense.  Some  further  theoretical  work  should  also  be  done.  Clini¬ 
cal  literature  describes  many  new  and  unexpected  facts.  These  facts 
should  be  described  anew  in  the  new  language,  to  see  what  relations  sur¬ 
vive  the  transformation  of  forms  of  representation.  Thus,  if  it  is  found 
that  all  mental  ills  in  all  different  formulations  indicate  improper  evalu¬ 
ation,  we  should  be  justified  in  concluding  that  evaluation  represents  an 
invariant  general  characteristic  of  the  activities  of  the  human  organism- 
as-a-whole,  and,  consequently,  must  be  of  extraordinary  importance  for 
adjustment  and  sanity.  When  we  reach  this  conclusion,  we  should  in¬ 
vestigate  the  mechanism  of  evaluation,  starting  with  the  simplest  issues ; 
namely,  investigating  those  factors  which  make  proper  evaluation  im¬ 
possible.  We  should  discover  that  identification  in  all  cases  makes  proper 
evaluation  impossible,  and  should  then  conclude  that  identification  must 
be  entirely  eliminated  before  we  can  go  one  step  further.  In  fact,  once 
we  have  reached  these  rather  obvious  results,  the  rest  of  the  /^-system 
follows.  But  this  would  not  be  enough ;  we  must  verify  the  rnnM.^mns 
empirically,  and  this  suggests  directly  that  a  definite  series  of  experi- 
merits  should  be  undertaken. 

In  hospitals  for  ‘mentally*  ill  two  equally  large  groups  of  accessible 
patients  exhibiting  similar  clinical  symptoms  should  be  selected,  and 
isolated.  A  physician  who  himself  has  undergone  a  A  training  should 

UN-SANITY  VERSUS  SANITY 

attempt  to  re-train  the  $.r  of  one  group.  The  other  group  should  not  be 
re-trained,  but  treated  in  the  average  passive  and  standard  way,— it 
would  be  the  control  group.  One  physician  should  be  in  charge  of  both 
wards  and  keep  a  detailed  record  of  the  cases  and  treatment.  IUs  to  be  ex¬ 
pected  that  at  the  end  of  the  year,  in  the  ward  trained  in  the  A  standards 
of  evaluation,  a  larger  number  of  unexpected  and  spontaneous  recoveries 
would  happen  than  in  the  untrained  ward.  It  would  be  extremely  in¬ 
structive  to  have  more  than  two  groups,  and  to  attempt  a  different 
group  method,  following  some  other  medical  school  based  on  another 
system-function.  The  passive  attitude  toward  the  patients  should  be 
changed,  as  under  the  older  methods  physicians  in  mental  hospitals  are 
more  glorified  keepers  than  medical  men.  This  is  what  theory  suggests. 
Experiments  alone  can  show  if  these  conclusions  are  correct.  In  special 
individual  cases,  the  theory  has  already  been  confirmed,  but  it  should  be 
tried  as  a  group  method,  and,  if  successful,  only  then  would  ‘mental 
hospitals  become  hospitals,  and  not  mere  places  of  detention. 

A  few  words  concerning  psychotherapy  will  not  be  amiss.  In  a 
time-binding  class  of  life,  we  must  take  into  account  the  historical  four¬ 
dimensional  experiences  of  the  race,  which,  even  in  individual  cases, 
have  sound  neurological  foundations,  as  it  is  known  that  the  nervous 
reactions  are  influenced  by  past  experiences.  History  teaches  us  that 
the  work  of  some  men  has  influenced  great  masses  of  mankind  for 
many  years,  and  that  the  works  of  others  have  had  but  little  general, 
lasting  effect.  The  considerations  of  doctrinal  functions  and  system- 
functions  explain  this  fact  quite  simply.  The  older  an  individual  or  a 
race  grows,  the  more  structural  observations  they  gather,  and  the  more 
they  notice  the  structural  dissimilarity  of  their  forms  of  representation 
with  the  first  order  facts  they  encounter.  As  adjustment  is  generally 
useful,  individuals,  as  well  as  groups,  and  particularly  scientists,  always 
attempt  to  discover  more  structural  data  about  the  world  and  themselves. 
This  process  requires,  among  others,  the  comparison  of  the  structure 
of  the  forms  of  representation  with  the  structure  of  the  world  and  our¬ 
selves.  All  so-called  ‘progress’,  ‘civilization’,  and  science  depend  on  this. 

In  this  particular  field,  achievements  are  of  two  kinds : 

1)  Some  individuals  produce  a  new  system-function,  with  a  new 
structure,  more  similar  to  the  world. ,  (see  Chapter  XI).  In  the  great 
majority  of  cases,  the  new  system- function  is  not  formulated  explicitly , 
but  is  hidden  implicitly  behind  some  explicit  particular  and  individual 
interpretation  or  particular  system  of  the  discoverer.  The  production  of 
a  new  system- function  is  usually  a  most  important  event  and  is  indepen¬ 
dent  of  the  special  value  given  to  the  variables  in  this  function  by  the 

S34  VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

originator.  In  such  cases,  the  given  originator  has  many  followers,  and 
there  is  a  possibility  ef  many  doctrines  or  systems  which  have  one  doc¬ 
trinal  function  or  system-function.  The  content  of  the  doctrines  may 
e  changed,  but  they  all  have  one  structure.  The  importance  of  the  new 
doctrine  or  system  was  not  in  its  particular  interpretation,  or  in  the 
assigning  of  a  particular  value  to  the  variables,  but  in  the  underlying 
doctrinal  function  or  system-function,  which  alone  has  explicit  structure 
and  is  given  by  the  postulates  which  establish  the  function. 

,  .  2)  ,S?me  md*v>dua4s  do  not  produce  explicitly  or  implicitly  new 

doctrinal  function  or  system-functions,  with  new  structure,  but  simply 

assign  a  new  and  individual  value  to  the  variables  in  the  on*  doctrinal 
