
function  °r  system-function  produced  by  others.  These  workers  very 

often  bitterly  defend  the  private  individual  value  they  have  assigned  to 

a  vanaWe,  and  are  often  entirely  innocent  of  the  serious  debt  they  owe 

to  the  originator  of  the  new  function  which  they  utilize.  But  these 

neVer,mafk  a  mllestone  in  the  Progress  of  mankind  and  are 
usually  soon  forgotten. 

Because  of  the  disregard  of  the  considerations  explained  here  the 
proper  evaluation  of  different  doctrines  and  systems  is  very  difficult 

shing.  It  seems  that  it  is  not  enough  to  produce  a  ‘new  theory’  to  have 
made  an  important  contribution  to  knowledge;  but  it  is  essential  to  pro- 
uce  a  new  doctrinal  function  or  system-function,  because  this  only  has 

doulTn  SIgn‘  an“-  This  P°int  of  view>  Perhaps,  solves  the  tremen¬ 
dous  and,  as  yet,  unsolved  difficulties  we  have  in  reducing  doctrines  to 

duc?Cs/oeSfiWH^  desiraUe’  and  ^  -o  hard  to  pro- 

Mderll  a  the  nCti°n  °r  ^“"-function  which 

“  d"rI'eS,  a  ,theor>:’  must  H  of  all  accidental  values  privately 
ascribed  to.the  variables,  and  formulate  only  the  invariant  relations  which 
are  posited  between  the  variables.  The  finding  of  this  function  is  also 
equivalent  to  finding  the  structure  of  a  given  theory. 

We  may  consider  that  the  psychoanalytical  and  psychotherapeutic 
movement  originated  with  the  work  of  Freud.  The  epLLmakffig^Tue 
of  his  work  consists  in  the  fact  that,  underlying  his  special  theory  there 
can  be  discovered  a  new  system-function.  All  other  schools  simnlv 
ascribe  a  different  value  to  the  variables,  but  do  not  produce,  structurally 

- 

UN-SANITY  VERSUS  SANITY 

First,  we  must  discriminate  permanently  between  the  freudian  par¬ 
ticular  system,  which  represents  a  particular  interpretation  of  the 
freudian  system-function  without  specific  interpretations :  say  ‘complex 
x\  on  semantic  levels,  which  corresponds,  let  us  say,  to  ‘cluster  X*  on 
colloidal  levels.  Second,  we  must  realize  that  the  freudian  system-func¬ 
tion  (not  system)  was  scientific  at  the  date  of  its  production,  but  to  be 
scientific  1933  it  must  be  revised  and  reformulated,  taking  into  considera¬ 
tion  the  newer  physico-mathematical,  physico-chemical,  colloidal,  A  . , 
points  of  view.  The  struggle  for  a  special  ‘complex  A*  or  invention  of 
a  new  ‘complex  B ’  is  useless  because  in  1933  the  colloidal,  structural 
‘cluster  X*  which  underlies  the  semantic  ‘complex  x\  which  alone  can 
legitimately  be  considered  in  a  system-function,  includes  all  of  the  com¬ 
plexes’  in  literary  existence,  and  there  are  no  assignable  limits  to  their 
numbers.  If  we  analyse  in  such  oo-valued  terms  as,  for  instance,  clus¬ 
ter  X\  we  evade  an  enormous  amount  of  unnecessary  and  confusing 
metaphysics,  and  become  scientific  in  the  1933  sense.  From  a  modern, 
A  system-function  point  of  view,  which  means,  when  we  recognize  the 
necessity  of  oo-valued  semantics,  structure . ,  necessitating  the  reduction 
of  a  system  to  a  postulate  base,  we  readily  see  that  the  freudian  system- 
function  (not  system)  is  a  necessary  and  natural  passing  step  between 
the  A  and  A  systems. 

The  postulates  which  are  discovered  in  the  freudian  system- function 
can  be  divided  into  two  main  groups : 

1)  The  observations  of  human  behaviour  and,  in  my  language,  of 
s.r,  have  to  be  formulated  in  a  special  language  to  fit  the  more  struc¬ 
turally  fundamental  parts  of  the  system. 

2)  The  fundamental  and  revolutionary  new  postulates  were,  at  the 
date  of  their  introduction,  quite  scientific.  In  1933  these  postulates  have 
to  be  reformulated  and  made  to  comply  to  modern  physico-mathemati- 
cal,  physico-chemical,  and  general  semantic  A  standards. 

A  satisfactory  analysis  of  the  above  problems  would  require  a  spe¬ 
cial  volume ;  therefore,  I  shall  entirely  disregard  No.  1,  and  from  No.  2 
shall  only  suggest  a  few  most  important  and  new  postulates.  These  can 
be  expressed,  roughly,  as  follows:  (a)  The  postulation  of  an  active 
‘dynamic’  unconscious.  This  postulate  departs  widely  from  the  older 
notions,  although  the  word  ‘dynamic’  is  used  in  this  connection  in  the 
vernacular,  but  not  strictly  scientific,  sense.  The  methods  of  translating 
the  dynamic  into  static  and  vice  versa,  are  disregarded,  owing  to  the 
innocence  of  modern  science  and  the  assumption  by  physicians,  in  gen¬ 
eral,  of  the  permanent  validity  of  A  principles,  (b)  Once  the  active 
unconscious  is  postulated,  some  determinism  follows  according  to  the 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

date.  Freud,  at  his  date,  accepted  the  (in  1933  antiquated)  two-valued 
determinism.  Unfortunately,  the  great  majority  of  physicians  and  the 
medical  education  still  follow  the  antiquated  notions,  (c)  As  the  past  is 
taken  into  account  and  man  is  treated  as  a  process  in  which  the  past 
experiences  play  an  important  role,  we  might  say  that  the  outlook  is 
four-dimensional,  but  this  statement  is  not  entirely  justified,  because  the 
notion  of  a  consistent  four-dimensional  orientation  carries  us  much 
further  than  physicians,  who  neglect  physico-mathematical  aspects,  can 
possibly  produce. 

a  ^‘System,  the  fundamental  postulates  of  the  system-function 
which  underlies  all  psychotherapy  have  been  accepted,  although  they  have 
been  vastly  enlarged  to  comply  with  the  known  facts  and  scientific 
requirements  of  1933.  It  is  important  to  investigate  independently,  sys¬ 
tematically,  and  m  detail,  the  corresponding  system-functions  and  to 
find  to  what  extent  they  mutually  intertranslate,  but  such  an  investigation 
cannot  be  carried  out  successfully  if  we  confuse,  through  the  habits  of 
speech,  the  two  different  terminologies. 

It  seems  that  the  older  psychotherapeutic  schools  have  been  formu¬ 
lated  as  systems,  and  that  the  system-function,  which  underlies  them, 
has  not  been  explicitly  stated,  greatly  hampering  future  creative  work. 

The  special  benefit  of  a  generalized  theory  is  in  its  fundamental 
simplicity  and  entirely  general  linguistic  applicability,  which,  for  pre¬ 
vention,  plays  a  decisive  role.  Accidentally,  we  acquire  psychophysio- 
logical  means  to  influence  the  so  difficult  ‘narcissistic*  cases. 

The  present  author  has  attempted  to  indicate  the  most  important 
structural  and  semantic  factors  which  would  facilitate  the  future  workers 
in  the  impending,  necessary  revision  and  co-ordination. 

CHAPTER  XXXI 

CONCLUDING  REMARKS 

Pitiless  indeed  are  the  processes  of  Time  and  Creative  Thought  and 
Logic:  they  respect  the  convenience  of  none  nor  the  love  of  things  held 
sacred;  agony  attends  their  course.  Yet  their  work  is  the  increasing  glory 
of  a  world, — the  production  of  psychic  light, — the  growth  of  knowledge, 
the  advancement  of  understanding, — the  enlargement  of  human  lite,  tne 
emancipation  of  Man.  (264>  cassius  j.  keys 

Yet  the  barbarians,  who  are  not  divided  by  rival  traditions,  fight  all  the 
more  incessantly  for  food  and  space.  Peoples  cannot  love  one  another  un¬ 
less  they  love  the  same  ideas.  <46i)  G*  santayana 

The  individual  whose  brutish  desire  for  personal  profit  is  unrestrained 
by  the  needs  and  rights  of  his  fellows  reverts  to  barbarism.  If  a  bandit  he 
is  outlawed;  if  a  politician  he  is— usually  reelected,  with  resulting  retro¬ 
gression  of  the  entire  social  organization.  <221)  c.  judson  herrick 

...  a  "League  of  Sound  Logic”  is  the  best  “League  of  Nations”  because 
effective  under  the  subtle  inevitable  laws  of  Logical  Fate— Unified  Uoc- 
trines  Will  Unify  Man.  (280)  A*  K* 

A  little  less  worry  over  the  child  and  a  bit  more  concern  about  the  world 
we  make  for  the  child  to  live  in;  an  inclusion  of  the  child  in  a  life  of  which 
the  aim  is  not  merely  to  earn  money  so  as  to  become  independent  of  the 
job;  more  love  for  whole-hearted,  creative  work  and  progress  that  will 
make  possible  what  we  all  can  share  in;  with  these  conditions,  the  adult 
and  the  young  both  will  have  a  better  chance.  adolf  meyer 

The  present  remarks  were  originally  written  for  the  last  chapter  of 
the  whole  volume,  but  a  final  critical  survey  of  the  material  suggested 
the  newly  ordered  sequence  of  the  present  three  main  divisions.  Book  I 
gives  a  general  preparatory  introduction  which  will  help  the  reader  to 
differentiate  between  the  A  and  A  systems,  and  to  evaluate  properly  the 
differences.  Book  II  formulates  the  main  A  principles  which  constitute 
an  organic  interrelated  whole,  to  which  the  present  concluding  remarks 
belong.  Book  III  gives  some  additional  structural  data  about  mathe¬ 
matics  and  physics  which  usually  are  not  treated  from  the  present  point 
of  view,  but  which  furnish  the  essential  structural  material  needed. 

The  writing  of  Book  I,  and  particularly  Book  III,  was  very 
laborious  and  difficult.  I  often  had  the  temptation  to  omit  Book  III 
entirely,  and  to  refer  the  reader  to  other  authors.  After  months  of 
search,  however,  I  found,  to  my  sorrow,  that,  in  spite  of  many  excellent 
volumes,  there  were  no  books  written  from  a  structural  and  semantic 

♦What  Can  the  Psychiatrist  Contribute  to  Character  Education?  Rel.  Educ.  May,  1930. 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

point  of  view.  To  refer  the  reader  to  other  writers  would  necessitate 
the  reading  of  a  fair-sized  library,  because  often  from  a  whole  book  he 
would  need  only  a  few  scattered  paragraphs.  This  would  involve  a  very 
expensive  and  laborious  process  of  hunting,  which  very  few  would 
undertake ;  besides,  it  would  not  give  a  connected  structural  or  semantic 
picture.  I  tried  to  induce  some  specialists  to  write  a  book  on  the  struc¬ 
ture  and  semantic  aspects  of  mathematics,  and  another  similar  book  on 
physics.  I  was  told  that  it  would  be  very  laborious  and  difficult,  if  at 
all  possible,  and  so  I  had  no  other  choice  than  to  try  to  write  it  myself. 

I  earnestly  suggest  the  reading  of  Book  III,  so  that  the  reader  may, 
at  least,  become  acquainted  with  the  existence  of  such  problems.  I  hope 
that  even  specialists  may  find  some  suggestions  helpful,  because  the 
structural  and  semantic  aspects  of  science  and  mathematics  are  usually 
neglected,  the  neglect  of  which  introduces  needless  difficulties  in  the 
teaching.  The  elimination  of  identification  helps  to  solve  many  scientific 
puzzles,  besides  eliminating  semantic  blockages  and  so  helping  creative 
activities. 

The  world  affairs  have  seemingly  come  to  an  impasse  and  probably, 
without  the  help  of  scientists,  mathematicians,  and  psychiatrists  included, 
we  shall  not  be  able  to  solve  our  urgent  problems  soon  enough  to  prevent 
a  complete  collapse.  Now  those  who  are  professionally  engaged  in 
human  affairs,  economists,  sociologists,  politicians,  bankers,  priests  of 
every  kind,  teachers.,  ‘mental*  hygiene  workers,  and  psychiatrists  in¬ 
cluded,  do  not  even  suspect  that  material  and  methods  of  great  general 
semantic  value  can  be  found  in  mathematics  and  the  exact  sciences.  The 
drawing  of  their  attention  to  this  fact,  no  matter  how  clumsily  done  at 
first,  will  stimulate  further  researches,  produce  better  formulations  and 
understanding,  and  ultimately  create  conditions  where  sanity  will  be 
possible. 

Some  of  those  who  have  seen  my  manuscript  or  with  whom  I  have 
discussed  the  problems  seemed  to  dislike  the  term  ‘copying  animals  in 
our  nervous  reactions*  and  also  the  explicit  introduction  of  ‘Fido*.  As 
identification  is  found  among  animals,  primitives,  infants,  and  ‘mentally’ 
ill,  it  could  be  said  that  the  introduction  of  ‘Fido*  was  not  necessary.  I 
have  given  serious  consideration  to  the  eventual  desirability  of  completely 
eliminating  ‘Fido’  from  my  work  and  substituting  the  term  ‘primitive*. ; 
but,  after  mature  deliberation,  I  decided  that  it  will  be  helpful  to  accentu¬ 
ate  the  distinction  between  the  reactions  of  animal  and  man.  The  main 
justifications  of  this  are  as  follows : 

1 )  My  whole  work  and  the  formulation  of  a  ^-system  started 
with  an  attempt  to  produce  a  science  of  man,  this  necessitating  a  mod- 

CONCLUDING  REMARKS 

ern,  scientific  functional,  non-elementalistic,  sharp  definition  of  man. 
Such  a  definition  was  given  in  my  Manhood  of  Humanity  to  the  effect 
that  man  differs  from  the  animals  in  the  capacity  of  each  human  gen¬ 
eration  to  begin  where  the  former  generation  left  off.  This  capacity  I 
Called  the  time-binding  function.  This  definition  cannot  be  denied,  and 
It  fulfills  the  modern  requirements. 

2)  The  present  enquiry  originated  in  the  investigation  of  the 
mechanism  of  time-binding,  and  is  a  further  analysis  of  the  sharp  dif¬ 
ferences  between  the  reactions  of  animals  and  humans,  which  became  the 
psychophysiological  foundation  of  a  ^-system  and  a  theory  of  sanity. 

3)  The  further  the  investigation  advanced,  it  became  increasingly 
evident  that  the  issues  involved  are  extremely  complex,  and  that  in  this 
field,  from  a  structural  and  non-el  point  of  view,  practically  nothing  has 
been  done.  In  general,  all  existing  'logics*  and  'psychologies*  are  struc¬ 
turally  misleading,  since  they  are  still  thoroughly  el  and  pr e-A  or  A ; 
these  conditions  necessitate  the  elimination  of  them,  as  well  as  other 
dependent  disciplines,  to  prevent  their  being  accepted  as  structurally 
fundamental.  It  was  then  desirable,  in  my  pioneering  enterprise,  to  keep 
a  simpler  and  more  obvious  contrast  between  ‘Fido’,  whom  we  nearly  all 
know  quite  well  and  usually  like,  and  ‘Smith*,  whom  no  one  seems  to 
know  properly.  This  method  has  proved  very  useful  to  the  writer  and 
I  am  convinced  that  many  readers  will  find  it  equally  helpful.  I  frankly 
admit  that  if  I  had  not  followed  this  simplified  method,  I  could  not  have 
produced  the  A- system  and  discovered  in  this  psycho-logical  maze  the 
blockages  introduced  into  our  s.r  by  identification,  elementalism,  lack  of 
consciousness  of  abstracting,  improper  evaluation.,  and,  in  general, 
infantilism. 

For  these  three  main  reasons  it  seemed  advisable  to  retain  ‘Fido* 
as  a  most  useful  factor  in  my  analysis,  with  ail  due  apologies  to  ‘Fido*. 

I  also  admit  that  I  did  not  realize  the  difficulties  of  the  task  and 
the  magnitude  of  the  undertaking.  The  last  revision  alone  of  the  manu¬ 
script  required  more  than  a  year.  I  am  all  too  well  aware  to  what  extent 
the  presentation  falls  short  of  my  expectations  and  how  much  better  it 
could  have  been  written  by  some  one  more  gifted,  but  the  following 
rather  unexpected  developments  sustained  my  courage. 

1)  Curiously  enough,  the  principles  involved  are  often  childishly 
simple,  often  ‘generally  known*,  to  the  point  that  on  several  occasions 
some  older  scientists  felt  ‘offended*  that  such  ‘obvious*  principles  should 
be  so  emphasized.  Yet  my  experience,  without  any  exception,  was  that 
no  matter  how  much  these  simple  principles  were  approved  of  verbally, 
in  no  case  were  they  fully  applied  in  practice ,  Slowly  I  understood  that 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

we  cannot  train  mankind  in  identification  by  all  available  means,  which 
must  prevent  adjustment,  and  then  live  by  non-identification.  Thus, 
when  non-identity  is  pointed  out,  even  a  moron  will  ‘^gree’,  or  wonder 
at  the  silliness  of  an  author  who  fusses  about  it;  yet,  because  all  of  us 
were  trained  in  a  linguistic  and  semantic  system  based  on  identity,  that 
infantile  identification  will  unconsciously  play  havoc  with  all  our  s.r  the 
rest  of  our  lives,  unless  this  semantic  blockage  is  counteracted.  Natur¬ 
ally,  the  ‘simpler’  a  principle  appears,  to  which  we  may  pay  lip  service 
but  which  we  never  fully  apply,  the  more  I  became  convinced  that  th<* 
discovery  of  new  methods  for  the  application  of  this  simple  yet  neglected 
principle  must  be  considered  most  important.  Any  reader  may  verify 
by  himself  to  what  extent  identification  introduces  difficulties  in  his  own 
life.  In  fact,  the  main  difficulties  we  have  can  always  be  traced  to  some 
identification  somewhere. 

2)  The  experimental  data  of  Doctor  Philip  S.  Graven  with  the 
‘mentally’  ill  and  those  cases  of  semantic  disturbances  which,  in  the 
orthodox  way,  were  not  supposed  to  be  un-sane,  showed  that  a  change 
from  the  A  standards  of  evaluations  involving  identification  to  the  A 
standards  without  identification  often  either  brought  about  a  complete 
semantic  reconstruction  of  an  individual,  or  semantic,  expedient,  and 
lasting  ‘cures’.  This  fact  again  impressed  me  with  the  genuine  work¬ 
ability  and  so  human  importance  of  a  ^-system.  If  the  old  ‘impossible 
to  change’,  ‘human  nature’  can  be  ‘changed’  by  the  new  simple  psycho- 
physiological  methods,  this  again  suggests  that  this  new  system,  no  mat- 
ter  how  imperfect,  may  be  useful. 

3)  I  was  also  very  much  impressed  by  the  far-reaching  power  of 
the  A  methods.  As  a  rule,  only  mathematicians  and  epistemologists  fully 
appreciate  what  the  power  of  a  method  means.  Thus,  the  differential 
methods  were  invented,  and  later  we  found  that  these  methods  were 
structurally  applicable  to  all  processes.  A  tensor  calculus  was  invented, 
and  we  found  that  it  gave  us  absolute,  invariant  formulations  applicable 
to  all  physics.  Many  other  methodological  innovations  could  be  cited 
and  always  the  generality  of  the  applications  gave  the  value  to  those 
new  formulations.  The  present  A- system  was  formulated  in  a  way  inde¬ 
pendent  of  other  diciplines,  as  it  was  the  direct  result  of  structural 
semantic  researches  free  from  identification.  This  led  to  the  formulation 
of  fundamental  general  principles  which  underlie  all  human  ‘knowledge’, 
such  as  non-identity,  requiring  the  recognition  of  structure  as  the  only 
possible  content  of  ‘knowledge’  and  so  leading  to  the  formulation  of 
‘similarity  of  structure’;  non-elementalism  as  a  general  principle;  the 
general  principle  of  uncertainty;  oo-valued  general  semantics..  It  is 

CONCLUDING  REMARKS 

naturally  very  reassuring  to  find  that  the  newest  most  important  achieve¬ 
ments  of  science  have  followed  these  principles  unconsciously  and  have 
applied  them  before  they  were  explicitly  formulated. 

From  another  point  of  view,  a  ^-system  which  could  claim  to  be 
'modern',  should  formulate  general  principles  that  all  scientists  in  every 
field  could  follow.  This  was  practically  the  case  with  the  -system  until 
Francis  Bacon.  It  is  also  the  case  with  the  present  system  except  that 
different  scientists  have  applied  these  new  principles  without  having 
produced  a  general  formulation .  The  fact  that  these  principles  had  no 
general  formulation  was  a  retarding  factor  even  in  science  and  made 
the  application  of  science  to  human  affairs  impossible.  In  the  following 
examples,  the  different  A  aspects  overlap,  and  I  am  emphasizing  only 
the  most  marked  features.  Thus  Einstein-Minkowski's  space-time, 
Einstein-Mayer’s  new  unified  field  theory,  the  newer  quantum  mechan¬ 
ics,  the  new  physics  of  high  pressure,  piezochemistry . ,  the  tropism 
theory  of  the  late  Jacques  Loeb,  the  physiological  gradients  of  C.  M. 
Child . ,  . ,  exhibit  clearly  the  application  of  non-elementalism.  Heisen¬ 
berg's  restricted  principle  of  uncertainty  is  also  the  result  of  the  appli¬ 
cation  of  non-elementalism,  based  on  the  observation  that  the  ‘observer 
and  the  ‘observed'  cannot  be  sharply  divided.  This  principle  becomes  a 
particular  instance  of  the  general  A  principle  of  uncertainty,  which 
again  is  based  on  the  observation  that  we  deal  actually  with  absolute 
individuals  and  speak  in  more  or  less  general  terms,  with  the  result  that 
all  statements  are  only  probable  in  different  degrees. 

The  absolute  individuality  of  four-dimensional  events,  objects,  situ¬ 
ations,  s.r. ,  necessitates  an  indefinitely  flexible  evaluation  requiring 
oo-valued  A  semantics.  Outside  of  daily  life,  the  best  examples  are 
given  in  science  by  the  newer  developments  in  vitamins,  the  effects  of 
radiant  energy  on  heredity,  but  particularly  by  the  bewildering  possibil¬ 
ities  disclosed  by  the  developments  of  physics,  physics  of  high  pressure, 
piezochemistry,  polymorphism,  colloidal  behaviour,  and  the  application 
of  colloidal  knowledge  to  psychiatry.  The  Polish  school  of  mathema¬ 
ticians  has  produced  the  extension  of  the  traditional  two-valued  A 
‘logic’  to  three-,  and  many- valued  ‘logic';  Chwistek  has  based  a  new 
foundation  of  mathematics  and  a  new  theory  of  aggregates  on  his 
semantic  methods ;  but  even  these  writers  disregarded  the  general  prob¬ 
lems  of  non-elementalism,  non-identity,  and  the  necessity  for  a  full- 
fledged  /^-system  before  their  formulations  can  become  free  from 
paradoxes,  valid,  and  applied  to  life. 

All  these  issues  combined  are  of  particular  interest  to  mankind  in 
general,  and  to  the  medical  profession  in  particular,  because,  obviously, 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

if  mankind  is  to  pass  from  an  infantile  stage  of  its  development  into  an 
era  of  general  sanity,  this  would  require  a  serious  collaboration  of  medi¬ 
cal  science.  Unfortunately,  medical  science  is  one  of  the  most  laborious 
and  difficult  disciplines,  and,  of  late,  in  spite  of  some  specific  advances, 
it  is  rapidly  ceasing  to  be  in  general  a  modern  science.  Any  one  who 
attends  medical  congresses,  scientific  meetings,  or  follows  up  medical 
literature  often  wonders  whether  he  listens  to,  or  reads,  scientific  argu¬ 
ments,  or  sixteenth  century  religious  disputes.  Dr.  F.  G.  Crookshank, 
in  his  chapter  on  The  Importance  of  a  Theory  of  Signs  and  a  Critique 
of  Language  in  the  Study  of  Medicine  in  Ogden  and  Richard's  The 
Meaning  of  Meaning ,  gives  an  excellent  picture  of  the  present  sad  state 
of  affairs ;  but  a  A  analysis  discovers  deeper  foundations  underlying  the 
difficulties  in  medicine,  which  would  have  to  be  remedied  by  the  revision 
of  medical  education.  In  this  connection,  A  issues  become  very  impor¬ 
tant.  Organisms  in  general,  and  humans  in  particular,  represent  col¬ 
loidal  processes  which  involve  tremendous  pressure  because  of  colloidal 
attraction  for  water.  Dr.  Neda  Marinesco1  has  recently  suggested  that 
Ice  VI  constitutes  an  important  factor  in  the  human  organism.  Ice  VI 
represents  a  new  form  of  ice  discovered  by  P.  W.  Bridgman2  who  found 
that  water  in  bulk  and  at  the  temperature  of  the  body  may  be  found  to 
crystallize  by  the  application  of  high  pressure.  It  is  the  notion  of  Dr. 
Marinesco  that  the  forces  of  adsorption  may  be  as  high  as  the  pressure 
used  by  Bridgman,  so  that  in  thin  surface  films  the  arrangement  of  water 
molecules  may  be  much  like  that  found  in  Ice  VI.  It  may  interest  the 
reader  to  know  that,  among  others,  Professor  Bridgman  discovered  that 
aceton  becomes  solidified  at  room  temperature,  albumen  coagulates., 
under  high  pressure. 

Although  physicians  in  their  university  days  are  well  acquainted 
with  colloidal  chemistry,  yet  somehow,  in  practice,  they  have  great 
difficulties  in  ‘thinking'  in  colloidal  terms.  With  the  newest  discoveries 
of  physics  of  high  pressure  and  piezochemistry,  with  their  bewildering 
variety  of  physical  manifestations,  which,  under  different  pressure, 
change  with  every  individual  material,  a  modern  physician  will  have  to 
‘think'  not  only  in  terms  of  colloids,  but  of  colloids  in  combination  with 
the  data  of  high-pressure  physics  and  piezochemistry.  Now  such  ‘think¬ 
ing'  is  humanly  impossible  under  the  traditional  two-,  or  three-valued  A 
disciplines  and  becomes  only  possible  with  oo -valued  A  general  seman¬ 
tics,  One  of  the  immediate  results  of  the  use  of  A  disciplines  is  the 
elimination  of  the  elementalism  of  ‘body'  and  ‘mind’,  ‘intellect'  and  ‘emo¬ 
tions'.  ,  and  the  introduction  of  the  non-el  point  of  view  as  given  in  the 
present  work.  This  requires  every  physician  to  be  acquainted  with 

CONCLUDING  REMARKS 

psychiatry,  which  acquaintance  would  eliminate  many  harmful  cults.  It 
should  be  fully  realized  that  the  older  chemistry  which  dealt  with  differ¬ 
ent  'substances',  having  different  ‘properties',  could  have  been  treated 
by  A  subject-predicate  and  two-,  or  three-valued  means.  But  not  so  in 
1933 ;  the  older  chemistry  is  gone,  and  today  we  deal  only  with  a  special 
branch  of  physics  based  on  structure ;  the  newer  physics  of  high  pressure 
show  clearly  that  many  of  the  older  characteristics  of  'substances'  are 
only  accidental  functions  of  pressure,  temperature,  and  what  not,  which 
vary  in  a  bewildering  way,  requiring  new  semantic  principles,  new 
epistemologies . ;  in  short,  a  new  non-el  and  oo-valued  A -system.  In 
other  words,  whoever  retains  the  A  s.r  is  entirely  unable  to  'think'  scien¬ 
tifically  in  the  modern  sense.  If  we  want  to  have  a  science  of  man  or  a 
1933  science  of  medicine . ,  the  first  step  is  to  revise  thoroughly  the 
A -system. 

,  In  fact,  many  more  interconnections  and  interrelations  could  be 
shown  which  would  make  still  more  obvious  how  a  ^-system  results 
from,  and  leads  to,  modem  scientific  results,  which  can  be  extended  and 
applied  to  all  human  concerns  only  after  a  general  formulation  as  a 
system . 

4)  If  the  difference  between  the  animal  and  man  consists  in  the 
capacity  of  the  latter  to  start  where  the  former  generation  left  off,  obvi¬ 
ously  humans,  to  be  humans,  should  exercise  this  capacity  to  the  fullest 
extent.  If  we  fail  to  do  this,  we  again  'copy  animals  in  our  nervous 
reactions',  which  copying  is  the  very  thing  we  should  struggle  against. 
This  ‘where  the  former  generation  left  off'  would  not  only  include  all 
science,  but  also  epistemology  and  the  'wisdom*  which  through  painful 
experiences  each  former  generation  has  accumulated . ,  which,  in  prin¬ 
ciple ,  should  be  given  to  every  child.  Under  the  A  conditions  of  our 
present  education . ,  systems,  and  evaluational  systems,  this  is  completely 
impossible  and  may  sound  visionary.  Thus,  to  acquire  scientific  knowl¬ 
edge  in  all  fields,  one  would  have  to  spend  a  lifetime  devoted  to  science, 
entirely  free  from  financial  worries . ,  and  even  then  he  would  only  be 
able  to  acquire  a  small  part  of  it.  Before  any  older  epistemological  in¬ 
sight  could  be  imparted,  one  should  not  only  have  special  gifts,  inter¬ 
ests.,  but  should  also  have  an  enormous  amount  of  knowledge  before 
such  an  education  could  be  attempted.  Similarly  with  'wisdom*.  The 
older  and  the  younger  generations,  by  colloidal  necessity,  cannot  fully 
understand  each  other  and,  to  a  large  extent,  have  mutual  mistrust, 
which,  as  yet,  is  an  entirely  normal  A  s.r , . 

In  a  non-elt  ^-system  this  whole  situation  becomes  radically 
changed.  The  impossible  is  made  possible;  I  may  say  more,  it  is  made 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

simple  and  easy,  and  becomes  a  necessary  and  unavoidable  factor  in  the 
life  of  any  child.  A  non-el,  ^-system  is  based  on  the  complete  elimination 
of  identification,  from  which  it  directly  follows  that  the  only  link  between 
the  un-speakable  objective  levels  and  the  verbal  levels  is  found  in  struc- 
ture-  Structure,  then,  becomes  the  only  possible  content  of  all  knowl¬ 
edge  . ,  and  all  scientific  technicalities,  admittedly  laborious  and  difficult, 
become  only  a  necessary  tool  in  the  search  for  structure,  with  little,  if 
any,  intrinsic  value,  and  are  unnecessary  for  ‘knowledge’  as  soon  as  in 
a  given  case  the  structure  is  discovered.  This  structure  is  always  simple 
and  can  be  given  to  children. 

It  is  meaningless  and  utterly  useless  to  argue  whether  or  not  the 
world  is  simple’;  as  the  world  is  not  our  understanding  of  it;  but  as 
our  understanding’  happens  to  be  structural,  our  nervous  system, 
through  its  abstracting  capacities,  makes  it  simple,  once  its  structural 
content  is  discovered.  As  the  search  for  structure  involves  similarity  of 
linguistic  and  empirical  structures,  we  readily  understand  that  any  Ian¬ 
s'13^  which  we  cannot  evade  teaching  our  children,  has  structure  and 
involves  structural  assumptions.  In  the  structural  revision  of  our  lan¬ 
guage  and  the  teaching  of  a  few  structurally  appropriate  terms,  entirely 
abandoning  a  few  structurally  misleading  ones,  we  directly  impart  all 
up-to-a-date  fundamental  knowlege  to  any  child.  We  train  him  auto¬ 
matically  in  the  appropriate  linguistic  structure,  which  builds  up  in  him 
appropriate  s.r.  Mankind  at  large  does  not  need  scientific  technicalities 
to  absorb  and  thereby  obtain  semantic  benefits  from  the  structural  results 
of  science.  These  results  are  the  only  ones  which  really  matter,  and 
which  can  be  given  in  an  extremely  simple  way,  automatically  abolishing 
the  primitive  metaphysics,  structural  assumptions,  and  infantile  s.r. 

By  abolishing  the  structurally  false  to  facts  one-valued  identification, 
we  automatically  train  in  oo-valued  differentiation  leading  toward  con¬ 
sciousness  of  abstracting,  which  results  in  all  the  wisdom  that  epistem¬ 
ology  and  private  experience  can  give  us,  being  structurally  a  total  result 
of  racial  experience.  As  structure  is  based  on  relations  and  order, 
structural  training,  when  done  consciously,  becomes  a  physiological 
method,  working  simply  and  automatically. 

In  the  ^-system  these  semantic  mechanisms  were  not  consciously 
recognized,  although  they  worked  fatalistically  with  us.  We  were  impart¬ 
ing  primitive  psychophysiological  reactions  to  our  children,  who  had  to 
spend  a  lifetime  to  learn  by  very  painful  experience  that  something  was 
wrong  somewhere.  Now  we  understand  that  the  origin  of  the  difficulty 
was  in  the  lack  of  scientific  investigations  which  would  have  analysed, 
non-elementalistically,  the  structural  aspects  of  language  and  cnrmected 

