CONCLUDING  REMARKS 

/.r.  All  of  which,  let  me  repeat,  works  automatically,  as  experience  and 
experiments  abundantly  show.  Thus,  an  analysis  of  the  mechanism  of 
time-binding  depends  on  the  discovery  of  a  sharp  non-el  difference  be¬ 
tween  ‘Fido’  and  ‘Smith',  and  the  formulation  of  means  to  make  the 
time-binding  characteristics  of  man  fully  effective  with  all  except  heavily 
pathological  individuals. 

By  abolishing  identification  we  generalize  differentiation  and  so 
impart  consciousness  of  abstracting,  an  indispensable  factor  in  proper 
evaluation,  and  an  absolute  condition  for  adaptive  and  so  survival  be¬ 
haviour.  Thus  a  ^-system  becomes  a  general  theory  of  sanity  and  the 
general  theory  of  time-binding,  from  which  general  semantics  follow. 

5)  One  of  the  most  important  features  of  the  present  ^-system 
consists  of  its  non-el  structural  character.  We  may  analyse  problems  in 
a  scientific  ‘intellectual’  way ;  yet  this  analysis,  because  non-el ,  structural, 
and  semantic,  appeals  to,  and  affects,  our  ‘feelings',  ‘intuitions'. ,  involving 
psychophysiological  factors  based  on  order.  Thus,  the  structurally  neces¬ 
sary  translations  of  one  level  of  abstractions  into  the  others  and  vice 
versa,  is  enormously  facilitated,  while  in  el  systems  these  translations 
were  hampered  by  unavoidable  semantic  blockages.  Accordingly,  ‘intel¬ 
lect’,  ‘emotions',  ‘body’,  and  ‘mind*. ,  are  not  divided.  The  organism  is 
affected  as-a-whole,  because  structurally  correct  non-el  means  are  em¬ 
ployed,  making  many  benefits  of  the  system  accessible  to  children, 
morons,  and,  perhaps,  even  superior  idiots.  The  last  results  are  to  be 
foreseen,  although  they  have  not,  as  yet,  been  verified  empirically. 

6)  But  the  most  workable  feature  of  the  system  consists  in  the  fact 
that,  being  based  on  such  fundamental  principles  as  non-identification, 
non-elementalism . ,  it  has  an  organic  unity.  The  main  issues  are  all 
strictly  interrelated  and  apply  to  ‘body',  ‘mind’,  ‘emotions'. ,  in  a  non-el 
way,  all  working  automatically,  no  matter  from  what  angle  we  approach 
the  training. 

Thus,  if  we  start  with  order,  we  are  led  to  relations  and  structure; 
these  establish  differentiation  and  stratification,  eliminating  identification 
and  ‘allness’,  which  result  in  consciousness  of  abstracting,  necessitating 
oo-valued  general  semantics,  indispensable  to  proper  evaluation  and  ad¬ 
justment.  If  we  start  with  non-identity,  we  are  led  to  order,  relations, 
structure,  differentiation,  stratification,  non-allness,  consciousness  of 
abstracting,  oo-valued  semantics,  proper  evaluation,  and  adjustment.  If 
we  start  with  differentiation  or  stratification,  we  are  led  to  order,  rela¬ 
tions,  structure,  non-identification,  non-allness,  consciousness  of  abstract¬ 
ing,  and  proper  evaluation. 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

It  should  be  noticed  that  consciousness  of  abstracting  and  proper 
evaluation  are  complex  end-results  which  cannot  be  imparted  directly, 
but  which  become  automatically  lasting  semantic  states  only  after  we 
have  eliminated  one-valued  identification,  or  introduced  order,  oo-valued 
differentiation,  stratification , .  The  non-el  benefit  of  the  system  consists 
in  engaging  the  organism-as-a- whole.  Thus,  four-dimensional  order 
plays  the  role  of  a  potent  physiological  factor  in  the  process  and  becomes 
the  foundation  for  psychophysiology.  Non-identity  is  a  term  applied  on 
the  verbal  levels,  which,  on  visual  and  intuitive  levels,  involves  differen¬ 
tiation,  ordering,  and  stratification.  This  system  thus  involves  all  neces¬ 
sary  nerve  centres  and  operates  in  a  non-el  way,  as  reactions  on  one  level 
are  easily  and  organically  translated  into  the  terms  of  other  levels, 
making  psychophysiology  possible. 

7)  Finally,  it  is  significant  that  many  publications  in  the  last  ten 
years  have  shown  efforts  in  a  similar  direction,  which  have  received 
scientific  and  public  approval.  As  I  am  more  interested  in  creative  work, 
rather  than  critical,  I  shall  not  analyse  these  strivings  except  to  make 
one  general  remark  that,  because  they  are  not  based  on  order,  structure, 
non-el  s.rt  the  complete  elimination  of  identification . ,  they  are  valuable 
and  useful  to  the  selected  few,  but  under  no  conditions  could  a  psycho¬ 
physiology  or  a  theory  of  sanity  be  based  on  these  works  which  could 
be  applicable  in  general  elementary  linguistic  and  semantic  education. 
If  I  am  not  mistaken,  in  this  respect  the  present  work  differs  radically 
from  the  others  with  which  I  am  acquainted. 

From  a  non-el  point  of  view  we  can  never  disregard  the  effect  the 
‘body’  or  ‘emotions'  have  on  the  ‘mind',  and  vice  versa  the  effect  that  the 
‘mind'  has  on  the  ‘emotions'  and  the  ‘body', .  Identification  and  all  its 
consequences  involve  seriously  disturbing  semantic  factors  with  corre¬ 
sponding  colloidal  disturbances,  and  it  seems  that,  as  yet,  the  human 
race,  outside  of  very  exceptional  cases,  has  never  been  free  from  these 
disturbances.  What  effect  the  elimination  of  such  disturbances  will  have 
on  the  human  race  it  is  impossible  to  foretell  at  this  stage,  beyond  ex¬ 
pressing  the  expectation  that  the  consequences  must  be  highly  beneficial. 

We  have  already  become  acquainted  with  the  terms  ‘conditional'  and 
‘unconditional'  reactions.  In  the  example  of  the  patient  and  the  paper 
roses,  we  have  seen  that  the  pathological  symptoms  were  ‘unconditional'. 
They  were  compulsory,  as  in  the  case  of  the  dogs  mentioned  in  Part  VI. 
In  a  healthy  individual  they  would  have  been  fully  conditional  reactions, 
under  semantic  control.  The  above  terminology  may  be  extended  so  as 
to  apply  to  all  ‘mental’  ills,  for  here  that  which  in  the  ‘normal’  person 
is  a  fully  conditional  reaction  becomes  unconditional,  or  a  reaction  of 

CONCLUDING  REMARKS 

lower  order  conditionality  (compulsory)  beyond  conscious  control.  Here 
we  differ  from  animals  and  hospital  cases.  When  our  conditional  reac¬ 
tions  are  not  fully  regulated  by  proper  s.r  and  become  unconditional,  we 
copy  animals,  and  so  are  in  a  state  of  arrested  development  or  of 
regression. 

The  general  therapeutic  and  preventive  measures  are  clearly  indi¬ 
cated  by  such  considerations.  Conditional  reactions  in  man  should  be¬ 
come  fully  conditional  and  not  fixed  as  unconditional,  or  conditional  of 
lower  orders.  In  other  words,  instead  of  ‘fixation’,  we  should  have 
means  and  methods  to  preserve  and  foster  semantic  dexibility.  This  last 
is  accomplished  by  acquiring  the  semantic  reactions  connected  with  the 
consciousness  of  abstracting .  I  recommend  this  last  point  to  the  atten¬ 
tion  of  specialists,  as  it  is  impossible  in  the  present  work  to  go  further 
into  details.  Flexibility  is  an  important  semantic  characteristic  of  healthy 
youth.  Fixation  is  a  semantic  characteristic  of  old  age.  With  the  col¬ 
loidal  background,  the  imparting  of  permanent  semantic  flexibility  which 
every  one  acquires  who  becomes  conscious  of  abstracting  might  prove 
to  be  a  crucial  neuro-physico-chemical  colloidal  factor  of,  at  present, 
unrealized  power.  The  colloidal  behaviour  of  our  ‘bodies  is  dependent 
on  electromagnetic . ,  manifestations,  which,  in  their  turn,  are  connected 
with  ‘mental’  states  of  every  description.  If  the  colloidal  ageing,  which 
brings  on  old  age,  ‘physical’  and  ‘mental’  symptoms,  and,  ultimately, 
death,  is  connected  with  such  ‘mental’  fixity,  we  may  expect  some  rather 
startling  results  if  we  impart  a  permanent  semantic  flexibility.  The 
‘ageing’  involves  electrical  changes  in  the  colloidal  background,  which 
must  be  connected  with  the  older  semantic  states.  The  new  fluid  seman¬ 
tic  states  should  have  different  electrical  influences,  which,  in  their  turn, 
would  bring  about  a  difference  in  the  colloidal  behaviour  on  which  our 
‘physical’  states  depend. 

From  a  A  point  of  view,  a  new  era  of  human  development  seems 
possible,  in  which,  by  mere  structural  analysis  and  a  linguistic  revision, 
we  will  discover  disregarded  semantic  mechanisms  operating  in  all  of 
us,  which  can  be  easily  influenced  and  controlled ;  and  we  will  discover, 
also,  that  at  least  a  great  deal  of  prevention  can  be  accomplished. 

It  seems,  also,  that  we  will  discover  more  about  the  dependence  of 
‘human  nature’  on  the  structure  of  our  languages,  doctrines,  institu¬ 
tions  . ,  and  will  conclude  that  for  adjustment,  stability . ,  we  must  adjust 
these  man-made  and  man-invented  semantic  and  other  conditions  in  com- 
formity  with  that  newly  discovered  ‘human  nature’.  This,  of  course, 
would  require  a  thorough  scientific  1933,  physico-mathematical,  epistemo¬ 
logical,  structural,  and  semantic  revision  of  all  existing  human  interests, 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

inclinations,  institutions . ,  to  be  made  by  those  specialized  in  a  ‘science 
of  man’.  If  such  a  revision  is  produced  soon  enough,  it  will,  perhaps, 
help  to  adjust  peacefully  the  standards  of  evaluation  and  prevent  the 
repetition  of  bloody  protests  of  unenlightened  blind  forces  against 
equally  blind  forces  of  existing  powers  and  reactions. 

The  forces  of  life,  humanity,  and  time-binding  are  at  odds ;  in  mod¬ 
em  slang,  a  ‘show-down'  is  imminent;  it  will  happen ,  and  no  one  can 
prevent  it.  To  a  A  understanding  the  only  problem  of  importance  is 
whether  this  ‘show-down'  will  be  scientific,  enlightened,  orderly,  and 
peaceful,  with  minimum  suffering;  or  whether  it  will  take  a  blind, 
chaotic,  silly,  bloody,  and  wasteful  turn  with  maximum  suffering. 

The  problems  of  structure,  language,  and  ‘consciousness  of  abstract¬ 
ing'  play  a  crucial  semantic  role.  To  be  modern,  one  must  accept  modern 
metaphysics  and  a  structurally  revised  modern  language.  As  yet,  these 
semantic  problems  have  been  completely  disregarded  as  far  as  general 
education  is  concerned.  This  is  probably  due  to  the  fact  that  in  an  infan¬ 
tile  and  commercial  civilization  we  encourage  engineering  and  applied 
sciences,  medicine,  biology.,  to  increase  private  profits.,  and  preserve 
or  increase  the  ranks  of  buyers.  But  we  do  not  encourage  to  an  equal 
extent  branches  of  science  like  mathematics,  mathematical  philosophy, 
linguistic,  structural,  and  semantic  researches . ,  which  would  not  directly 
increase  profits  or  the  numbers  of  customers,  but  which  would,  never¬ 
theless,  discover  structural  means  for  more  happiness  for  all. 

Accidentally — and  this  is  recommended  to  the  attention  of  econo¬ 
mists — the  classical  law  of  ‘supply  and  demand'  is  structurally  and 
semantically  an  animalistic  law ,  which  in  an  adult  human  civilization 
must  be  reformulated.  In  fact,  an  adult  human  civilization  cannot  be 
produced  at  all  if  we  preserve  such  fundamental  animalistic  ‘laws’.  In 
the  animal  world  the  numbers  of  individuals  cannot  increase  beyond  what 
the  given  conditions  allow.  The  animals  do  not  produce  artificially. 

Not  so  with  our  human  world.  We  produce  artificially  because  we 
are  time-binders,  and  all  of  us  stand  on  the  shoulders  of  others  and  on 
the  labours  of  the  dead.  We  can  over-populate  this  globe  as  we  have  done. 
Our  numbers  are  not  controlled  by  unaided  nature,  but  can  be  increased 
considerably.  In  the  animal  world  the  numbers  are  regulated  by  the 
supply  of  food . ,  and  not  by  conditions  imposed  by  the  animals  on  that 
food  supply.  The  animal  law  of  ‘supply  and  demand’  is  strict.  In  a 
human  class  of  life,  which  does  produce  artificially,  production  should 
satisfy  the  wants  of  all,  or  their  number  should  be  controlled  until  the 
wants  can  be  filled.  The  application  of  animalistic  laws  to  ourselves 
makes  conditions  very  complicated,  and  detrimental  to  most,  if  not  all 

CONCLUDING  REMARKS 

S49 

of  us.  It  is  also  easily  understood  why  it  should  be  so.  Ignorant  and  A 
handling  of  powerful  symbols  has  proved  to  be  dangerous  when  we  do 
not  realize  the  overwhelming  semantic  role  and  the  importance  of  sym¬ 
bols  in  a  symbolic  class  of  life. 

Another  interesting  application  of  the  consciousness  of  abstracting  is 
given  in  our  attitude  toward  money,  bonds,  titles  to  property , .  Money 
represents  a  symbol  for  all  human  time-binding  characteristics.  Animals 
do  not  have  it.  No  doubt  bees  produce  honey,  but  these  products  of  the 
bees  do  not  constitute  wealth  until  man  puts  his  hands  on  them.  Money 
is  not  edible  or  habitable.  It  is  worthless  if  the  other  fellow  refuses  to 
take  it.  The  tn.o  reality  behind  the  symbol  is  found  in  human  agreement . 
The  value  behind  the  symbol  is  doctrinal .  Fido  does  not  discriminate 
between  the  different  orders  of  abstractions.  If  we  copy  him,  we  wor¬ 
ship  the  symbol  alone.  ‘In  gold  we  trust*  becomes  the  motto,  with  all  its 
identifications  and  destructive  consequences.  Smith  should  not  identify 
the  m.o  reality  behind  the  symbol  with  the  symbol.  It  is  amusing,  when 
not  tragic,  to  see  how  the  so-called  ‘practical  man*  deals  mostly  with 
fictitious  values,  for  which  he  is  willing  to  live  and  die.  When  he  has 
the  upper  hand  and  ignorantly  plays  with  symbols,  disregarding  the  m.o 
realities  behind  them,  of  course,  he  drives  civilization  to  disasters.  His¬ 
tory  is  full  of  examples  of  this. 

We  see  the  utter  folly  of  racing  to  accumulate  symbols,  worthless 
in  themselves,  while  destroying  the  ‘mental*  and  ‘moral*  values  which  are 
behind  the  symbols.  For  it  is  useless  to  ‘own’  a  semantically  unbalanced 
world.  Such  ownership  is  a  fiction,  no  matter  how  stable  it  may  look 
on  paper.  Commercialism,  as  a  creed,  is  a  folly  of  this  type.  Some  day 
even  economists,  bankers,  and  merchants  will  understand  that  such 
‘impractical*  works  as  this  present  one  on  structure,  s.r . ,  lead  to  the 
revision  of  standards  of  evaluation  and  are  directly  helping  the  stabiliza¬ 
tion  of  an  economic  system.  Meanwhile,  in  their  ignorance,  they  do  their 
best  to  keep  the  economic  system  unscientific,  and,  therefore,  unbal¬ 
anced.  History  shows  clearly  how  the  rulers  have  generally  made  life 
unbearable  for  the  rest  of  mankind,  and  what  bloody  results  have  fol¬ 
lowed.  Since  the  World  War  certain  conditions  are  becoming  increas- 
ingly  more  difficult,  and  the  infantile  and  animalistic  systems  drive  us 
fatalistically  toward  further  catastrophes.  Whether  these  disasters  will 
occur,  the  unknown  future  shall  decide;  but  out  of  this  unknown,  one 
fact  remains  a  certainty ;  namely,  that  this  will  depend  on  whether  or  not 
science  can  take  hold  of  human  affairs ;  I  hope  it  can,  but  the  blind 
forces  of  identification  are  so  strong  and  powerful  that  perhaps  such 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

hopes  are  premature.  Perhaps  a  new  race  can  accomplish  it  after  this 
one  is  extinct,  with  the  exception  of  a  few  remnants  in  museums. 

The  problems  of  determinism  and  indeterminism  are  not  purely 
‘academic’  but  influence,  to  a  large  extent,  our  theories  and  behaviour, 
and  so  are  fundamental  for  adjustment.  Historically,  science  has  utilized 
determinism  of  the  two-,  and  three-valued  variety,  which  has  lately,  in 
the  case  of  the  newer  quantum  mechanics,  proved  insufficient.  The  lack 
of  the  formulation  of  oo-valued  semantics,  necessary  for  oo-valued 
determinism,  seemed  to  indicate  that  even  science  tends  to  drift  toward 
indeterminism,  a  tendency  which  was  rather  baffling  and  disturbing  to 
many  scientists. 

Different  ‘ethics’  and  ‘morals’  have  fought  determinism  throughout 
all  our  past  on  the  ground  that  in  a  deterministic  world  all  ‘morals’  and 
‘ethics’  would  be  impossible.  If  a  man  is  compelled  to  do  something, 
then,  we  are  told,  he  is  not  responsible.  They  state  that  the  result  would 
be  undesirable  licence,  forgetting  that  determinism  implies  quite  the 
opposite  of  licence. 

We  have  already  become  acquainted  with  infantile  self-love  and 
self-importance.  These  infantile  characteristics  have  not  only  shaped 
our  semantic  attitudes,  but  also  our  ‘scientific’  theories.  Smith  and  this 
little  earth  were  in  many  ways  postulated  as  the  centre  of  the  universe. 
Scientific  discoveries  showed  that  such  statements  did  not  cover  the  facts 
at  hand,  and  Smith  was  displaced  from  this  primitive  and  infantile 
self-centred  position.  The  Polish  astronomer  Copernicus  was  the  first 
to  give  this  rude  shock.  The  little  earth  was  no  longer  the  ‘centre  of  the 
universe’.  Next  came  Darwin  with  another  shock  to  such  infantile  pride. 
Smith  was  no  longer  a  ‘special  creation’,  but  belonged  to  the  general 
series  of  living  forms,  none  of  which  were  ‘special  creations’.  Finally, 
Freud  developed  the  notion  that  even  in  semantic  processes,  determinism 
prevails.  All  our  actions,  psycho-logical  and  semantic  states . ,  have  very 
definite  conscious  and  unconscious  psychophysiological  ‘causes’  whkh 
activate  us. 

An  infantile  society  had  difficulties  in  abandoning  their  pleasing 
delusions,  and  these  three  men  were  duly  persecuted,  criticized,  and  bit¬ 
terly  attacked  and  hated  by  many. 

The  present  situation  may  appear  baffling  because  science  discovers 
facts  which  would  seem  to  lead  to  an  ‘undesirable’  indeterminism  in 
science,  and  to  a  determinism  in  ‘mental’  processes.  The  reader,  by  now, 
I  hope,  realizes  that  both  ‘undesirable’  results  are  only  undesirable  be¬ 
cause  of  identification  and  the  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions,  which 
resulted  in  the  ascribing  of  undue  generality  and  uniqueness  to  the  A 

CONCLUDING  REMARKS 

S51 

two  and  three-valued  ‘logic*.  But  once  we  realize  that  in  a  A,  co-valued, 
more  general  system,  the  two-,  and  three-valued  aspects  are  only  par¬ 
ticular  instances,  which  apply  to  some  instances  but  not  to  others,  all 
our  difficulties  vanish.  From  a  A  structural  point  of  view  we  also  under¬ 
stand  that  oo-valued  determinism  becomes  a  necessity  of  our  s,r  in  the 
search  and  comparison  of  structures. 

The  result  seems  to  be  that  the  problem  of  determinism  or  inde¬ 
terminism  is  not  primarily  a  problem  of  the  outside  world,  but  simply 
one  of  our  s.r  and  ignorance  versus  ‘knowledge*.  Abandoning  elemental- 
ism  and  identification,  we  stop  arguing  *is  the  world  deterministic  or 
not*.;  but,  by  analysis,  we  find  which  semantics  better  fit,  structurally, 
the  facts  and  our  abstracting  capacities.  The  results  we  reach  are  not 
entirely  new,  but  the  semantic  conflict  is  eliminated. 

Science  employs  determinism  because  of  the  structure  and  function 
of  our  nervous  system.  We  cannot  do  otherwise  than  preserve  oo-valued 
determinism  and  step  by  step  supply  the  missing  links  in  our  structural 
adjustments  of  language  to  the  structure  of  empirical  data. 

Let  us  again  repeat  that  the  older  problems  of  ‘determinism*  in 
general  were  the  results  of  elementalism  and  identification  and  of  a  com¬ 
plete  misunderstanding  of  the  role  of  structure.  Once  these  undesirable 
afflictions  are  eliminated,  the  artificial  problems  which  they  create  are 
also  eliminated.  Structural  considerations  show  clearly  that  determin¬ 
ism  is  a  neurological  necessity.  If  empirical  facts  lead  to  linguistic 
indeterminism,  it  is  an  unmistakable  sign  that  the  language  used  is  not 
similar  in  structure  to  the  structure  of  the  world  around  us,  and  that  we 
should  simply  produce  a  language  of  different  structure.  Such  determin¬ 
ism  is  a  vital  condition  in  the  search  for  structure ,  and  cannot  be 
abandoned . 

Shall  we,  then,  preserve  the  deterministic  attitude  in  our  ‘mental* 
processes?  Are  the  objections  on  ‘moral*  and  ‘ethical’  grounds  serious 
enough  to  induce  us  to  reinstate  in  our  semantic  attitudes  the  older 
structurally  misleading  ‘indeterminism*  ? 

Let  us,  first,  recall  the  facts.  In  our  old  el  and  infantile  attitudes 
with  identification  we  analysed  a  child  or  an  adult  in  isolation.  Determin¬ 
ism  was  applied  to  such  a  fictitious  non-existent  individual,  and  the  old 
objectified  and  el  speculations  followed.  If  any  one  is  inclined  to  chal¬ 
lenge  the  above  statement,  let  him  perform  an  experiment  and  imme¬ 
diately  after  birth  isolate  a  child  ‘completely*.  He  will  find  that  this 
cannot  be  done  with  a  human  baby  without  destroying  the  child.  There¬ 
fore,  the  old  speculations  deal  with  structurally  fictitious  conditions.  The 
facts  are  that  a  baby  is,  from  the  first,  subjected  to  a  treatment  based 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

on  the  semantics,  structure  of  language,  doctrines,  understanding, 
knowledge,  attitudes,  metaphysics . ,  of  his  parents  or  their  substitutes, 
which  shape  his  semantic  reactions. 

If  we  abandon  the  problem  of  the  two-valued  ‘determinism’  in  con¬ 
nection  with  such  a  fictitious,  isolated  individual,  and  apply  oo-valued 
eterminism  to  an  actual,  non-isolated  individual,  we  see  at  once  that 
t  e  whole  situation  is  different.  If  parents  and  society  accept  oo-valued 
determinism,  they  realize  their  own  responsibilities  toward  the  individual, 
and  understand  that  the  actions  of  parents,  society. ,  are,  to  a  large 
extent,  responsible  for  the  future  development  of  the  child  on  quite 
deterministic  psychophysiological  grounds.  If  an  individual  behaves  in 
a  way  detrimental  to  others  and  to  himself,  and  an  enlightened  society 
deades  to  do  this  or  that  with  him,  that  is  a  different  proposition.  The 
mam  point  is  that,  if  we  were  to  accept  an  indeterministic  attitude,  a  great 
deal  of  harm  would  be  done  by  parents,  teachers,  preachers,  and  society 
in  general ;  harm  which  could  be  prevented.  This  is,  to  a  large  extent, 
unrealized,  and  in  the  old  way  no  one  was  supposed  to  be  responsible 
except  the  poor  victim  of  ‘free  will’.  Under  such  A  conditions,  we 
sponsor  bitterness,  cruelty. ,  under  the  labels  of  ‘sin’,  ‘justice’,  ‘revenge’ 
punishment’,  or  whatever  it  may  be.  On  deterministic  grounds  when 
society  and  educators  realize  fully  their  own  responsibilities,  we  should 
ame  the  individual  less,  and  should  more  and  more  investigate  struc¬ 
ture,  language,  our  systems,  metaphysics,  education,  conditions  of  liv¬ 
ing,.  Instead  of  a  holy  frenzy  for  ‘justice’,  ‘punishment’,  ‘revenge’ 
we  would  try  to  improve  conditions  of  life  and  education,  so  that  a  new¬ 
born  individual  would  not  be  handicapped  from  the  day  of  his  birth. 

Since  the  organism  operates  as-a-whole  and  no  one  is  free  from 
higher  order  abstractions  and  structural  assumptions,  we  see  that  the 
keeping  of  savage-made  metaphysics  must  involve  us  individually  and 
collectively  m  an  arrested  or  regressive  development.  From  the  organ- 
ism-as-a-whole  point  of  view  structural  ignorance  must  result  in  some 
semantic  defectiveness. 

The  objection  that  there  are  cases  of  great  ‘mental’  brilliancy  accom¬ 
panied  by  very  vicious  tendencies  is  easily  answered  by  the  fact  that  the 
problem  is  formulated  in  an  el  way.  ‘Mental’  brilliancy  does  not  tell  the 
whole  story  of  the  organism-as-a-whole.  One  may  be  ‘mentally’  brilliant, 
yet  infantile  or  a  ‘moral  imbecile’.  In  life,  we  deal  with  the  whole 
non-isolated  individual,  who  may  be  pathological  in  a  great  many  ways. 

If  it  is  objected  that  science  is  so  complicated  that  it  would  be  impossible 
to  impart  such  knowledge  to  the  masses,  the  answer  is  that,  as  this 
enquiry  shows,  science  involves  some  structural  metaphysics  and  seman- 

CONCLUDING  REMARKS 

tic  components  which,  once  discovered,  are  childishly  simple,  and  can 
be  given  in  elementary  education. 

Science  represents  the  highest  structural  abstractions  that  have  been 
produced  at  each  date.  It  is  a  supreme  abstraction  from  all  the  experi¬ 
ences  of  countless  individuals  and  generations.  Since  the  lower  centres 
produce  the  raw  material  from  which  the  higher  abstractions  are  made, 
and  these  higher  abstractions  again  influence  the  working  of  the  lower 
centres,  obviously  some  means  can  be  devised  to  put  back  into  the  nervous 
circuits  the  beneficial  effects  of  those  highest  abstractions. 

The  above  statement  may  appear  visionary,  and  many  are  likely  to 
gay,  ‘It  cannot  be  done*.  Now,  the  main  contention  of  the  present  theory, 
verified  empirically,  is  that  it  can  be  done  in  an  extremely  simple  way, 
provided  we  study  the  neglected  non-el  aspects  of  mathematics  and 
icience;  namely,  their  structural  and  semantic  aspects.  Such  study  has 
helped  us  to  discover  in  a  ^-system  the  means  for  affecting  lower  centres 
by  the  products  of  the  higher  centres  of  the  best  men  we  had.  We  have 
already  discovered  that  all  advances  in  science  and  mathematics  supply 
us  with  an  unbelievable  amount  of  purely  psycho-logical  and  semantic 
data  of  extreme  simplicity,  which,  without  any  technicalities,  can  be 
imparted  to  the  masses  in  elementary  structural  education.  Such  educa¬ 
tion  allows  us  to  give  very  simply  to  children  the  ‘cultural  results  ,  or  to 
impart  the  s.rt  which  are  the  aim  of  university  training,  in  a  relatively 
short  period  and  without  any  technicalities.  These  benefits,  under  an  A 
education,  are  too  rarely  acquired  even  by  university  graduates,  and 
impossible  to  impart  to  the  masses,  who  are  left  helpless  with  archaic, 
delusional  structural  assumptions. 

From  one  point  of  view  the  A  issues  are  childishly  simple  and  ob¬ 
vious,  but  from  another,  because  of  the  power  of  old  established  habits 
and  s.r ,  are  quite  difficult  for  the  grown-ups  to  apply.  It  seems  evident 
that  an  infant  must  be  under  the  influence  of  the  standards  of  evaluation 
of  those  who  take  care  of  him,  automatically  connected  with  the  struc¬ 
ture  of  the  language  he  is  taught.  Under  such_unavoidable  conditions, 
it  is  obvious  that  to  give  the  full  benefit  of  a  ^-system  in  the  training 
of  children,  parents  and  teachers  should,  themselves,  have  entirely  ab¬ 
sorbed  these  new  standards. 

A  A  civilization  will  require  a  unification  of  all  existing  human 
disciplines  on  the  base  of  exact  sciences.  This  unification  will  require  all 
scientists,  mathematicians,  physicists,  and  psychiatrists  included,  to  be¬ 
come  acquainted  and  fully  to  practice  A  standards  of  evaluation.  A  A 
revision  would  have  an  international  and  interracial  application,  requir¬ 
ing  a  very  thorough  revision  of  all  doctrines,  a  better  acquaintance  of 

SS4  VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

Bpecwhste  in  one  field  with  the  accomplishments  in  other  fields,  and  an 
up-to-date  epistemology.  If  we  try  to  disregard  epistemology  con¬ 
sciously,  we  delude  ourselves,  as  we  cannot  eliminate  some  epistemology 
as  a  foundation  for  our  methods  of  evaluation,  and,  therefore,  uncon¬ 
sciously  retain  some  primitive  epistemology  which  through  inappropriate 
standards  of  evaluation,  introduces  semantic  blockages. 

Mach  said  long  ago:  ‘Not  every  physicist  is  an  epistemologist,  and 
not  every  one  must  or  can  be.  Special  investigation  claims  a  whole  man 
so  also  does  the  theory  of  knowledge.’  The  influence  of  Mach  on  modern 
science  is  well  known;  men  such  as  the  late  Jacques  Loeb,  Einstein,  the 
younger  quantum  pioneers.,  were  deeply  influenced  by  the  writings  of 
Mach,  because  Mach  was  a  deep  student  of  epistemology.  But  in  a  A 
society  his  statement  must  be  slightly  reworded;  namely:  ‘Not  every 
individual  knows  or  realizes  the  importance  of,  or  seemingly  consciously 
cares  for,  epistemology  ;  yet  every  one  unconsciously  has  one  and  actsanc 
rves  by  it.  Each  individual  has  his  own  special  problems,  the  solution  of 
which  always  claims  the  whole  man,  and  no  man  is  complete,  unless  he 
consciously  realizes  the  permanent  presence  in  his  life  of  some  standards 
of  evaluation.  Every  one  has  thus  some  epistemology.  There  is  no  way 
o  parting  with  it,— nor  with  air,  nor  with  water,— and  live.  The  only 
problem  is  whether  his  standards  of  evaluation  are  polluted  with  primi- 
tive  remains  of  bygone  ages,  in  a  variety  of  ways ;  or  sanified  by  science 
and  modern  epistemology.' 

The  present  work  shows  how  any  system  involves  a  special  epistem 
olop  which  we  accept  unconsciously,  once  we  accept  the  system.  To 
evaluate  a  system  is  practically  equivalent  to  formulating  its  epistemology, 
his  is  strictly  connected  with  linguistic  and  structural  investigations. 

o  centralize  and  co-ordinate  the  A  efforts,  an  International  Non- 
anstotehan Library  has  been  originated,  which  field  embraces,  ultimately 
all  known  doctrines  and  human  interests,  the  first  publication  being  the 
present  handbook.  To  facilitate  the  application  of  A  disciplines  and  to 
simulate  further  researches,  an  International  Non-aristotelian  Society 
has  been  incorporated  with  headquarters  in  New  York  City  and  branches 
to  be  established  in  all  cities  of  the  world  which  have  educational  insti¬ 
tutions  The  main  aims  of  the  Society  are  scientific  and  educational  for 
the  study,  by  means  of  papers  and  lectures  followed  by  discussions  of 
the  A  aspects  necessary  for  a  revision  and,  therefore,  a  co-ordination 
of  all  existing  sciences  and  concerns  of  man.  As  the  aspects  of  science 
which  are  of  interest  to  the  Society  would  be  structural  and  semantic 
from  the  point  of  view  of  a  general  theory  of  values,  the  lectures  would’ 
be  of  a  general  non-technical  character  on  the  level  of  intelligent  laymen. 

CONCLUDING  REMARKS 

Science  would  not  be  ‘popularized'  but  analysed  from  a  fundamental 
A  epistemological  point  of  view,  compelling  the  speakers  and  authors  of 
papers  to  analyse  the  deeper  non-el ,  structural,  and  semantic  foundations 
of  experience,  as  well  as  of  theories.  The  layman  would  benefit  because 
he  would  be  given  a  structural  education  readily  understood,  without 
being  led  astray  by  the  older  A  ‘popularization’.  Later,  if  economically 
feasible,  it  is  intended  to  issue  a  monthly  International  Non-aristotelian 
Review ,  and  also  to  organize  International  Non-aristotelian  Congresses . 

The  ^-system  was  the  result  of  the  s.r  of  the  white  race  of  more  than 
two  thousand  years  ago ;  it  built  up  the  doctrines,  institutions  . ,  appropri¬ 
ate  to  this  system.  In  those  days,  knowledge  was  very  scanty ;  the  intercon¬ 
nection  of  different  peoples,  vague ;  the  means  of  communications,  very 
primitive , .  It  may  be  considered  that  science,  and  particularly  mathe¬ 
matics,  began  a  A  revolution  by  explicitly  searching  for  structure  and 
adjusting  the  structure  of  the  scientific  languages,  which  we  usually  call 
‘terminology’,  ‘theories’, .  Modern  conditions  of  life  are,  to  a  large  extent, 
affected  by  A  science  but  exploited  by  the  thoroughly  A  doctrines  of  the 
commercialists,  militarists,  politicians,  priests,  lawyers.,  which  results 
