in  a  bewildering  chaos,  resulting  in  needless,  great,  and  imposed  suffer¬ 
ing  for  the  great  masses  of  mankind,  as  exemplified  by  such  cataclysms 
as  wars,  revolutions,  unemployment,  different  economic  crises , . 

A  disciplines,  or  science  as  such ,  are  thoroughly  beneficial  to  man¬ 
kind  at  large;  but  an  A  exploitation  and  use  of  these  A  products  are, 
and  must  be,  a  source  of  endless  sufferings  to  the  enormous  majority  of 
mankind,  leading  automatically  to  every  kind  of  break-down.  It  is  im¬ 
possible  to  give  a  fuller  analysis  of  this  complex  interrelation,  as  this 
would  require  a  separate  volume ;  I  shall,  therefore,  tabulate  only  a  few 
overlapping  suggestions. 

Non-aristotelian,  Scientific,  Adult 
Standards  of  Evaluation 

Aristotelian,  Infantile  Standards  of 
Evaluation  of  Commercialism, 
Militarism  , . 

Biological  Sciences . 

Particularly  medicine  has  discovered 
means  of  how  to  keep  or  restore 
health,  how  to  eliminate  suffering, 
how  to  save  and  to  prolong  life . ;  but 
medicine  also  gives  means  whereby 
we  may  prevent  the  overpopulation  of 
this  globe  and  so  teaches  us  how  to 
avoid  great  sufferings  through  over¬ 
crowding,  which  results  in  bitter 
struggle  for  food,  shelter,  employ¬ 
ment.,  in  turn,  leading  to  wars, 
revolutions,  unemployment , . 

Commercialized  medicine  unavailable  to 
great  masses  of  poor  people.  Commer¬ 
cialism,  militarism,  infantile  dreams 
of  ‘world  empires'  sponsor  unintelli¬ 
gent  breeding  in  vast  numbers  which 
runs  up  the  prices  of  land  and  houses, 
lowers  the  price  of  labour,  and  sup¬ 
plies  cannon-fodder, .  The  intelligent 
control  of  numbers  of  population  is 
prevented  by  jailing  and  otherwise 
persecuting  scientific  workers,  which 
persecution  affects  only  the  poor  and 
uneducated.  _ 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

Non-aristotelian,  Scientific,  Adult 
Standards  of  Evaluation 

Aristotelian,  Infantile  Standards  of 
Evaluation  of  Commercialism, 
Militarism  , 

Chemistry. 

Antiseptics,  fundamental  for  medicine 
and  the  control  of  the  increase  or  de¬ 
crease  in  the  population. 

Drugs,  fundamental  for  medicine. 

High  explosives,  necessary  for  agricul¬ 
ture,  mining , . 

Production  of  food  products.  Alcohol, 
wine,  beer,. 

Poisonous  gas,  necessary  for  the  elimi¬ 
nation  of  insects. 

Sponsoring  of  overpopulation  by  forci¬ 
bly  withholding  knowledge  from  the 
masses. 

Use  of  drugs  in  war  to  allow  a  soldier 
to  suffer  twice.  Commercialized  drug 
pedlars. 

High  explosives  used  for  killing  in  the 
struggle  for  ultimately  futile  'world 
empires’. 

Food  destroyed  to  keep  up  prices.  Com¬ 
mercialization  of  drinking.  The  saloon, 
crimes,  ‘prohibitions’,  the  financing  of 
gangsters,  corruption  of  government 
and  justice , . 

Poisonous  gas  in  wars. 

Linguistics. 

Law,  as  expressing  some  standards  of 
evaluation. 

Newspapers,  magazines,,  giving  most 
powerful  educational  means. 

Other  public  prints,  giving  necessary  or 
useful  informations. 

Religions  represent  primitive  structural 
rationalizations,  or  primitive  ‘science’; 
intended,  also,  as  guides  for  conduct 
and  adjustment,  under  the  structural 
assumptions  of  the  epoch  of  their 
primitive  origin. 

Interpretations  by  commercialized  law¬ 
yers  to  evade  law,  and  the  influencing 
of  the  wording  of  the  law  so  as  to 
make  evasion  possible.  Lobbyists. 

Commercialized  newspapers . ,  controlled 
by  profits  and  advertisements,  supply¬ 
ing  stultifying,  controlled  material, 
stimulating  the  morbid  potentialities 
of  the  mob,  to  increase  circulation , . 

Commercialized  advertisements.  Schizo¬ 
phrenic  pi  Ay  on  words,  the  promoting 
of  infantilism , . 

Commercialized  religions.  Religions  hav¬ 
ing  outlived  their  usefulness,  often 
become  priestcraft  as  a  source  of  in¬ 
come  and  control.  The  sponsoring  of 
primitive  and  delusional  standards  of 
evaluation  often  for  private  gains. 
The  imposition  of  primitive  standards 
of  evaluation  involves  pathological 
factors. 

Physics  and  Related  Sciences . 
Aeroplanes,  as  means  of  communication 
and  scientific  exploring. 

Automobiles,  as  means  of  transportation 
and  pleasure. 

Militarized  aeroplanes,  as  means  of  de¬ 
struction  and  murder. 

Militarized  automobiles,  as  means  of  de¬ 
struction  and  suffering. 

CONCLUDING  REMARKS 

Non-aristotelian,  Scientific,  Adult 
Standards  of  Evaluation 

Aristotelian,  Infantile  Standards  of 
Evaluation  of  Commercialism, 
Militarism  , . 

Physics  and  Related  Sciences  (continued). 

Machinery  and  tools,  as  means  to  elimi¬ 
nate  avoidable  efforts  and  to  benefit 
fully  through  natural  resources;  to 
give  greater  comfort  and  sanitary  con¬ 
ditions;  to  allow  greater  leisure  for 
cultural  pursuits , . 

Moving  pictures,  as  powerful  educational 
means. 

Radio,  as  powerful  means  of  communi¬ 
cation  and  education. 

Railroads,  as  means  of  public  transpor¬ 
tation. 

Tractors,  as  means  of  transportation  and 
sources  of  power  in  agriculture. 

Commercialized  machines,  as  means  tor 
larger  individual  profits  and  suffering 
for  the  increasing  numbers  of  unem¬ 
ployed  and  starving  masses.  Mass  pro¬ 
duction  of  guns,  ammunitions . ,  for 
mass  extermination  and  destruction, 
and  larger  profits  for  the  manufac¬ 
turers  and  investors. 

Commercialized  moving  pictures,  stimu¬ 
lating  and  satisfying  the  erotic  and 
morbid  crowds,  and  for  private  propa¬ 
ganda. 

Commercialized  radio,  advertisements, 
private  propaganda,  often  stimulating 
morbid  inclinations  of  the  mob. 

Commercialized  railroads,  as  means  for 
private  gains  and  the  control  by  a  few 
of  large  areas  and  many  people. 

Tractors,  as  tanks  and  means  of  de¬ 
struction  and  murder  in  wars. 

Public  Servants . 

Judges,  as  guardians  of  some  standards 
of  evaluation. 

Lawyers,  as  assistants  in  the  adminis¬ 
tration  of  justice. 

Police,  as  an  executive,  regulating, 
safety-force. 

Commercialized  politicians,  as  judges, 
corruption,  lack  of  justice , . 

Commercialization  and  corruption  of  the 
legal  profession.  Means  to  evade  or 
pervert  justice. 

Commercialization  of  police  by  politi¬ 
cians,  corruption,  combinations  with 
the  underworld,. 

Sports ,  as  means  for  preserving  and  Commercialization  of  sports,  elimination 
building  up  health,  co-ordinated  orien-  of  benefits.  Gambling.  Lowering  of 
tation,  fair  play,  and  in  a  lesser  degree  educational  standards  , . 
as  recreation. 

From  a  A  point  of  view,  which  eliminates  primitive  s.r,  it  becomes 
obvious  that  mankind  represents  an  interdependent  time-binding  class  of 
life,  and  any  group  of  people  who  possess  physical  means  for  destruction 
and  still  preserve  infantile  standards  of  evaluation  become  a  menace  to 
the  culture  of  the  whole  race.  Under  such  conditions  we  must  have 
agencies  for  an  international  exchange  and  evaluation  of  our  standards, 
as  well  as  methods  which  would  help  us  in  adjusting  these  standards. 

At  present,  we  must  admit  that  with  the  modem,  rapid,  and  inter¬ 
national  advancement  of  science  we  have  fairly  well-established  interna- 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

tional  A  standards  of  scientific  values.  International  Scientific  Congresses 
are  not  only  necessary  for  the  advancement  of  science,  but  they  also 
explicitly  prove  science  to  be  entirely  international. 

.  ^test,  most  important  A  institution  is  found  in  the  League  of 
Nations,  which  embraces  practically  the  whole  civilized  world,  with  the 
exception  of  a  very  few  nations  who  display  infantile  and  A  aloofness, 
using  different  self-deceptive  excuses,  and,  to  a  large  extent,  handicap¬ 
ping  the  power  and  usefulness  of  the  League. 

As  we  have  learned  lately,  not  only  human  achievements,  but  also 
human  disasters,  are  mostly,  interrelated  and  international,  and  are  be¬ 
coming  more  so  every  year.  Obviously,  with  A  narrowness,  selfishness, 
shortsightedness,  infantilism,  commercialism,  militarism,  nationalism., 
rampant,  mankind,  to  prevent  further  major  A  disasters,  would  have  to 
produce  a  special  international  body  which  would  co-ordinate  various 
structural  achievements,  strivings.,  formulate  and  inform  the  great 

masses  of  mankind  of  the  modern  scientific  A,  adult  standards  of 
evaluation. 

At  present,  we  already  have  the  necessary  agencies;  but,  as  yet, 
they  are  inefficient  and  non-co-ordinated.  These  are  to  be  found  in  Inter¬ 
national  Scientific  Congresses,  and  the  League  of  Nations.  The  weak 
spots  of  these  organizations  are  found  in  the  fact  that  the  Scientific 
Congresses  are  too  cumbersome,  expensive,  non-co-ordinated  and  only 
periodic.  The  League  of  Nations,  although  a  A  body  in  structure,  is 
mostly  made  up  of  men  who  do  not  know  any  other  standards  of  evalua¬ 
tion  than  A,  and  so  they  often  lack  the  means  to  present  a  scientific,  or 
A  argument,  and  usually  do  not  realize  the  tremendous  power  they 
would  have  in  a  ^-system.  In  human  affairs,  for  instance,  there  cannot 
e  a  neutral  and  innocent  absentee.  One  such  absentee  with  guns  and 
battleships  becomes  a  powerful  blocking  and  so,  ultimately,  disrupting 
actor  for  the  rest  of  civilization.  Such  an  absentee  is  not,  then,  guilty 
by  omission;  but,  from  a  A  point  of  view,  becomes  guilty  by  commission. 
The  League,  when  definitely  and  fully  allied  with  international  science, 
will  some  day  have  the  pluck  to  make  such  a  declaration  and  act  accord- 
mgiy.  A  consciously  A  League  of  Nations  will  not  limit  itself  to  the 
thankless  and  very  pften  useless  task  of  adjusting  inevitable  clashes  of 
A  standards  of  evaluation,  but  will,  with  the  full  co-operation  of  scien¬ 
tists,  undertake  the  much  more  important,  constructive,  and  unique  duty 
of  a  guardian  and  leader  of  human  culture.  Such  a  League  would  be¬ 
come  a  scientific,  professional,  international,  co-ordinating,  cultural, 
time-binding  advisory  organization  for  all  nations.  National  A  govern- 

CONCLUDING  REMARKS 

merits,  instead  of  only  instructing  their  A  representatives,  would  first 
consult  with  the  new  A  specialists. 

Many  politicians  and  their  followers  often  become  all  but  hysterical 
at  the  mention  of  the  League  of  Nations,  which,  in  some  mysterious  way, 
they  associate  with  a  ‘super-state*  or  ‘control*, .  Let  me  say,  at  once,  that 
a  symbolic,  or  human  class  of  life,  is  very  largely  controlled  by  ignorant, 
hidden,  often  pathological.,  factors  beyond  public  control,  of  which  the 
majority  are  entirely  innocent.  In  the  human  symbolic  class  of  life  no 
one  is  entirely  free,  but  all  our  lives  are  entangled  in  an  interdependence 
of  human  relations.  The  dependence  on  those  powers  which  are  now 
hidden,  and  beyond  public  control,  constitutes  a  grave  danger  to  ail.  Not 
•  so  with  a  scientific,  enlightened  public  opinion  with  adult  standards  of 
evaluation  as  formulated  by  a  future  co-ordination  of  science  and  the 
League  of  Nations.  Such  great  majority-opinions  will  remain  opinions, 
or  statements  of  standards  of  evaluation,  which  any  one  member  of  the 
League  may  accept  or  reject;  but,  then,  it  would  be  necessary  for  him 
to  state  publicly  his  standards  of  evaluation  and  to  decide  consciously 
to  act  with  or  against,  or  to  enlighten  further  the  opinion  of  the  human 
race.  There  is,  of  course,  no  question  of  ‘super-states*  or  ‘control*  except 
the  unified  demand  for  a  conscious  and  explicit  stand  on  any  important 
subject  by  any  nation.  Public  opinion  will  do  the  rest,  once  it  is  con¬ 
voked  to  act. 

I  am  not  a  pacifist  in  the  accepted  sense.  In  an  animalistic,  infantile, 
or  A  society,  this  would  be  not  only  impossible  but  downright  silly. 
Quite  the  contrary,  I  am  disgusted  with  the  infantile  standards  under 
which  wars  are  conducted.  Thus,  our  rulers  and  war  lords,  sponsored 
by  commercialism,  like  little  boys  make  a  sort  of  game  out  of  wars,  and 
thus  help  to  preserve  them  as  an  institution.  In  a  consistent  society,  wars 
should  be  as  ruthless  as  possible  to  all  If  any  one  wants  a  war,  he 
should  consistently  take  all  the  consequences.  But  this  would  not  suit 
our  infantile  rulers ;  they  know  that  when  little  boys  play  at  war,  and  one 
group  becomes  too  rough,  the  other  group  refuses  to  play,  and  so  the 
play  at  war  ends.®  All  these  perverted  ‘humanitarianisms*  only  sponsor 
wars  because,  in  an  unlimited  modem  warfare,  the  people  would  soon 
come  to  their  senses  and  would  refuse  to  suffer  for  the  benefit  of  the 
very  few.  So  I  am  far  from  being  an  A  pacifist. 

But  why  our  destinies  should  be  dependent  on  the  accidental  and 
primitive  structure  of  the  language  we  use . ,  is  beyond  my  comprehen¬ 
sion.  I  grant  that  if  we  accept  such  and  such  postulates,  two-valued,  el, 
structurally  f alse-to-fact  A  ‘logics’,  ‘psychologies’. ,  all  the  old,  too  famil- 

VII.  THE  MECHANISM  OF  TIME-BINDING 

iar  consequences  follow,  which  we,  in  our  ignorance,  have  forced  upon 
human  life. 

But  if  we  put  all  systems  and  all  ‘logics’. ,  on  new  A  foundations, 
which  are  structurally  closer  to  the  facts  of  life  (1933),  all  the  older 
conclusions  may  even  be  reversed.  The  problem  now  before  m.nUnH 
is  whether  or  not  the  new  ^-system  is  more  similar  in  structure  to  the 
world  and  our  nervous  system  than  the  old.  On  the  answer  to  this 
question,  the  future  of  civilization  depends. 

From  the  present  point  of  view,  we  should  establish  with  the 
League  of  Nations  a  permanent  A  or  scientific  department,  composed  of 
a  few  of  the  best  scholars  from  all  countries,  who  would  keep  in  touch, 
not  only  with  the  developments  of  their  specialties,  but  would  also 
co-ordinate  them  on  general  structural  and  epistemological  foundations. 
This  department  would  be  the  international  authority  on  modern  revised 
and  co-ordinated  standards  of  evaluation,  which  would  be  published  in 
special  proceedings.  The  present  discrepancy  and  lack  of  co-ordination 
between  different  branches  of  knowledge  becomes  genuinely  alarming 
and  detrimental  to  mankind,  because  in  1933  it  is  humanly  impossible  for 
a  single  individual  to  attempt  such  a  co-ordination.  Members  of  this 
group  would  be  selected  by  the  universities  of  each  country.  In  their 
researches,  joint  studies,  and  results,  mankind  at  large  would  find  the 
most  reliable  scientific  and  A  opinions  produced  at  each  date,  and  would 
have  some  definite  and  conscious  standards  of  evaluation  by  which  to 
orient  themselves. 

The  modern  ‘voting*  has  some  benefits  in  local  affairs,  but  when  its 
very  limited  validity  is  not  understood,  it  becomes  a  serious  danger  to 
mankind.  Thus,  when  we  are  ill,  or  when  we  want  a  bridge  built,  we 
ask  specialists  for  their  scientific  co-operation ;  we  would  hardly  depend 
on  ignorant  voters.  Similarly,  in  a  A  scientific  civilization,  the  major 
problems  of  mankind  would  be  analysed  by  scientific  specialists,  recom¬ 
mendations  offered  to  be  accepted  or  rejected,  as  the  case  may  be ;  but  the 
ignorant  voter  would  have  at  his  disposal  an  unbiased,  impersonal,  and 
responsible  opinion  of  international  scientific  specialists  to  compare  with 
the  equivocations  of  some  local  ignorant  politician. 

To  facilitate  such  future  A  activities,  the  International  Non-aristo- 
telian  Society  has  been  established.  It  is  hoped  that  soon  the  scientific, 
educational,  ‘mental’  hygiene.,  workers  will  begin  to  unite  on  a  local 
and  national  A  basis.  Later,  International  Congresses  will  unite  the 
local  societies,  which  ultimately  will  be  embodied  as  a  permanent  insti¬ 
tution,  most  probably  in  the  League  of  Nations. 

CONCLUDING  REMARKS 

In  the  process  of  formulating  the  above  system  a  curious  observa¬ 
tion  has  been  forced  upon  me;  namely,  that  statements  which  are,  for 
instance,  quite  legitimate  for  the  English  language,  even  though  they 
probably  apply  in  general  to  all  Indo-european  languages,  do  not  apply 
in  a  similar  degree. 

I  am  intimately  acquainted  with  six  languages,  two  Slavic,  two 
Latin,  and  two  Teutonic,  and  also  with  the  psycho-logical  trends  of 
these  groups.  I  have  been  led  to  suspect  strongly  that  the  finer  differ¬ 
ences  in  the  structure  of  these  languages  and  their  use  are  connected  with 
the  semantics  of  these  national  groups.  An  enquiry  into  this  problem, 
in  my  opinion,  presents  great  semantic  possibilities  and  might  be  the 
foundation  for  the  understanding  of  international  psycho-logical  differ¬ 
ences.  Once  formulated,  this  would  lead  us  to  a  better  mutual 
understanding,  particularly  if  a  A  semantic  revision  of  these  different 
languages  is  undertaken.  To  the  best  of  my  knowledge,  this  field  of 
enquiry  is  entirely  new  and  very  promising. 

It  must  be  obvious  to  the  reader  that  such  a  vast  program  is  beyond 
the  power  of  a  single  man  to  carry  out,  and  the  present  author  hopes  for 
public  interest  in  this  enterprise. 

If  the  /^-system  has  accomplished  nothing  more  than  to  draw  the 
attention  of  mankind  to  some  disregarded  problems ;  if  it  has  done  noth¬ 
ing  more  than  point  the  way,  not  to  panaceas,  but  to  suggestions  toward 
an  expedient,  constructive,  and  unified  scientific  program  whereby  future 
disasters  may  be  avoided  or  lessened — the  writer  will  be  satisfied. 

BOOK  III 

ADDITIONAL  STRUCTURAL  DATA 
ABOUT  LANGUAGES  AND 
THE  EMPIRICAL  WORLD 

The  every-day  language  reeks  with  philosophies  ...  It  shatters  at  every 
touch  of  advancing  knowledge.  At  its  heart  lies  paradox. 

The  language  of  mathematics,  on  the  contrary,  stands  and  grows  in 
firmness.  It  gives  service  to  men  beyond  all  other  language.  (25) 

ARTHUR  F.  BENTLEY 

Nothing  is  more  interesting  to  the  true  theorist  than  a  fact  which  di¬ 
rectly  contradicts  a  theory  generally  accepted  up  to  that  time,  for  this  is 
his  particular  work.  (4is>  M*  planck 

It  is  not  surprising  that  our  language  should  be  incapable  of  describing 
the  processes  occurring  within  the  atoms,  for,  as  has  been  remarked,  it  was 
invented  to  describe  tne  experiences  of  daily  life,  and  these  consist  only  of 
processes  involving  exceedingly  large  numbers  of  atoms.  Furthermore,  it 
is  very  difficult  to  modify  our  language  so  that  it  will  be  able  to  describe 
these  atomic  processes,  for  words  can  only  describe  things  of  which  we 
ran  form  mental  pictures,  and  this  ability,  too,  is  a  result  of  daily  experi¬ 
ence.  12151  W.  HEISENBERG 

PREFATORY  REMARKS 

In  re  mathematics  ars  proponendi  quaestionem  pluris  facienda  est  quam 
SOlvendi.  (74)  GEORG  CANTOR 

We  cannot  describe  substance;  we  can  only  give  a  name  to  it.  Any  at¬ 
tempt  to  do  more  than  give  a  name  leads  at  once  to  an  attribution  of  struc¬ 
ture.  But  structure  can  be  described  to  some  extent;  and  when  reduced  to 
ultimate  terms  it  appears  to  resolve  itself  into  a  complex  of  relations  .  .  . 
A  law  of  nature  resolves  itself  into  a  constant  relation,  .  .  .  ,  of  the  two 
world-conditions  to  which  the  different  classes  of  observed  quantities  form¬ 
ing  the  two  sides  of  the  equation  are  traceable.  Such  a  constant  relation 
independent  of  measure-code  is  only  to  be  expressed  by  a  tensor  equation. 
(148)  A.  S.  EDDINGTON 

We  have  found  reason  to  believe  that  this  creative  action  of  the  mind 
follows  closely  the  mathematical  process  of  Hamiltonian  differentiation  of 
an  invariant.  (i4S)  a.  s.  eddington 

The  only  justification  for  our  concepts  and  system  of  concepts  is  that 
they  serve  to  represent  the  complex  of  our  experiences;  beyond  this  they 
have  no  legitimacy.  I  am  convinced  that  the  philosophers  have  had  a  harm¬ 
ful  effect  upon  the  progress  of  scientific  thinking  in  removing  certain  funda¬ 
mental  concepts  from  the  domain  of  empiricism,  where  they  are  under  our 
control,  to  the  intangible  heights  of  the  a  priori .  <1S2>  a.  einstein 

In  writing  the  following  semantic  survey  of  a  rather  wide  field  of  mathe¬ 
matics  and  physics,  I  was  confronted  with  a  difficult  task  of  selecting  source- 
books.  Any  mathematical  treatise  involves  conscious  and  many  unconscious 
notions  concerning  ‘infinity’,  the  nature  of  numbers,  mathematics,  ‘proof’, 
'rigour'.  ,  which  underlie  the  definitions  of  further  fundamental  terms,  such  as 
'continuity',  ‘limits', .  It  seems  that  when  We  discover  a  universally  constant 
empirical  relation,  such  as  ‘non-identity’,  and  apply  it;  then  all  other  assumptions 
have  to  be  revised,  from  this  new  point  of  view,  irrespective  of  what  startling 
consequences  may  follow. 

At  present,  neither  the  laymen  nor  the  majority  of  scientists  realize  that 
human  mathematical  behaviour  has  many  aspects  which  should  never  be 
identified.  Thus,  (1)  to  be  somehow  aware  that  ‘one  and  one  combine  in  some 
way  into  two’,  is  a  notion  which  is  common  even  among  children,  ‘mentally’ 
deficients,  and  most  primitive  peoples.  (2)  The  mathematical  ‘1+1-2’  already 
represents  a  very  advanced  stage  (in  theory,  and  in  method  .  ,)  of  development, 
although  in  practice  both  of  these  s.r  may  lead  to  one  result.  It  should  be 
noticed  that  the  above  (1)  represents  an  individual  s.r,  as  it  is  not  a  general 
formulation;  and  (2)  represents  and  involves  a  generalized  s.r.  Does  that 
exhaust  the  problem  of  ‘1+1=2’?  It  does  not  seem  to.  Thus,  (3),  in  the 
Prindpia  Mathematica  of  Whitehead  and  Russell  which  deals  with  the  meanings 
and  foundations  of  mathematics,  written  in  a  special  shorthand,  abbreviating 
statements  perhaps  tenfold,  it  takes  more  than  350  large  ‘shorthand’  pages  to 
arrive  at  the  notion  of  ‘number  one*. 

ADDITIONAL  STRUCTURAL  DATA 

It  becomes  obvious  that  we  should  not  identify  the  manipulation  of 
mathematical  symbols  with  the  semantic  aspects  of  mathematics.  History  and 
investigations  show  that  both  aspects  are  necessary  and  important,  although 
of  the  two,  the  semantic  discoveries  are  strictly  connected  with  the  revolu¬ 
tionary  advances  in  science,  and  have  invariably  marked  a  new  period  of  human 
development.  In  Chapter  XXXIX,  the  reader  will  find  a  very  impressive 
example  of  this  general  fact.  Thus,  what  is  known  as  the  ‘Lorentz  transforma¬ 
