tion  ,  looks  like  the  ‘Einstein  transformation*.  When  manipulated  numerically 
both  give  equal  numerical  results,  yet  the  meanings,  and  the  semantic  aspects, 
are  different.  Although  Lorentz  produced  the  ‘Lorentz  transformation*  he  did 
not,  and  could  not  have  produced  the  revolutionary  Einstein  theory. 

It  is  well  known  that  when  it  comes  to  the  manipulation  of  symbols 
mathematicians  agree,  but  when  it  comes  to  the  semantic  aspects  or  meanings  .  , 
they  are  admittedly  hopelessly  at  variance.  In  a  prevailingly  A  world  we  have 
had  no  satisfactory  theory  of  ‘infinity’,  or  a  A  definition  of  numbers  and 
mathematics.  This  necessarily  resulted  in  the  fact  that  the  semantic  aspects 
of  practically  all  important  mathematical  works  by  different  authors  often 
involve  individual  semantic  presuppositions ,  or  orientations  concerning  funda¬ 
mentals.  My  presentation  intends  to  be  primarily  semantic  and  elementary, 
and  is  only  remotely  concerned  with  the  manipulation  of  symbols.  A  ^-system, 
which  rejects  ‘identity’,  differs  very  widely  from  A  attitudes,  and  introduces 
distinct  A  requirements.  I  had,  therefore,  to  select  from  many  works,  with 
their  individual  presuppositions,  those  which  were  less  in  conflict  with  A 
principles  than  the  others. 

A  survey  of  important  mathematical  treatises  shows  that  although  the 
majority  of  modern  mathematicians  explicitly  abjure  the  ‘infinitesimal’,  yet, 
in  some  presentations,  this  notion  persists.  In  my  presentation  I  reject  the 
‘infinitesimal’  explicitly  and  implicitly,  although  the  formulae  are  not  altered. 
Modern  calculus  is  based  officially  on  the  theory  of  limits,  but  as  the  theory 
of  limits  involves  the  unclarified  theory  of  ‘infinity’.  ,  nothing  would  be  gained 
semantically  and  for  my  purpose,  had  I  stressed  these  formal  possibilities  of 
the  calculus.  Quite  the  opposite,  if  I  had  done  so,  I  would  have  failed  to  stress 
the  most  fundamental  A  principle  and  task  of  establishing  the  similarity  of 
structure  between  languages  and  the  un-speakable  levels  and  happenings  as  the 
first  and  crucial  consequence  of  the  elimination  of  identity.  For  these  weighty 
reasons,  in  my  presentation,  I  followed  some  older  textbooks,  particularly 
Osgood  s,  which,  from  a  A  point  of  view,  are  sounder  than  the  newer,  largely 
A  rationalizations  and  apologetics. 

However,  it  should  be  realized  that  practically  all  outstanding  and  creative 
mathematicians  have  had,  and  still  have,  A  attitudes,  yet,  these  private  bene¬ 
ficial  attitudes,  not  being  formulated  in  a  ^-system,  could  not  become  conscious , 
simple,  workable,  public,  and  educational  assets.  We  can  be  simple  about  this 
point.  With  the  elimination  of  identity,  structure  becomes  the  only  possible 
content  of  ‘knowledge’ — and  structure  of  the  un-speakable  levels  has  to  be 
discovered .  Discovery  depends  on  the  finding  of  new,  and  therefore  different 

PREFATORY  REMARKS 

5 67 

characteristics.  In  the  formulation  of  the  last  sentence,  we  cannot  make  the 
*  training  in  discovery*  an  educational  discipline .  The  opposite  is  true  in  a 
j| -system,  based  on  non-identity,  as  we  can  train  simply  and  effectively  in  non- 
identity,  which  ultimately  leads  to  differentiation,  and  so  discovery. 

Because  of  the  elementary,  and  purely  semantic  character  of  the  following 
pages,  I  have  often  restrained  myself  from  giving  technical,  supposedly  Vigorous’, 
and  often  A  rationalizations,  which  we  occasionally  call  definitions.  In  a 
semantic  and  A  treatment,  at  this  pioneering  stage,  stressing  old  definitions 
would  be  seriously  confusing;  and  I  wished  to  avoid  such  witty  wittgensteinian 
‘definitions’  as  fA  point  in  space  is  a  place  for  an  argument*.  In  a  number  of 
Instances,  and  for  my  purpose,  I  often  avoided  unsatisfactory  formal  definitions, 
preferring  to  depend  upon  the  ordinary  meanings  of  words. 

For  the  reader  who  wishes  to  acquaint  himself  with  an  elementary  theory 
of  limits  and  corresponding  sets  of  definitions,  I  would  suggest  the  book  of  the 
late  Professor  J.  G.  Leathern,  Elements  of  the  Mathematical  Theory  of  Limits 
(London  and  Chicago,  1925).  This  theory  is  based  on  Pascal’s  Calcolo  Infini - 
tesimale,  Borel’s  Theorie  des  fonctions,  and  Godefroy’s  Theorie  des  s'eries. 
Leathern’s  book  has  been  printed  under  the  supervision  of  Professor  H.  F. 
Baker,  F.R.S.,  of  the  University  of  Cambridge,  and  Professor  E.  T.  Whittaker, 
F.R.S.,  of  Edinburgh.  I  give  these  names  for  professional  mathematicians,  to 
indicate  the  semantic  trend  which  underlies  this  particular  treatment  of  limits 
and  which  does  not  greatly  conflict  with  a  A  outlook.  This  outlook  may  be 
summarized  in  part,  in  the  words  of  Borel  somewhat  as  follows:  To  the  evolution 
of  physics  should  correspond  an  evolution  of  mathematics,  which,  without 
abandoning  the  classical  and  well-tried  theories,  should  develop  however,^  with 
the  results  of  experiments  in  view*.  This  statement  implies  vaguely  the  simi¬ 
larity  of  structure’.  ,  and  so  requires  as  a  modus  operandi  the  rejection  of  identity. 

There  seems  to  be  little  doubt  that  a  complete  and  radical  revision  of  the 
semantic  aspects  of  human  mathematical  behaviour  is  pending.  Such  a  revision 
appears  to  be  laborious  and  difficult,  and  should  be  undertaken  from  the  point 
of  view  of  the  theory  of  the  unique  and  specific  relations,  called  numbers.  I 
doubt  if  a  single  man  could  accomplish  this  revision.  Such  an  undertaking  will 
probably  be  the  result  of  group  activities,  and  may,  in  the  beginning,  be  unified 
by  the  formulation  of  one  fundamental  A  principle  of  non-identity,  the  disregard 
of  which,  from  science  down  to  ‘mental*  ills,  can  be  found  at  the  bottom  of 
practically  all  avoidable  human  difficulties. 

The  problems  are  very  complicated  and  extremely  difficult,  and  need  to 
be  treated  from  many  angles.  At  present,  we  have  many  scientific  societies, 
grouped  by  their  specialties;  but  we  do  not  have  a  scientific  society  composed 
of  many  different  specialists  whose  work  could  be  unified  by  some  common  and 
general  principle.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  principle  of  identity  ,  or 
‘absolute  sameness  in  all  aspects’,  is  invariably  false  to  facts.  The  main  problem 
is  to  trace  this  semantic  disturbance  of  improper  evaluation  in  all  fields  of  science 
and  life,  and  this  requires  a  new  co-ordinating  scientific  body  of  many  specialists, 
with  branches  in  all  universities.  Each  group  would  meet,  say  monthly,  to 

ADDITIONAL  STRUCTURAL  DATA 

discuss  their  problems,  and  give  mutual  technical  assistance  in  tracing  this  first 
general  semantic  disturbance .  Such  meetings  would  stimulate  enormously 
scientific  productivity.  In  fact,  without  such  a  co-ordinating  body,  the  present 
enormous  technical  developments  in  each  branch  of  science  preclude  the  revision 
of  general  principles,  on  which,  in  the  last  analysis,  all  other  of  our  activities 
greatly  depend.  The  first  task  then,  is  to  find  a  co-ordinating  principle,  and 
present  it  to  the  scientific  world. 

Psychiatry,  and  common  experience,  teach  us,  that  in  heavy  cases  of 
dementia  praecox  we  find  the  most  highly  developed  'identification'.  A  con¬ 
siderations  suggest  that  any  identification,  no  matter  how  slight,  represents  a 
dementia  praecox  factor  in  our  semantic  reactions.  The  rest  is  only  a  question 
of  degrees  of  this  maladjustment.  From  this  point  of  view,  we  will  find  dementia 
praecox  factors  even  in  mathematics.  In  physics,  only  since  Einstein  has  this 
factor  of  un-sanity  been  eliminated,  and  this  elimination  has  already  produced 
an  ever-growing  crop  of  'geniuses',  which  merely  means,  that  some  inhibitions 
of  mis-evaluation  have  been  eliminated  from  these  younger  men,  and  that  they 
are  humanly  more  'normal'  than  the  others. 

In  mathematics,  from  a  A  point  of  view,  we  must  first  of  all  not  identify 
different  aspects  of  our  mathematical  behaviour,  nor  try  to  cover  up  these 
identifications  of  endless  aspects  by  the  one  very  old  term  'mathematics'.  This 
word,  ‘mathematics',  in  its  accepted  sense  covers  a  non-existing  fiction.  What 
does  exist,  and  the  only  thing  we  actually  deal  with,  is  human  mathematical 
behaviour ,  human  s.r,  and  the  results  of  human  mathematical  behaviour  and  s.r. 
A  treatise,  say,  on  a  new  quantum  mechanics,  has  no  value  to  a  monkey  or  a 
corpse,  and  only  human  mathematical  behaviour  and  s.r,  have  any  actual  non-el 
existence,  and  is  the  only  thing  which  actually  matters.  So  we  see  that  'mathe¬ 
matics*  covers  a  non-existent  fiction  if  elementalistically  separated  from  human 
mathematical  behaviour  and  s.r .  I  use  the  term  'mathematics*  in  the  non-el 
sense,  and  attempt  to  signalize  some  of  the  difficulties  non-elementalism  involves 
at  this  transitory  stage. 

From  a  A*  non-identity,  structural,  non-el  point  of  view,  human  mathe¬ 
matical  behaviour  must  be  treated  uniquely  as  a  physico-mathematical  discipline, 
and  postulational  methods  to  be  used  exclusively  as  a  most  valuable  checking 
method.  To  base  mathematical  behaviour  and  s.r  on  postulational  methods 
exclusively,  is  to  introduce  dementia  praecox  factors  into  science,  which  only 
induces  the  spread  of  semantic  maladjustment  in  life. 

Our  main  task  in  producing  a  A  revision  of  mathematical  s.r,  is  in  the 
elimination  of  identification  from  our  s.r  about  'infinity'  and  in  the  formulation 
of  a  A  definition  of  numbers  in  terms  of  relations.  This  would  enable  us  to 
rebuild  human  mathematical  s.r  from  a  theory  of  numbers  point  of  view,  as  a 
physico-mathematical  discipline.  The  intrinsic,  or  internal  theory  of  surfaces, 
and  the  tensor,  or  absolute  calculus,  are  methodologically  our  most  secure 
epistemological  guides. 

I  would  suggest  that  mathematical  and  scientific  readers  who  are  interested 
in  a  ^4  revision  should,  at  first,  in  their  special  fields,  sketch  in  technical  papers, 

PREFATORY  REMARKS 

presented  before  the  local  International  Non-aristotelian  Societies,  A  pitfalls 
*nd  A  problems  and  outlooks.  Only  after  this  is  done,  shall  we  be  able  to  begin 
A  co-ordination  of  their  findings,  and  thereby  initiate  a  revised  and  unified  A 
science,  mathematics,  and  perhaps  ultimately  a  saner  scientific  civilization . 

The  scientific  achievements  dealt  with  in  Book  III,  are  developing  so 
rapidly,  and  the  technical  points  of  view  alter  so  often,  that  on  a  static  printed 
page  it  is  impossible  to  do  them  justice.  The  writer  has  spared  no  efforts  to 
keep  informed  of  these  scientific  developments  until  two  weeks  before  the 
appearance  of  this  book;  yet  because  these  new  developments  do  not  represent 
new  and  fundamental  semantic  factors,  I  deliberately  do  not  include  them  here. 
In  some  instances,  a  given  author  may  seem  to  change  his  opinions,  but,  from 
a  A  point  °f  view,  it  sometimes  appears  that  the  original  notions  were  more 
justified,  and  so  I  preserved  them  without  change. 

The  following  pages  are  written  exclusively  from  a  semantic  point  of  view, 
an  undertaking  which  is  far  more  difficult  than  dealing  with  a  restricted  technical 
physico-mathematical  problem,  because  it  involves  second  order  observations, 
of  the  first  order  observations,  of  the  first  order  observer,  and  of  the  relations 
between  them  ,  .  When  it  came  to  a  final  revision  of  the  manuscript,  and  reading 
of  the  proofs,  I  found  that  dealing  with  so  many  varied  fields,  languages,  and 
symbolisms  at  one  period,  was  no  small  task,  and  I  only  hope  that  I  have  not 
over-looked  too  many  errors  or  misprints. 

If  we  must  have  slogans,  a  A  motto  readily  suggests  itself  ‘Scientists  of 
the  world  unite’.  Perhaps  this  motto  may  prove  more  constructive  and  workable 
than  the  familiar  A  elementalislic  slogans  which  have  mostly  led  to  the  dis¬ 
membering  of  human  society.  Protests  against  any  misrule  should  not  be 
confused  with  the  proclaiming  of  disrupting  general  principles .  Let  me  repeat 
once  more,  that  the  most  lowly  manual  worker  is  useful  only  because  of  his 
human  nervous  system,  which  produced  all  science,  and  which  differentiates 
him  from  an  animal,  and  not  primarily  for  his  hands  alone;  otherwise  we  would 
breed  apes  to  do  the  world’s  work. 

In  the  explanations  of  some  geometrical  notions,  and  some  parts  of  the 
theory  of  Einstein,  I  have  followed  often  very  closely  the  Einstein's  Theory  of 
Relativity  by  Max  Born,  which  is  easily  the  best  elementary  exposition  I  have 
read,  and  also  the  books  of  Eddington.  In  the  quantum  field  I  have  followed 
mostly  the  books  by  Biggs,  Birtwistle,  Bocher,  Haas,  and  Sommerfeld,  and  I 
wish  to  acknowledge  my  indebtedness  to  the  above  authors. 

I  am  also  under  heavy  obligations  to  Professors  E.  T.  Bell,  P.  W.  Bridgman, 
B.  F.  Dostal,  R.  J.  Kennedy,  and  G.  Y.  Rainich,  who  were  so  kind  as  to  read 
the  MS.  and/or  proofs,  and  whose  criticism  and  suggestions  were  invaluable 
to  me.  However,  I  assume  entire  responsibility  for  the  following  pages,  especially 
since  I  have  not  always  followed  the  suggestions  made. 

PART  vm 

ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  MATHEMATICS 

Being  myself  a  remarkably  stupid  fellow,  I  have  had  to  unteach  myself 
the  difficulties,  and  now  beg  to  present  to  my  fellow  fools  the  parts  that 
are  not  hard.  Master  these  thoroughly,  and  the  rest  will  follow.  What 
one  fool  can  do,  another  can.  (5io)  silvanus  p.  Thompson 

Besides  the  theory  of  surfaces  is  the  model  on  which  all  the  higher  theories 
are  built  and  must  be  built,  and  it  is  well  to  master  it  completely  before 
attempting  generalizations.  (425)  G-  Y-  RAINICH 

To  find  such  relations  Einstein  has  applied  a  mathematical  method  of 
great  power — the  calculus  of  tensors — with  extraordinary  success.  The 
calculus  threshes  out  the  laws  of  nature,  separating  the  observer's  eccen¬ 
tricities  from  what  is  independent  of  him,  with  the  superb  efficiency  of  a 
modern  harvester.  <2i>  E-  T*  BELL 

CHAPTER  XXXII 

ON  THE  SEMANTICS  OF  THE  DIFFERENTIAL  CALCULUS 

The  principle  of  gaining  knowledge  of  the  external  world  from 
the  behaviour  of  its  infinitesimal  parts  is  the  mainspring  of  the  theory 
of  knowledge  in  infinitesimal  physics  as  in  Riemann’s  geometry,  and,  in¬ 
deed,  the  mainspring  of  all  the  eminent  work  of  Riemann,  m  particular, 
that  dealing  with  the  theory  of  complex  function.  (547)  Hermann  weyl 

The  conception  of  tensors  is  possible  owing  to  the  circumstance  that  the 
transition  from  one  co-ordinate  system  to  another  expresses  itself  as  a 
linear  transformation  in  the  differentials.  One  here  uses  the  exceedingly 
fruitful  mathematical  device  of  making  a  problem  “linear”  by  reverting 
to  infinitely  small  quantities.  (547)  Hermann  weyl 

Section  A.  Introductory. 

In  the  first  draft  of  this  book  written  in  1928,  the  following  pages  preceded 
Part  VII.  In  a  final  revision  in  1932,  it  seemed  advisable  to  transfer  pages 
which  to  laymen  look  ‘mathematical’,  to  the  end  of  the  volume,  because  the 
majority  of  even  intelligent  readers  have  a  sort  of  ‘inferiority  complex’  about 
anything  ‘mathematical’. 

The  patient  reader  knows  by  now,  I  hope,  that  on  neurological  grounds, 
he  must  for  the  sake  of  sanity,  be  able  to  translate  the  dynamic  into  the  static, 
and  the  static  into  the  dynamic;  and  also  that  he  must  know  at  least  about 
the  modern  structure  of  ‘space’,  ‘time’,  ‘matter*.  These  conditions  seem 
essential  for  sanity,  and  so  I  had  no  choice  but  to  give  the  minimum  of  a 
structural  and  semantic  outline,  and  to  acquaint  the  reader  with  the  existence 
of  modem  scientific  problems  and  vocabularies.  It  is  not  my  aim  to  teach 
the  reader  mathematics  or  modern  physics.  I  must  limit  myself  to  structural 
and  semantic  issues,  for  there  are  excellent  elementary  books  which  will  give 
him  the  necessary  informations. 

The  following  pages  should  in  no  way  intimidate  the  intelligent  reader. 
Elementary  structural  statements  and  definitions  are  given  in  simple  language, 
followed  by  illustrations  to  render  their  meanings  more  understandable.  The 
pages  are  less  technical  than  they  look,  as  each  example  is  carried  through 
in  the  most  elementary  way  in  all  of  its  details,  so  as  to  make  easy  reading. 
A  real  difficulty  for  some  readers  may  come  from  the  semantic  blockage  created 
by  the  use  of  apparently  strange,  and,  to  them,  unknown  terms,  or  from  a 
feeling  of  fright  or  abhorrence  of  anything  mathematical,  due  to  deplorably 
faulty  introduction  to  some  branch  of  mathematics  at  the  hands  of  some 
teacher  innocent  of  the  broader  epistemological  aspects  of  science.  I  am 
acquainted  with  scientists  of  very  considerable  mathematical  gifts,  who  have 
had  to  overcome  this  phobia  of  mathematics.  Once  the  word  ‘mathematics* 
was  mentioned  to  them,  they  became  ‘mentally*  paralysed.  An  ‘emotional’ 
fright  seized  them  and  it  took  some  months  to  overcome  this  undesirable 
childish  s.r,  I  use  the  subject  of  mathematics  as  an  illustration  of  this  difficulty, 
because  I  want  to  contrast  the  comparative  simplicity  of  mathematical  notions 

574  VIII.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  MATHEMATICS 

with  the  complexity  of  human  problems  and  language.  For  when  we  have 
understood  the  simplest  notions,  which  happen  to  be  mathematical,  then  only 
shall  we  be  able  better  to  understand  our  human  problems,  which  are  in 
comparison  so  difficult  and  so  confused. 

Any  reader  who  has  a  distaste  for  mathematics  will  benefit  most  if  he 
overcomes  his  semantic  phobia  and  struggles  through  these  pages,  even  several 
times.  As  a  result  of  so.  doing  he  will  find  it  simple  although  not  always  easy. 
It  is  always  semantically  useful  to  overcome  ones  phobias;  it  liberates  one  from 
unjustified  fears,  feelings  of  inferiority ,  .  The  main  point  of  this  whole  dis¬ 
cussion  is  to  evoke  the  semantic  components  of  a  living  Smith,  when  he 
habitually  uses  the  method  which  will  be  explained  herewith.  This  method  is 
so  simple  and  so  fundamental  that  in  the  form  given  by  a  ^-system  and  further 
simplified  according  to  the  gifts  of  the  teacher,  it  will  some  day  be  introduced 
into  elementary  schools  without  technicalities,  as  a  preventive  semantic  method 
against  'insanity’,  un-sanity  and  other  nervous  and  semantic  difficulties,  and 
as  a  foundation  for  a  training  in  sanity  and  adjustment. 

Section  B.  On  the  Differential  Calculus . 

1.  GENERAL  CONSIDERATIONS 

As  we  have  already  seen,  the  structural  notion  of  a  function  is  strictly 
connected  with  that  of  the  variable.  The  variable  on  one  level  does  not  Vary’; 
it  is  a  selection  by  Smith  of  a  definite  value  from  a  given  set.  As  these  processes 
are  going  on  inside  of  the  skin  of  Smith  he  might  experience  on  a  different 
level  a  feeling  of  ‘change’.  The  method  of  dealing  with  such  problems  is  given 
by  the  mathematical  differential  and  integral  calculus. 

The  beginnings  of  methods  dealing  with  ‘change’  are  to  be  found  even 
among  the  ancients.  Galileo,  Roberval,  Napier,  Barrow,  and  others  were 
interested  in  ‘fluxional’  methods,  before  Newton  and  Leibnitz.1  The  epoch- 
making  discoveries  of  the  last  two  mathematicians  consisted  not  only  in 
perfecting  the  knowledge  they  had  and  in  inventing  new  methods,  but  also— 
and  this  is  perhaps  the  most  important— they  formulated  a  general  theory  of 
these  structural  methods  and  invented  a  new  notation  suitable  for  their  purpose. 
The  definite  abandonment  of  the  old  tentative  methods  of  integration  in  favour 
of  methods  in  which  integration  is  regarded  as  the  inverse  of  differentiation 
was  especially  the  work  of  Newton.  Leibnitz’  main  work  was  in  the  field  of 
precise  formulation  of  simple  rules  for  differentiation  in  special  cases  and  the 
introduction  of  a  very  useful  notation. 

It  is  not  an  exaggeration  to  say  that  the  calculus  is  one  of  the  most  inspiring, 
creative,  structural  methods  in  mathematics.  There  is  little  doubt  that  the 
analysis  of  the  foundations  of  mathematics,  and  their  revision,  was  suggested 
by  a  study  of  the  methods  of  the  calculus.  It  is  structurally  and  semantically 
the  ‘ logic ’  of  sanity  and,  as  such,  can  be  given  ultimately  without  technicalities 
by  the  present  ^-system  and  semantic  training,  with  the  aid  of  the  Structural 
Differential. 

SEMANTICS  OF  THE  DIFFERENTIAL  CALCULUS  575 

The  application  of  the  differential  calculus  to  geometry  produced  differential 
geometry.  This  prepared  the  way  for  the  notions  of  Einstein  and  Minkowski. 

The  whole  of  modern  physics  becomes  possible  through  the  calculus,  and 
It  will  probably  be  correct  to  say  that  the  achievements  of  the  future  also  will 
be  dependent  on  it. 

The  present  work  is  also  to  a  large  extent  inspired  by  it,  and  develops 
simple  non-technical  methods  by  which  the  psycho-logical  structural  s.r 
necessitated  by  the  calculus  can  be  given  to  the  masses  in  elementary  education 
without  any  technical  knowledge  of  it.  This  statement  does  not  include 
teachers,  who  should  be  acquainted  with  at  least  the  rudiments  of  the  calculus.2 

It  is  true  that  in  the  beginning  we  did  not  suspect  that  the  semantics  of 
the  calculus  are  indispensable  in  education  for  sanity.  It  is  the  only  structural 
method  which  can  reconcile  the  as  yet  irreconcilable  higher  and  lower  order 
abstractions.  Without  such  a  reconciliation,  at  our  present  level  of  develop¬ 
ment,  sanity  is  a  matter  of  good  luck  quite  beyond  our  conscious  or  educational 
control. 

Let  us  recall  the  rough  definition  of  a  function:  y  is  said  to  be  a  function 
of  x  if,  when  x  is  given,  y  is  determined.  In  symbols  we  write  y  ~f(x)  which 
we  read  *y  is  equal  to  a  function  of  x’  or  ly  is  equal  to  /  of  x\  If  y  is  a  function 
of  x ,  or  y  =f(x),  then  x  is  called  the  independent  variable,  being  the  one  to 
which  we  arbitrarily  assign  any  value  we  choose  out  of  a  given  set  of  values. 
The  y  is  called  the  dependent  variable  as  its  value  depends  on  the  value  we 
assign  to  x. 

A  function  may  have  more  than  one  independent  variable;  in  which  case 
we  have  a  function  of  several  variables.  It  happens  frequently  that  to  one 
value  of  the  independent  variable  there  may  correspond  several  values  of  the 
dependent  variable.  Then  y  is  said  to  be  a  multiple-valued  function  of  x. 

Roughly  speaking,  a  function  is  said  to  be  continuous  if  a  small  increment 
in  the  variable  gives  rise  to  a  small  increment  of  the  function. 

A  theory  of  functions  can  be  developed  without  any  references  to  graphs 
and  geometrical  notions  of  co-ordinates  and  lengths;  but  in  practice  (and  in 
this  work),  it  is  extremely  useful  to  introduce  these  geometrical  notions,  as 
they  help  intuition.  A  modern  definition  of  an  analytic  function  is  technical 
and  unnecessary  for  our  purpose.  Suffice  it  to  say  that  it  is  connected  with 
derivatives  and  power  series,  which  means  structure. 

Geometry  is  a  very  remarkable  science.  It  may  be  treated  as  pure  mathe¬ 
matics,  or  it  may  be  treated  as  physics.  It  may  therefore  be  used  as  a  link 
between  the  two  or.  as  a  link  between  the  higher  and  lower  order  of  abstractions. 
This  fact  is  of  tremendous  psycho-logical  and  semantic  importance.  It  is  not 
by  pure  ‘chance’  that  the  most  important  writers  on  mathematical  philosophy, 
authors  who  have  generalized  their  knowledge  of  mathematics  to  include 
human  results,  were  mostly  geometers. 

Indeed,  Whitehead,  in  his  Universal  Algebra  (p.  32),  says,  and  justly  so, 
that  a  treatise  on  universal  algebra  is  also  a  treatise  on  certain  generalized 
notions  of  ‘space*.  ‘Space’  should  be  understood  as  ‘fulness’,  ‘fulness  of  some- 

576  VIII.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  MATHEMATICS 

thing’,  a  plenum.  Naturally  coherent  speech,  like  universal  algebra,  must  be 
coherent  speech  about  something.  ‘Generalized  space’  becomes  generalized 
plenum,  and  so  it  belongs  to  two  realms.  One  is  contentless  and  formal,  hence 
genera  hzed  algebra;  the  other,  in  that  it  refers  to  a  generalized  plenum,  becomes 
generalized  geometry,  or  generalized  physics. 

.  n'la‘n  importance,  perhaps,  of  geometry  is  in  the  fact  that  it  can  be 

interpreted  both  ways.  One  way  appears  as  pure  mathematics,  and  therefore 
as  the  study  of  sets  of  numbers  representing  co-ordinates.  The  other  the 
form  of  an  interpretation,  in  which  its  terms  imply  a  connection  with  the 
empirical  entities  of  our  world.  Obviously  if  speech  is  not  the  things  spoken 
about,  we  must  have  a  special  discipline  which  will  translate  the  coherent 
anguage  of  pure  mathematics,  which  is  contentless  by  definition,  into  another 
way  of  speaking  which  uses  a  different  vocabulary  capable  of  both  interpretations. 

Again,  the  different  orders  of  abstractions,  which  our  nervous  structure 
produces,  are  perfectly  reflected  in  the  very  structure  and  methods  of  mathe¬ 
matics.  The  possibility  of  the  use  of  the  ‘intuitions’  of  lower  order  abstractions 
is  extremely  useful  in  pure  mathematics.  This  fact  makes  geometry  also  unique. 
It  allows  us  to  apply  to  the  development  of  geometry  both  orders  of  abstrac¬ 
tions  the  intuitions’,  ‘feelings’,  of  the  lower  order  of  abstractions,  and  the 
static,  quantum’  jumpmethodsof  pure  analysis.  Thisisalso  why  theeinsteinian 
physics  becomes  four-dimensional  geometry;  which,  because  it  can  be  treated 
on  both  levels  of  abstraction,  gives  tremendously  powerful  and  important 
psycho-logieal  means  for  sanity  and  nervous  co-ordination  of  the  individual. 

ince  Einstein,  many  far-sighted  scientists  have  said  that  although  they  do 
not  know  in  what  respect  the  Einstein  theory  will  affect  our  lives,  yet  they  feel 
that  it  will  have  a  tremendous  influence.  I  venture  to  suggest  that  the  bearing 
of  the  Einstein  theory  and  its  development  on  the  problems  of  sanity,  as 
explained  in  this  work,  is  a  new  and  unexpected  semantic  result  of  the  application 
of  modern  science  to  our  lives.  As  the  Einstein  theory  could  have  been  formu¬ 
lated  more  than  two  hundred  years  ago  when  the  finite  velocity  of  light  was 
discovered,  so  the  present  theory  is  also  several  hundred  years  overdue.  The 
only  consolation  we  have  left  is  that  it  is  better  late  than  never. 

The  scope  of  this  work  allows  us  to  go  but  a  little  beyond  these  simple 
remarks,  and  permits  only  a  very  brief  explanation  of  the  most  fundamental 
and  elementary  beginnings  of  the  calculus.  In  this  presentation  I  shall  appeal 
very  °ften  to  “tuition  (lower  order  abstractions),  as  this  will  help  the  reader. 

The  notion  of  differentiation  of  a  continuous  function  is  the  process  for 
measuring  the  rate  of  growth;  that  is  to  say,  the  evaluation  of  the  increment 
of  the  function  as  compared  with  the  growth  or  increment  of  the  variable. 
We  may  describe  this  process  as  follows:  If  y  is  a  function  of  *,  it  is  helpful  not 
to  consider  x  as  having  one  or  another  special  value  but  as  flowing  or  growing 
just  as  we  feel  ‘time’  or  follow  the  ripples  made  by  a  stone  thrown  into  a  pond’ 

The  function  y  varies  with  *,  sometimes  increasing,  sometimes  decreasing. 
We  have  already  defined  the  variable  as  any  value  selected  from  a  given  range 
Let  us  consider  our  *  as  given  in  the  interval  between  1  and  S.  We  are  now 

SEMANTICS  OF  THE  DIFFERENTIAL  CALCULUS  577 

interested  in  all  values  which  our  #  may  take  between  these  two  values,  or,  as 
we  say,  in  this  interval.  Obviously,  we  can  select  a  few  values,  or,  in  other 
words,  take  big  steps;  as,  for  instance,  assigning  to  *  the  successive  values 
#1-1,  #2-2,  #8-3,  #4-4,  #6-5.  In  such  a  case  we  would  have  few  values 
and  the  difference  between  two  successive  values  would  be  rather  large,  for 
instance,  #3-x2  =  L  But  such  large  differences  are  not  of  much  interest  to  us 
here.  We  may,  if  we  choose,  select  smaller  differences;  in  other  words,  assign 
more  values  to  our  variable  in  the  given  range. 

Let  us  take,  for  instance,  for  our  x  the  series  of  values:  1,  Ij,  2,  2\ ,  3, 
3},  4,  4§,  5.  Here  we  see  that  the  difference  between  two  successive  values 
is  smaller  than  1,  it  is  $.  So  we  already  have  nine,  instead  of  the  former  five, 
values  which  We  may  assign  to  our  x.  Thus  we  have  selected  smaller  steps  by 
which  to  proceed.  Let  us  select  still  smaller  steps;  for  instance,  J.  Our  exten- 
sional  manifold  of  values  for  #  in  the  interval  between  1  and  5  would  then  be: 
1,  11,  If.  2,  2i  2£,  2f ,  3,  3j,  3j,  3j,  4,  4j,  4$,  4$ ,  5.  We  see  that  in  the 
interval  between  1  and  5,  we  have  already  17  values  which  we  may  assign  to 
our  variable,  but  we  have  followed  the  ‘growth’  of  our  #  by  smaller  steps; 
namely,  by  steps  of  J.  If  we  choose  to  diminish  the  steps  to  we  would  have 
for  our  extensional  manifold  of  values:  1,  1.1,  ...»  1.9,  2,  2.1,  .  .  .  ,  2.9,  3, 
3.1,  .  .  .  ,  3.9,  4,  4.1,  ...»  4.9,  5:  in  all,  41  values  for  #,  any  two  succeeding 
values  differing  by  n>-  If  we  select  still  smaller  steps— let  us  say,  iro—we  have 
401  values  for  #  and  the  difference  between  two  successive  values  is  still  smaller; 
namely,  ife.  This  process  may  be  carried  on  until  we  have  as  many  numbers 
between  1  and  5  as  we  choose,  since  we  may  make  the  difference  between  suc¬ 
cessive  numbers  in  the  sequence  as  small  as  we  please.  In  the  limit,  between 
any  two  numbers,  let  us  say,  1  and  2,  or  any  two  fractions,  there  are  infinite 
numbers  of  other  numbers  or  fractions.  It  is  obvious  that  in  a  given  interval, 
let  us  say,  between  1  and  5,  we  can  have  an  indefinitely  large  number  of  inter¬ 
mediary  numbers  arranged  in  an  increasing  progression,  such  that  the  difference 
between  two  successive  numbers  can  be  made  smaller  than  any  assigned  value, 
which  is  itself  greater  than  zero. 

The  above  may  be  made  clearer  by  r  *  _ _ i  A 

a  geometrical  illustration.  Let  us  take 

a  segment  of  a  line  of  definite  length,  / _ _ £ - £i- - 

let  us  say  2  inches.  Let  us  designate 

the  ends  by  numbers  1  and  3.  In  figure  /  *  H  Jl _ £ — — H — it — ic 

(A)  we  divide  the  segment  into  2  equal 

parts  of  one  inch  each,  and  see  that  to  /  $  r  ,  2  -^  ■  ■  ■ 

reach  3  starting  with  1  we  have  to  pro-  "  2 

ceed  by  two  large  jumps  from  1  to  2, 

and  from  2  to  3.  In  figure  (B)  we  have  more  steps  in  the  interval  and  therefore 
the  steps  are  smaller.  In  figures  (C)  and  (D)  the  steps  are  still  smaller  and  their 
number  greater.  If  the  number  of  steps  is  very  large,  the  steps  are  very  small. 
In  the  limit,  if  the  numbers  of  steps  become  infinite,  the  length  of  the  steps  tends 

578  VIII.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  MATHEMATICS 

toward  zero  and  the  aggregate  of  such  points  of  division  represents  (in  the 

rough  only)  a  continuous  line. 

.  **  *s  *mP°rtant  that  the  reader  should  become  thoroughly  acquainted 
with  the  above  simple  considerations  as  they  will  be  very  useful  in  any  line  of 
endeavour.  ^  Here  we  already  have  learned  how,  somehow,  to  translate  dis¬ 
