a/aA  a2z  „ 

dy\dx)~dxdy~*m*"*?e,y)'  The  order  in  which  we  differentiate  is  immaterial 

provided  that  the  derivatives  concerned  are  continuous.  The  total  differential 

of  a  function  of  two  variables,  for  example, /(*,y),  df = dff+dj = ^dx  +^dy  is 

dx  dy 

SEMANTICS  OF  THE  DIFFERENTIAL  CALCULUS  595 

equal  to  the  sum  of  the  partial  differentials  of  the  first  order  if  we  neglect  terms 
of  higher  orders,  whose  values  are  indefinitely  small  quantities  relative  to 

the  first  order  differentials.  In  symbols,  df  - dj +dyf  - *n 

words,  the  total  differential  of  f(xty)  is  found  by  finding  the  partial  derivatives 
with  respect  to  x  and  y,  multiplying  them  respectively  by  dx  and  dyt  and  adding. 

2.  DIFFERENTIAL  EQUATIONS 

A  natural  development  of  the  invention  of  the  calculus  was  the  introduction 
of  differential  equations.  Differential  equations  differ  from  the  ordinary 
equations  of  mathematics  in  that  in  addition  to  variables  and  constants  they 
contain  also  derivatives  of  one  or  more  of  the  variables  involved.  Differential 
equations  are  of  extreme  importance,  and  arise  in  many  problems.  Newton 
solved  his  first  differential  equation  in  1676  by  the  use  of  an  infinite  series, 
eleven  years  after  his  discovery  of  the  calculus  in  1665.  Leibnitz  solved  his 
first  differential  equation  in  1693,  the  year  in  which  Newton  first  published 
his  results.  From  this  date  on,  progress  in  the  development  and  application 
of  differential  equations  was  very  rapid,  and  today  the  subject  of  differential 
equations  occupies  in  the  general  field  of  mathematics  a  central  position  from 
which  important  and  useful  lines  of  development  flow  in  many  different 
directions. 

To  integrate  or  solve  a  differential  equation  means,  analytically,  to  find 
all  the  functions  which  satisfy  the  equation.  In  geometry,  it  means  to  find  all 
the  curves  which  have  the  property  expressed  by  the  equation.  In  mechanics 
it  means  to  find  all  the  motions  that  may  possibly  result  from  a  given  set  of 
forces  , .  The  degree  of  the  differential  equation  is  defined  as  the  degree  of  the 
derivative  of  the  highest  order  which  enters  the  equation.  The  order  of  the 
differential  equations  is  the  order  of  the  highest  derivative  it  contains. 

Equations  in  x  and  y,  of  the  first  degree  in  y  and  its  derivatives  with  respect 
to  x ,  y't  y". ,  are  called  linear  equations .  The  main  equations  of  physics  are 
Unear  differential  equations  of  the  second  order,  since  y,  the  primitive  function, 
/,  the  first  derivative,  and  y",  the  second  derivative,  appear  only  in  the  first 

degree.  For  instance  the  equation  -f  <xi— -f  o*y =X,  or  y’*  +aiyr  +a*y  =Xf 

dx2  dx 

when  X  represents  a  function  of  x  alone  is  such  an  equation.  It  is  linear,  or  of 
the  first  degree,  because  the  second  derivative,  y",  appears  only  to  the  first 
degree.  It  is  of  the  second  order  because  that  is  the  highest  order  derivative 
in  the  equation.  As  we  may  recall,  the  derivative  of  a  function  gives  us  the 
rate  of  change  of  the  function  when  we  give  successive  values  to  the  independent 
variable.  When  we  study  the  rate  of  change  of  the  rate  of  change  of  our  function, 
we  study  the  rate  of  change  of  the  first  derivative  which  expresses  the  rate  of 
change  of  the  function,  whence  we  obtain  the  derivative  of  the  second  order, 
and  so  on.  If  we  equate  our  derivatives  to  zero,  or  choose  a  value  of  the  variable 
for  which  our  derivative  becomes  zero,  the  rate  of  change  of  our  function 

596  VIII.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  MATHEMATICS 

becomes  zero.  In  other  words,  the  value  of  our  function  is  momentarily  constant, 
it  has  a  stationary  value. 

Quite  naturally,  differential  equations  which  involve  derivatives  involve 
implicitly  and  explicitly  the  whole  fundamental  structural  framework  of  the 
calculus  as  explained  in  this  chapter  by  expressing  the  ‘rate  of  change’  of  some 
natural  process.  If  the  rate  of  change  is  zero,  it  might  express  some  ‘natural 
law*,  or  some  uniformity  as  found  in  nature.  In  other  words,  differential 
equations  express  differential  laws,  which  in  turn  express  the  momentary  ten¬ 
dencies  of  processes  whose  outcomes  are  given  by  the  process  of  integration. 

From  what  has  already  been  said  here,  it  is  obvious  that  differential 
equations  and  the  differential  laws  which  they  express  are  of  extreme  structural 
importance.  They  formulate  not  only  the  uniformities  and  tendencies  found 
in  nature,  but  also  of  necessity  somehow  involve  causality.  Besides  which, 
they  are  also  in  accord  with  the  physical  structure  and  function  of  the  nervous 
system.  We  shall  return  to  this  most  important  subject  in  the  next  chapter, 
in  which  we  shall  analyse  the  physical  significance  and  aspects  of  what  has 
been  explained  here. 

3.  METHODS  OF  APPROXIMATION 

In  discussing  the  above  fundamental  notions  of  the  calculus  we  considered 
a  portion  AB ,  of  the  curve  given  by  the  equation  y=/(x),  (Fig.  13)  and  two 
points  on  this  curve  Pi  with  co-ordinates  (*i,  yi)  and  P2  with  co-ordinates 

(*2»  ?2)  moving  along  the  curve,  the 
secant,  or  chord,  P\P%  rotates  about  Pi, 
its  length  steadily  diminishing,  and  in 
the  limit  as  the  length  of  the  chord  PiP2 
tends  toward  zero,  the  slope  of  the  se¬ 
cant  approaches  the  slope  of  the  tangent 
PiP.  We  saw  that  the  slope  of  this  tan¬ 
gent  was  given  by  the  value  of  the  first 
derivative  of  the  function  which  repre¬ 
sented  the  curve.  We  were  trying  to  get 
some  knowledge  of  the  direction  of  our 
curve  at  a  given  point  by  considering 
the  slope  of  a  straight  line  of  smaller  and 
smaller  length.  When  we  studied  the  curvature  of  our  curve  we  considered  the 
rate  of  change  of  the  slope  of  our  tangent  and  so,  by  the  aid  of  a  second  deriva¬ 
tive,  we  found  the  curvature.  In  this  case  we  approximated  our  curve  to  a  circle 
of  radius  equal  to  the  radius  of  curvature  of  the  curve  at  a  given  point. 

In  attempting  to  determine  the  length  of  a  portion  of  our  curve  a  point 
cannot  be  regarded  as  a  piece  of  the  curve  but  only  as  marking  a  position  on  it. 
For  the  purpose  of  determining  the  length  of  an  arc  it  is  convenient  to  replace 
each  small  element  of  the  arc  by  its  chord,  a  lineal  element .  By  definition  the 
length  of  an  arc  of  a  curve  is  the  limit,  if  such  limit  exists,  toward  which  the 

SEMANTICS  OF  THE  DIFFERENTIAL  CALCULUS  597 

aum  of  the  lengths  of  the  chords  of  its  small  subdivisions  tends  as  the  number 
of  chords  increases  indefinitely  and  their  individual  lengths  all  approach  zero 
uniformly.  For  example,  the  circumference  of  a  circle  is  the  limit  approached 
by  the  perimeter  of  an  inscribed  polygon  as  the  number  of  its  sides  increases 
Indefinitely,  the  lengths  of  the  individual  sides  all  approaching  zero. 

Similarly  the  length  of  a  curve  may  be  approximated  by  the  sum  of  the 
lengths  of  segments  of  tangents  at  successive  arbitrarily  chosen  points,  merely 
by  choosing  the  points  nearer  and  nearer  together.  For  example,  the  circum¬ 
ference  of  a  circle  is  the  limit  approached  by  the  perimeter  of  a  circumscribed 
polygon  as  the  number  of  its  sides  increases  indefinitely,  the  lengths  of  the 
individual  sides  all  approaching  zero.  In  either  case,  a  point  on  a  curve  taken 
with  a  vanishingly  small  portion  of  the  tangent  to  the  curve  at  that  point  may 
be  called  the  lineal  element  of  the  curve. 

The  above  definitions  apply  equally  well  in  either  two  or  three  dimensions. 
The  lineal  element  in  two  dimensions  may  be  defined  by  three  co-ordinates  x , 
yt  pt  0f  which  x  and  y  are  the  co-ordinates  of  the  point  through  which  the  lineal 
element  passes  and  p  is  the  slope  of  the  element.  This  slope,  as  we  already 
know,  is  to  be  found  by  differentiation,  and  is  given  by  the  formula  p  =dy/dx. 
In  geometrical  problems  which  relate  the  slope  of  a  tangent  to  that  of  other 
lines,  it  is  not  the  tangent  that  is  of  real  importance  but  the  lineal  element. 
From  this  point  of  view  a  curve  is  made  up  of  infinite  numbers  of  vanishingly 
small  lineal  elements  which  are  tangent  to  it,  which  is  the  point  of  view  of  the 
differential  calculus.  Or  the  curve  is  composed  of  infinite  numbers  of  vanishingly 
small  chords  which  are  the  sides  of  an  inscribed  polygon,  which  is  the  point  of 
view  of  the  integral  calculus. 

Obviously,  in  the  limit,  both  points  of  view  are  equivalent,  although  as  a 
matter  of  convenience  they  may  be  different.  In  any  case,  it  must  be  obvious 
to  the  reader  that  using  straight  lines  instead  of  pieces  of  a  curve,  or  using  as 
closer  approximations  arcs  of  circles,  facilitates  our  study  of  the  curves,  indeed 
renders  such  study  possible  at  all,  and  in  practice  we  can  carry  our  work  to  any 
degree  of  approximation  we  choose.  But  in  theoretical  work  we  require  pre¬ 
cision,  hence  we  think  in  terms  of  infinite  numbers  of  vanishingly  small  steps. 
The  differential  and  integral  calculus  supply  the  only  perfect  technique  for 
these  processes  of  analysis  and  synthesis. 

4.  PERIODIC  FUNCTIONS  AND  WAVES 

We  have  already  said  that  the  most  important  relations  of  physics  are 
represented  by  linear  differential  equations  of  the  second  order.  It  is  important 
to  know  the  connection  of  these  equations  with  the  general  theory  of  waves 
or  oscillations. 

If  on  a  circle  of  unit  radius,  as  shown  in  Fig.  14,  we  take  several  points 
Pi,  P2,  P3 ,  P4,  and  connect  these  points  by  straight  lines  with  the  centre  0, 
we  get  angles  XOPu  XOP2  ,  .  In  trigonometry  we  define  certain  functions  of 
these  angles  and  a  unit  of  measurement.  For  our  purpose  we  will  only  define 
the  so-called  sine  and  cosine,  as  we  have  already  met  the  definition  of  tangent 

598  VIII.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  MATHEMATICS 

tan  6 

M1P1 

OMi  ’  The  angles  XOPu  XOPt .  ,  may  be  specified  by  the  ratios 

MiPi/OPi,  MtPt/OP'i .  ,  respectively  each  of  which  ratios  has  a  definite  value. 
I  his  ratio  m  any  case  is  called  the  sine  of  the  angle,  and  is  written  in  abbreviated 
form  sin  0.  If  the  radius  of  our  circle  is  taken  as  unity  then  simply  MiP1  - 

8inCe  0Pl~l-  The  ratio  OM1/OPl  is  called  the  cosine 
of  the  angle  XOP\,  and  is  written  cos  0. 

Y 

There  are  two  units  of  measurement  of  angles.  In  ordinary,  or  Bevagaa.’moi 
measure,  the  unit  angle  is  the  degree,  1/360  of  the  entire  angle  about  a  point! 
1/180  of  a  straight  angle,  or  1/90  of  a  right  angle.  The  degree  is  divided  into 
60  equal  parts  called  minutes.  The  minute  is  divided  into  60  parts  called 
seconds.  In  circular  measure  the  unit  angle  is  the  radian,  the  an£l»  at  the 
centre  of  a  circle  whose  arc  is  equal  to  the  radius  of  the  circle.  This  angle  is 
a  constant  whether  the  circle  be  large  or  small,  due  to  the  fact  that  the  cir¬ 
cumferences  of  circles  vary  as  their  radii,  and,  in  one  circle,  angles  at  the  centre 
are  proportional  to  their  arcs.  The  constant  ratio  of  the  circumference  of  the 
circle  to  its  radius  is  given  by  the  number  it  =3.14159  ....  this  number  being 
‘incommensurable’  with  unity.  As  the  length  of  the  circumference  of  a  circle 
with  radius  R,  is  2  t  R  we  see  that  the  entire  angle  about  the  centre,  which  in 
degrees  is  360,  is  in  radians  2  x;  that  a  straight  angle  equals  180  degrees  or  x 

radians;  and  that  a 
Thus  1  radian 

right  angle  equals  90  degrees  or  -  radians. 

180° 

=57°17'44".  806 . . .  which,  as  it  depends  on  the  value 

of  x,  is  itself  an  'irrational'  number.  The  ‘incommensurability'  of  the  radian 
with  right  and  straight  angles  makes  its  practical  use  inconvenient.  One  of 
the  mam  uses  of  the  radian  is  in  theory  as  it  introduces  a  marked  simplification 
in  that  the  ratio  of  the  sine  of  an  indefinitely  small  angle  to  the  angle  itself  is  1, 
when  riie  angle  is  measured  in  radians.  In  other  words,  the  equivalence  of  an 
indefinitely  small  arc  and  chord  becomes  apparent  numerically  when  the  angle 
and  sine  are  expressed  in  one  unit. 

SEMANTICS  OF  THE  DIFFERENTIAL  CALCULUS  599 

The  following  table  gives  the  ordinary  and  radian  measures,  the  sine, 
cosine  and  tangent  of  angles  of  0,  1,  2,  3,  and  4  right  angles. 

Angle  in 
Right  Angles 

Angle  in 
Degrees 

Angle  in 
Radians 

Sine 

Cosine 

Tangent 

r/2 

=fcoo 

T 

-1 

St/2 

-1 

=F00 

2* 

From  Fig.  14  and  from  this  table,  it  follows  that  the  values  of  the  trigono¬ 
metric  functions  are  equal  for  the  angles  0  and  2ir,  or  in  the  language  of  degrees, 
for  the  angles  0°  and  360°.  We  see  also  from  Fig.  14  that  the  angle  XOPu  or 
any  other  angle,  has  one  measure  as  expressed  by  its  trigonometric  functions 
if  we  add  to  it  360°  or  2ir  radians. 

The  structural  importance  of  the  trigonometric  functions  in  analysis  lies 
in  the  fact  that  they  are  the  simplest  singly  periodic  functions  and  are  therefore 
adapted  for  the  representation  of  undulations.  As  we  have  already  seen  the 
sine  and  cosine  have  the  single  real  period  2tt,  which  means  that  they  are  not 
altered  in  value  by  the  addition  of  2ir  to  the  variable.  The  tangent  has  the 
period  tt. 

Besides  the  three  functions  defined  above,  we  usually  define  three  others, 
the  secant,  the  cosecant  and  the  cotangent  as  reciprocals  respectively  of  the 
cosine,  the  sine,  and  the  tangent.  These  last  three  we  may  disregard  in  our 
present  discussion. 

Let  us  consider  the  function  y~sin  *,  and  construct  the  curve  which  this 
equation  represents.  If  we  draw  a  circle  of  unit  radius,  Fig.  14,  the  ordinates 
corresponding  to  the  different  angles  XOPu  XOPu .  ,  give  the  values  of  y, 
while  the  angles  measured  in  radians,  give  the  corresponding  values  of  the 
abscissa  x. 

Plotting  corresponding  values  of  x  and  y  as  thus  obtained  in  Fig.  14  we 
get  in  Fig.  15  the  partial  graph  of  the  function  y  =  sin  Proceeding  again 
around  our  circle  in  Fig.  14,  that  is,  adding  360°  or  2ir,  to  each  of  our  angles, 
hence  to  their  abscissas  of  the  curve  in  Fig.  15,  we  add  to  the  graph  a  second 
complete  wave.  We  may  thus  proceed  either  forward  or  backward  obtaining 
as  many  complete  waves,  or  undulations,  as  we  please,  as  in  Fig.  16. 

The  curve  represented  by  y  =  cos  *  is  obtained  in  like  manner  and  is  quite 
similar  to  the  sine  curve.  (See  Fig.  17.) 

To  differentiate  sin  x  we  give  to  x  the  arbitrary  values  xu  and  xx+Ax  and 
compute  for  y  the  corresponding  values  yi  = sin  x\  and  yi+Ay  =sin  (xi+Axh 

600  VIII.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  MATHEMATICS 

y  =sin  x 

Fig.  16 

Fig.  17 

Subtracting  yx  from  yx  -f  Ay,  we  have  *Ay  =  sin  (xx  +Ax)  -sin  xv  Dividing 

by  Ax  we  have  Ay/Ar  -  —  ^Xl  ~~s*n  xi 

Ax 

To  express  the  meaning  of  the  above  geometrically  we  may  take  a  circle 
of  unit  radius  and  construct  the  angles  Xi  and  (xx+Ax),  (Fig.  18).  Then 
MiP1  -sin  xu  M2P%  -sin  (xx  +Ax),  QPt  =sin  (xx  +Ax)  -sin  xx  -  Ay,  and  arc 
P\P%  -  jCPiPi  -  Ax. 

The  limit  approached  by  the  ratio  Ay /Ax  =QP2/P\P2  as  P2->  Pi  or 
as  Ax-+  0,  is  by  previous  definitions  the  sine  of  the  angle  MtPtPi,  since  in  the 
/imtf  the  arc  PtP,  becomes  a  straight  line,  the  hypotenuse  of  the  right  triangle 
PiQPt,  which  is  similar  to  the  righ  t  triangle  PxMvO,  whence  angle  ZMlPiP1  =  Zxu 

In  other  words,  lim  —  =  lim  ; 

Ax— »0  Ax  Ax~+Q  PXP2  Op ,  C°S  *’  °r  Sln  X  COS  X • 

in  other  woixis,  lim  ^-Hm  l=cosx  orD 

Ax-tO  Ax  Ax~*Q  PyP2  QPX  COS  *’  °r  Sin  x  COS  X' 

T  ^  may  be  easily  and  similarly  shown 

s.  \  that  Dx  cos  x  =  -sin  x.  Our  main 

\  interest  is  in  the  second  derivative. 

j^y\/  We  see  that  the  derivative  of  sin  x  is 

cos  x,  and  that  the  derivative  of 
yr  j  ^  cos  x  is  —sin  x. 

f  Differentiating  again  we  obtain 

^ \  tbe  second  derivative  of  sin  x  as 

y0^0000^  j  j  W  —sin  x,  and  the  second  derivative  of 

j  j  \T*  cos  x  as  -cos  x. 

j  |  j  The  sine  and  cosine  and  their 

- M-"  M  *  linear  combinations  are  the  only  func- 

Fig.  18  Z  *  tions  which  when  differentiated  twice 

c  .  ,  .  ,  give  us  the  second  differential  coef- 

ficient  equal  and  of  opposite  sign  to  the  original  function.  In  symbols 

^(sin  x)  ,  ,  d2(cos  x) 

- -  sin  x;  and 

—  —cos  x. 

SEMANTICS  OF  THE  DIFFERENTIAL  CALCULUS  601 

In  physics  we  deal  with  many  processes  which  are  structurally  periodic,  which 
means  that  a  definite  physical  condition  constantly  recurs  after  equal  intervals 
of  ‘time*.  The  number  of  seconds  or  fractions  of  seconds  within  which  the 
process  runs  its  course  is  called  the  period.  We  know  already  that  the  simplest 
periodic  functions  are  sine  and  cosine  functions  of  the  type 

sin  (x+2 me)  =sin  x ,  and 

cos  (x+2«ir)  =  cos  x,  where  n  may  have  any  in¬ 
tegral  value.  Furthermore  we  have  already  seen  that  the  first  derivatives, 
therefore  all  derivatives  of  such  functions  are  likewise  simple  sine  and  cosine 
functions.  In  particular,  the  second  derivatives  of  the  sine  and  cosine  functions 
are  likewise  sine  and  cosine  functions  taken  with  the  opposite  algebraic  sign. 

If  we  express  the  variability  of  a  process  as  a  function  of  ‘time’,  that  is, 
by  an  equation  of  the  form  S  -  F(t)7  then  in  a  periodic  process,  F(h  +nT)  =  F(h)7 
where  T  is  the  period  and  n  any  integer.  If  the  process  repeats  itself,  as  in  a 
periodic  process,  we  must  have 

dF  I  dF  I  .  &F  I  d2F 

—  1  =  —  1  ana  —~r  ~  •  * 

dt  |twi+nr  dt  jfwi  dt 

but,  as  we  have  already  seen,  the  sine  and  cosine  functions  satisfy  these 
conditions. 

2  T$ 

A  process  which  can  be  described  by  an  equation  of  the  type  S  *=A  sin  -y 

is  called  a  harmonic  vibration  or,  a  ‘pure  sine  vibration*,  or  simply  a  ‘vibration* 
or  ‘oscillation*.  The  constant  A ,  which  represents  the  maximum  value  of  the 
displacement  on  either  side,  is  called  the  amplitude.  The  period  T  is  called 
the  ‘time  of  vibration*,  its  reciprocal  value  which  gives  the  number  of  vibrations 
in  a  unit  of  ‘time*  is  called  the  vibration  number  or  frequency. 

As  the  second  derivatives  of  sine  and  cosine  functions  are  equal  to  the 
original  functions  taken  with  the  opposite  signs,  we  can  describe  harmonic 
vibrations  by  differential  equations  of  the  first  degree  (linear)  and  of  the  second 
j2  c  dirt 

order  of  the  special  type  — -  =  —a2Sf  where  S  =A  sin  — +«),  A  representing 
dr  J 

the  amplitude,  T  the  period,  €  the  phase  of  the  vibration.  The  factor  of  propor¬ 
tionality  a  is  taken  as  the  square  of  any  arbitrary  real  quantity  to  indicate 
that  the  right-hand  side  must  always  have  the  opposite  sign  to  that  of  5. 

The  propagation  of  a  vibration  is  called  an  advancing  plane  wave  which 
has  both  velocity  and  direction. 

Fourier  has  shown  that  any  given  form  of  wave  may  be  represented  by 
the  superposition  of  a  series  of  sine-waves,  which  gives  sine-waves  great 
theoretical  and  practical  importance. 

In  writing  this  chapter  I  had  two  main  aims.  One  was  to  briefly  indicate 
the  essential  semantic  factors  involved  in  the  differential  methods.  The  other, 
to  make  the  general  reader  and  even  specialists  who  are  not  mathematicians 
acquainted  with  some  terms  and  rudiments  of  method  which  will  be  necessary 
for  further  discussion. 

602  VIII.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  MATHEMATICS 

The  differential  methods  involve  semantic  factors  essential  for  a  ^-system, 
the  oo-valued  semantics  of  probability  and  for  sanity  and  cannot  be  longer 
disregarded. 

The  main  pressing  issues  are  twofold.  One,  to  formulate  methods  which 
would  impart  the  A  semantic  reactions  of  the  calculus,  which  need  not  involve 
any  technicalities,  and  can  be  imparted  in  the  most  elementary  home  or  school 
education.  The  other  is  to  draw  the  attention  of  specialists  to  these  semantic 
problems  so  that  they  will  work  them  out. 

An  attempt  to  solve  the  first  issue  has  been  undertaken  in  the  present 
volume.  The  second  task  will  probably  be  accomplished  in  the  not  too 
distant  future. 

It  is  earnestly  suggested  to  all  scientists,  professional  men  and  teachers, 
who  are  not  mathematicians,  to  become  familiar  with  differential  methods 
and  so  acquire  the  appropriate  semantic  reactions.  Experience,  in  many  cases, 
has  shown  that  this  will  assist  them  in  acquiring  semantic  balance  and  'mental* 
efficiency.  Teachers  and  physicians  in  particular,  would  be  greatly  helped  in 
their  efforts  to  train  children  and  patients  in  the  A  reactions.  The  benefit 
is  not  in  any  'calculations'  whatsoever,  but  in  the  method  and  the  related 
psycho-logical  reactions. 

There  is  an  excellent,  short,  most  elementary  and  amusing  account  of 
the  calculus  by  Sylvanus  P.  Thompson  Calculus  Made  Easy  (Macmillan)  which, 
for  the  present,  is  all  that  is  needed  for  this  purpose. 

CHAPTER  XXXIII 

ON  LINEARITY 

The  conception  of  linear  transformation  thus  plays  the  same  part  in 
affine  geometry  as  congruence  plays  in  general  geometry;  hence  its  funda¬ 
mental  importance*  <547)  Hermann  weyl 

It  is  instructive  to  compare  the  mathematical  apparatus  of  quantum 
theory  with  that  of  the  theory  of  relativity.  In  both  cases  there  is  an  ap¬ 
plication  of  the  theory  of  linear  algebras.  <2is>  w.  Heisenberg 

This  “perturbation  theory"  is  the  complete  counterpart  of  that  of  clas¬ 
sical  mechanics,  except  that  it  is  simpler  because  in  undulatory  mechanics 
we  are  always  in  the  domain  of  linear  relations.  (466)  E.  schr6dinger 

As  a  result  of  experimental  research  on  association,  in  1904,  I  was  led 
to  show  the  complexity  of  the  factors  governing  evocation.  . .  .  And  I 
have  often  insisted  since  then  on  this  essential  idea,  in  opposition  to  the 
simple  schema  of  linear  associative  connection.  (411)  henri  fieron 

We  have  already  had  several  occasions  to  mention  the  *plus’  or  additive 
issues  as  connected  with  linearity.  This  problem  is  of  structural  and  linguistic 
as  well  as  empirical  and  psycho-logical  semantic  importance.  It  is  sufficient 
for  our  purpose  at  present  that  we  should  notice  two  facts;  namely,  (1)  That 
in  one  dimension,  linearity  expresses  the  relation  of  proportionality;  (2)  That 
the  problems  of  linearity  are  dependent  on  the  relation  of  additivity. 

The  structural  notion  of  additivity  is  of  great  antiquity.  Being  the 
simplest  of  such  notions,  it  naturally  originated  very  early  in  our  history.  The 
earliest  records  show  *hat  the  Babylonians  and  the  Egyptians  used  the  additive 
principle  in  their  notation.  Our  primitive  ancestors,  long  before  any  records 
were  written,  had  similar  structural  conditions  present,  open  for  investigation 
and  reflection,  that  we  have  today.  That  this  was  the  case  is  not  a  mere  guess. 
Otherwise  we  would  still  be  at  their  stage  of  development.  Some  beginning 
had  to  be  made  somewhere.  There  is  little  doubt  that  the  men  of  remote 
antiquity  presented  many  types  of  make-up,  as  we  do  today.  Some,  for  instance, 
were  more  curious  than  others;  some  more  inventive,  some  more  reflective . , 
which,  as  we  know  today,  is  found  even  among  animals.  These  more  gifted 
individuals  were,  as  usual,  the  inventors,  discoverers,  and  builders  of  systems 
and  language  of  their  period.  They  could  not  long  fail  to  recognize  the  fact 
that  a  stone  and  a  stone,  or  a  fruit  and  a  fruit  are  different  from  one  stone  or 
one  fruit.  For  instance,  the  two  stones  might  have  saved  the  early  observer’s 
life  in  defence,  or  the  two  fruits  might  have  satisfied  his  hunger  or  thirst,  where 
one  would  not  have  done  so.  An  accumulation  of  objects  was  obviously  some¬ 
how  different  from  a  single  object.  As  these  problems  were  often  of  vital 
importance  to  their  lives,  names  for  such  accumulations  of  objects  began  to 
be  invented,  and  one  and  one  was  called  two,  two  and  one  was  called  three  , . 
Number  and  mathematics  were  born  as  a  structural  semantic  life-necessity 
