
604  VIII.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  MATHEMATICS 

for  a  time-binding  class  of  life.  They  were  an  expression  of  the  neurological 
structure  and  function  and  of  the  tendency  toward  induction. 

In  the  beginning,  names  and  generalizations  were  made  from  the  simplest 
brute  facts  of  life,  and  our  primitive  ancestors  did  not  realize,  that  these  crude 
generalizations  might  not  have  a  structural  validity,  which  they  seldom  doubted 
that  they  possessed,  even  as  we  today,  seldom  doubt.  Those  primitive 
scientists,  (and  we  today  differ  very  little  from  them),  having  produced  terms , 
objectified  them,  and  began  to  speculate  about  them.  Let  us  examine  some 
examples  of  such  primitive  mathematical  speculations.  Addition,  of  course, 
by  which  we  generate  numbers , — one  and  one  make  two,  two  and  one  make 
three .  ,  was  all-important.  They  could  not  miss  the  simple  fact  that  three, 
which  is  equal  to  two  and  one,  by  definition,  is  more  than  two  or  one.  A  primi¬ 
tive  generalization;  namely,  that  the  sum  is  always  more  than  the  summands 
taken  separately,  was  still  further  generalized  to  a  postulate  that  a  part  is 
smaller  than  the  whole.  This  generalization  has  hampered  mathematics  almost 
up  to  our  own  day,  and  for  many  thousands  of  years  it  prevented  the  discovery 
of  the  notion  of  mathematical  infinity,  which  we  have  already  discussed  in 
Chapter  XIV. 

It  must  be  noticed  that  such  generalizations  involve  s.r ,  which  are  objective 
and  un-speakable.  If  verbally  formulated  they  should  have  a  structure  similar 
to  that  of  the  facts,  otherwise  they  are  fanciful  and  vicious,  because  not  properly 
formulated.  When  formulated  they  become  public  structural  facts  ( s.r  are 
personal,  individual,  non-transmittable,  and  un-speakable)  and  so  they  may  be 
criticized,  improved,  revised,  rejected  , .  All  human  history  shows  that  the 
correct  structural  formulation  of  a  problem  is  usually  as  good  as  the  solution 
of  it,  because  sooner  or  later  a  solution  always  follows  a  formulation. 

After  many  thousands  of  years — in  fact,  practically  only  the  other  day — it 
was  found  that  these  primitive  generalizations  were  in  general  not  valid. 
Negative  numbers  were  invented,  and  two  plus  minus-one  was  no  more 
three  but  one,  2  -h(  —  1)  =  L  The  sum  was  no  longer  greater  than  its  summands. 
The  usual  tragedy  takes  place  here  also.  A  few  people  know  the  facts,  but  the 
old  primitive  structural  s.r  remain  in  some  of  these  few,  as  well  as  in  the  great 
majority  of  us  who  did  not  even  know  the  facts.  That  such  structural  s.r  do 
not  vanish  quickly,  or  generally,  is  proven  again  and  again  throughout  history. 
We  see  it  very  clearly  in  the  problems  of  'infinity',  or  £  geometries,  or  pf 
physics.  But  the  most  pathetic  sight  is  to  see  scientists  who  have  rationalized 
the  technique  without  a  deeper  re-education  of  their  s.r.  This  is  most  clearly 
seen  in  the  case  of  many  writers  on  the  foundations  of  mathematics,  the  Einstein 
theory  or  on  the  newer  quantum  mechanics.  They  feel  in  the  old  structural 
way,  they  rationalize  in  the  new,  hence  their  works  are  full  of  self-contradictions. 
Readers  and  students  alike  feel  how  ‘difficult*  and  messy  the  whole  subject  is. 
As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  new  theories  are  neither  messy  nor  difficult.  They  are 
really  much  simpler  and  easier  than  the  old  theories,  provided  our  structural  s.r 
are  purged  of  the  primitive  structural  tendencies  to  which  every  one  of  us  is 
heir.  When  this  semantic  re-education  of  our  structural  feelings  is  accomplished 

ON  LINEARITY 

It  is  the  old  that  becomes  ‘unthinkable’  and  incomprehensible,  because  it  gives 
•uch  a  structural  mess. 

Something  similar  might  be  said  about  a  feeling  deep-rooted  in  all  of  us 
namely,  the  ‘plus’  feeling.  In  all  the  advances  of  science  we  struggle  against  it. 
For  instance,  the  example  of  the  green  man-made  leaf  given  previously  shows 
clearly  that  man-made  affairs  may  with  some  plausibility  be  considered  as 
‘plus’  affairs,  but  not  so  with  non-man-made  natural  leaves,  which  appear 
not  as  ‘plus’,  but  functional  affairs,  where  the  greenness  was  structurally  not 
added  but  happened,  or  became.  As  a  structural  fact,  the  world  around  us  is 
not  a  ‘plus’  affair,  and  requires  a  functional  representation.  In  chemistry,  for 
instance,  does  hydrogen  ‘plus’  oxygen  produce  water,  H2O?  If  we  mix  the 
two  gases,  two  parts  of  hydrogen  with  one  of  oxygen  we  do  not  get  water. 
We  must  first  pass  a  spark  through  the  mixture,  when  an  explosion  occurs 
and  the  result  becomes  water,  a  new  compound  quite  different  from  its  elements 
or  from  a  mere  mixture  of  them.  Does  one  gallon  of  water  and  one  gallon  of 
alcohol  make  two  gallons  of  a  mixture?  No,  it  makes  less  than  two  gallons. 
Does  light  added  to  light  make  more  light?  Not  always.  The  phenomena  of 
interference  show  clearly  that  light  ‘added’  to  light  sometimes  makes  darkness. 
Four  atoms  of  hydrogen,  of  atomic  weight  1.008,  produce,  under  proper  con¬ 
ditions,  one  atom  of  helium,  not  of  atomic  weight  4.032,  but  of  atomic  weight  4. 
The  0.032  has  somehow  mysteriously  vanished.  Such  examples  could  be  quoted 
endlessly.  They  show  unmistakably  that  structurally  this  world  is  not  a  ‘plus’ 
affair,  but  that  other  than  additive  principles  must  be  looked  for. 

The  struggle  against  this  ‘plus’  feeling  is  quite  evident,  but  often  unsuc¬ 
cessful,  in  scientific  literature.  Man  ‘is’  an  animal  ‘plus*  something.  Life  ‘is’ 
‘dead  matter’,  ‘plus’  some  ‘vitalizing  principle’, .  In  scientific  literature  we 
find  curious  expressions:  as  for  instance,  ‘It  is  impossible  to  express  the  conduct 
of  a  whole  animal  as  the  algebraic  sum  of  the  reflexes  of  its  isolated  segments’ ; 
or,  ‘The  individual  represents  heredity  plus  environment’;  or,  ‘That  the 
abstraction  does  not  merely  take  away  from  a  number  of  engrain  groups  some 
components  and  combine  the  rest  into  one  sum,  but  forms  thereby  a  new  psychic 
Structure  is  self  evident  and  is  in  no  way  peculiar  to  the  psyche.  Thus  a  clock 
work  is  as  little  the  mere  sum  of  its  little  wheels  as  a  human  being  is  the  sum 
of  his  cells  and  molecules’;  and  later  on,  ‘to  be  exact  the  ego  consists  of  the 
engrams  of  all  our  experiences  plus  the  actual  psychism’.  There  is  endless 
material  that  might  be  quoted,  but  for  our  purpose  these  few  samples  will 
suffice.  We  do  not  give  them  with  the  purpose  of  citing  authoritative  examples 
of  the  need  of  non-plus  considerations.  Far  from  it.  We  do  it  to  emphasize 
the  astounding  fact  that,  although  the  best  men  in  their  fields  have  vaguely  felt 
this  necessity,  yet  even  they  become  a  prey  to  this  very  old  structural  linguistic 
semantic  tendency.  In  all  three  cases  quoted  the  authors  were  of  the  best 
we  have.  They  have  fought  all  their  lives  against  the  ‘plus’  tendency  and 
methods;  and  yet,  if  they  succeed  in  eliminating  this  tendency  from  one  part 
of  their  subject,  they  plant  it  quite  obviously  somewhere  else.  We  see  that 

VIII.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  MATHEMATICS 

k  7“^  an  lngrain-ed  Psycho-logical  tendency  which  can  be 
remedied  only  by  a  fundamental,  A,  structural,  semantic  investigation. 

Let  us  analyse  these  quotations.  In  the  second  case,  we  hear  after  a 

he^dSU,W«  °"  ^  te"deTnCieS’  3  8tatement  that  *e  ‘individual  represents 
heredity  plus  environment'.  Is  this  statement  true?  JLet  us  take  examples 

There  are  certain  fishes  which  are  heliotropic  and  swim  toward  the  light  Pbut 
if  we  change  the  temperature  of  the  water  they  become  negatively  hefiotropic 
and  swim  away  from  the  light.  Is  this  most  complex  activhy  of  the  oi^anZ- 
^ma;Wfh0lf  a  P'^  cnvnonmenf  fact,  or  does  the  change  of  temperature  produce 
some  fundamental  functional  changes?  When,  for  instance,  a  good  mother  rat 

SfTme  m"  T  00  "  diffrnt  th°Ugh  8tiU  abundant  die‘>  -hich  is  depriS 
aL^  a  “  am°Unt  °{  speaal  vitarains-  begins  to  eat  her  litters,  Ts  this 
PUS  TfTZ  °T  “  il  3  mosf  complex  functional  change  of  the 
organism-as-a-whole?  Or  when  a  human  being,  because  he  received  in  childhood 
an  emotional'  shock  through  outside  events  (action  or  language  of  parkT 
for  instance)  develops  a  functional  disorder,  or  even  a  physiol  ailment  is  tht 
again  a  'plus  environment'  problem?  Or,  when  chickens  fed  on  eggs  iaid  by 
ens  kept  without  sunlight  or  violet  rays,  or  which  have  only  received  sunlight 
through  a  glass  window,  develop  rickets  and  soon  die,  though  they  do  not 
do  so  when  the  glass  windows  are  removed  and  the  sunlight  is  allowed  to 
operate  ra  y  upon  the  hens.  Is  this  again  a  ‘plus  environment’  example? 

t,Vk?  S  ^  t°T  make  two  ‘Smiths’,  as  far  as  theatre  or  railway 

tictets  are  concerned,  but  in  life,  under  proper  conditions,  they  form  a  famfly 

and  very  often  many  more  than  two  ‘Smiths’  come  out  of  such  ‘addition’ 

”°v:  atU  ntflhelr  IS  h  3  ^  SUm?  In  the  °f  -ventors  who  may 

have  been  influenced  by  one  or  many  men  directly  or  indirectly,  do  their  invent 

tions  produce  a  sum  of  the  work  of  as  many  men?  Surely  the  steam  engine  or 
the  dynamo  produces  more  work  than  not  only  the  inventors,  but  the  series 

inventor  “en  ^  been  ‘“Meetly  responsible  for  the  inspiration  of  the 
inventors,  could  ever  have  produced.  So  again  it  is  not  a  ‘plus’  affair. 

8  the  third  case  we  see  the  author  attacking  the  ‘plus’  tendency  on  one 

tome  ohtSngr?  ,  PlU-’  *  fCW  PagCS  further  0n’  which  ™PIi  Jat  once 
ft'1™™1  entity.  In  this  respect  it  must  be  noticed  that 
this^nddilire  tendency  represents  a  partial  and  important  structural  and 
semantic  mechanism  of  identification,  and  to  deal  successfully  with  it,  we  must 
clear  up  the  problem  connected  with  the  additive  tendency 

The  numberless  and  endless  ‘philosophical’  volumes,  for  instance  which 

torn!  iT  Wrltt!n  ab°Ut  tHe  ‘b°dy'sou1’  P^lems,  show  the  tremendous  struc- 
S  Thr™?  C  “portnnee  of  the  clearing  up  of  this  ‘plus’  versus  ^non-plus’ 

mH  l  ?  may  feCa11  that  the  A,theE,  and  the  N  systems  have  one 
underlying  structural  metaphysics.  The  E  systems  deal  with  non-linear 
equarions  and  with  curved  lines,  of  which  the  linear  equation  and  the  straight 
me.  (one  of  zero  curvature),  are  only  particular  cases.  And  the  general  theory 
of  Einstein  which  is  the  foundation  of  N  systems,  also  introduces  non-linelr 
equations.  Ought  we  to  be  surprised  to  find  that  a  ^-system  must  also  solve 

ON  LINEARITY 

this  difficult  structural  and  semantic  problem  of  linearity  versus  non-linearity, 
of  additivity  versus  non-additivity? 

Indeed  the  problems  demanding  our  attention  are  extremely  baffling  and 
difficult.  Even  in  such  a  perfected  science  as  physics,  we  have  great  difficulties 
in  using  non-linear  equations,  and  are  still  at  the  stage  where  we  solve  few 
equations  other  than  linear  ones.  To  make  any  progress  at  all  we  must  start 
with  the  simplest  available  problems  in  this  field;  namely,  mathematical 
problems.  The  main  point  at  this  stage  is  not  a  solution  of  the  problem  but  its 
formulation.  When  formulated  and  brought  to  the  attention  of  mankind, 
there  is  no  doubt  that  it  will  be  eventually  solved. 

To  better  understand  the  additive  principle,  let  us  consider  a  group  of 
elements,  the  individuals  of  which  we  denote  by  letters  tt,  b,  c,  d  , .  Let  us  take 
two  or  more  of  these  elements  and  produce  a  synthesis  which  results  in  a  third 
or  tt-th  entity.  Let  this  synthesis  be  of  such  a  nature  that  the  characteristics 
ascribed  to  the  elements  are  also  present  in  the  resultant  synthesis,  in  other 
words,  let  them  have  the  so-called  group  characteristic.  If  our  elements  are, 
for  instance,  numbers,  the  new  synthesis  is  also  a  number  and  belongs  to  the 
original  group.  We  must  notice  that  the  problem  of  order  is  important  in  the 
formulation  of  the  additive  principle.  If  a  and  b  are  the  two  elements  the 
synthesis  of  which  we  define,  we  must  be  clear  that  a  first  and  b  second,  or 
b  first  and  a  second,  must  be  recognized  in  the  synthesis.  Let  us  assume  also 
that  only  the  two  alternative  orders  a  and  b,  or  b  and  a,  are  of  importance  in 
this  case.  The  commutative  law  asserts  that  a  plus  b  is  equal  to  b  plus  o, 
a  s  b  +a,  which  means  that  the  two  possible  alternative  orders  give  equivalent 
results.  We  must  notice  that  this  does  not  mean  that  order  does  not  enter 
into  this  synthesis;  in  such  a  case  the  above  mentioned  commutative  law  would 
make  no  assertion  at  all.  It  is  of  importance  that  order  should  be  involved  in 
the  synthesis.  It  is  a  matter  of  indifference  only  as  far  as  equivalence  by  a 
commutative  law  is  concerned. 

We  should  notice  for  our  purpose  that  the  synthesis  has  the  ‘same'  charac¬ 
teristics  as  the  elements  had.  In  other  words,  if  we  know  the  characteristics 
of  the  elements  we  know  the  characteristics  of  the  result.  For  instance,  if  the 
elements  were  numbers,  the  result  will  be  a  number,  and  no  characteristic 
absent  in  the  elements  will  appear  in  the  result.  This  predictability  from  the 
characteristics  of  the  elements  to  those  of  the  result  is  perhaps  one  of  the  most 
striking  characteristics  of  additivity.  On  the  one  hand,  it  allows  us  to  foretell 
the  future;  on  the  other  hand,  it  limits  considerably  the  applicability  of  the 
additive  principle.  It  is  obvious  that  when  we  combine  elements,  and  the 
results  have  new  characteristics  absent  in  the  original  elements,  the  new 
problems  are  structurally  no  more  of  an  additive  character,  and  the  synthesis 
must  be  different. 

Only  a  few  of  the  simplest  entities  in  physics  possess  additive  character¬ 
istics.  If  we  take,  for  instance,  'weight'  or  ‘length’  or  'time',  we  see  that  these 
units  are  additive.  One  pound,  or  inch,  or  second,  if  added  respectively  to  one 
pound,  or  inch,  or  second,  gives  us  two  pounds,  or  two  inches,  or  two  seconds. 

608  VIII.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  MATHEMATICS 

Not  so,  however,  with  temperature,  or  density,  or  many  other  derived  magni¬ 
tudes,  as  we  call  them.  If  we  have  a  body  of  temperature  of  one  degree  and 
combine  it  with  another  body  of  equal  temperature  the  synthesis  will  not 
have  a  temperature  of  two  degrees,  (as  in  the  case  of  weight),  but  of  one  degree. 
This  applies  to  density , ,  two  bodies  of  density  one  each  will  not  give  us  a  body 
of  density  two,  but  of  density  one. 

Before  further  analysis  of  the  problems  of  linearity  and  additivity,  it 
will  be  well  to  consider  a  few  definitions. 

If  an  entity  u  is  changed  into  an  entity  v  by  some  process,  the  change 
may  be  regarded  as  the  result  of  an  operation  performed  upon  u,  the  operand, 
which  has  converted  it  into  v.  If  we  denote  the  operation  by/,  then  the  result 
might  be  written  as  v  =Ju.  The  symbol  of  the  operation  /  is  called  the  operator . 
We  are  familiar  with  many  such;  indeed  the  symbols  for  all  mathematical 
operations  may  be  treated  as  operators.  So  for  instance  the  symbol  V 
indicates  the  operation  of  extracting  the  square  root.  If  we  deal  with  a  range 
of  values  for  a  variable  x,  what  we  have  defined  as  the  function  symbol /(x)  may 
be  treated  as  an  operator  whose  operation  on  x  may  be  indicated  by  the 
symbol /x.  The  operation  of  differentiation  may  be  symbolized  by  D,  the  result 
of  whose  operation  on  the  variable  u,  Du  is  the  derivative  of  «.  The  sign  of 

a 

the  definite  integral  f  may  be  taken  as  indicating  an  operation  which  con- 
b 

verts  a  function  into  a  number  ,  . 

It  is  important  to  know  that  many  of  the  rules  of  algebra  and  arithmetic 
when  defined  in  this  way,  give  rise  to  a  calculus  of  operations.  The  fundamental 
notion  in  such  a  calculus  is  that  of  a  product.  If  u  is  operated  upon  by  / 
the  result  v  is  indicated  by  /#,  or  symbolically,  v  =fu.  If  v  in  turn  is  operated 
upon  by  g  the  result  w  is  indicated  by  gv,  or  symbolically,  w  =gv=gfu,  whence 
the  operation  gf  which  converts  u  directly  into  w  is  called  the  product  of  / 
and  g.  If  this  operation  is  repeated  several  times  in  succession  the  usual  notation 
of  powers  is  used,  for  instance  ff  fff  =/3, .  Not  applying  the  operator  at 
all,  which  we  would  denote  by  /°,  leaves  u  unchanged,  which  we  indicate 
symbolically  by  the  equation  f°u  ~u.  The  operator  /°  is  equivalent  to  multi¬ 
plication  by  1,  /°-l,  whence/0  may  be  called  the  idem  operator .  We  see  also 
that  the  law  of  indices  holds;  namely,  th efmXfn—fm+n, 

For  our  purpose  we  will  analyse  only  one  special  case;  namely,  where  we 
have  «,  v  and  u  -ftf  as  operands,  and  such  an  operator,  /,  that  /(«  +p)  — fu  +fv. 
Expressed  in  words,  this  means  that  the  operator  applied  to  the  sum  of  the 
two  operands  gives  a  result  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  results  of  operating  upon 
each  operand  separately.  Such  a  special  operator  is  called  a  linear ,  or  dis¬ 
tributive,  operator. 

In  terms  of  functions  we  would  have  /(x+y)  =/(x)~b/(y)  which  may  be 
called  a  functional  equation.  Lt  has  been  proved  that  such  a  functional  equation 
has  one  type  of  solutions;  namely,  when  /  is  equivalent  to  a  multiplication 
by  a  constant ,  or  fx  =  cx.  This  fact  is  of  great  importance  for  us.  Many  problems 
in  science  are  stated  in  terms  of  variation.  For  purposes  of  analysis  a  statement 

ON  LINEARITY 

that  *x  varies  as  /  is  written  y  -kx,  where  k  is  called  a  factor  of  proportionality, 
which  enables  Us  to  convert  a  statement  of  variation  into  an  equation.  If 
y  varies  inversely  as  xf  we  write  y=k(\/x)  or  y  —  k/x.  A  multiplication  by  a 
constant  thus  introduces  a  relation  of  proportionality,  hence  the  importance  of 
proportionality  in  a  world  where  constants  are  present. 

It  must  also  be  noticed  that  the  two  fundamental  operations  of  the  calculus 
are  linear  without  being  equivalent  to  multiplication  by  a  constant.  These 
are:  ‘the  derivative  of  the  sum  is  the  sum  of  the  derivatives’,  that  is, 
P(w+v)  =*Du+Dv;  and  ‘the  integral  of  the  sum  is  the  sum  of  the  integrals', 
that  is  J'(u+v)dx  =  J*ttdx+J'vdx.  But  as  the  fundamental  notion  of  the 
calculus  is  to  substitute  for  a  given  function  a  linear  function,  in  other  words, 
to  deal  with  curves  as  the  limits  of  vanishingly  small  straight  lines,  this  linearity 
underlies  structurally  all  fundamental  assumptions  of  the  calculus,  and  one 
might  say  with  Weyl  that  ‘one  here  uses  the  exceedingly  fruitful  mathematical 
device  of  making  a  problem  linear  by  reverting  to  infinitely  small  quantities’.1 

A  vector  is  defined  roughly  as  a  line-segment  which  has  a  definite  direction 
and  magnitude,  and  any  quantity  which  can  be  represented  by  such  a  segment 
is  defined  as  a  vector  quantity. 

The  addition  of  vectors  is  defined  by  the  law  of  the  parallelogram,  as  in 
the  case  of  two  forces.  It  should  be  noticed  that  because  of  this  definition  the 
sum  of  two  vectors  differs  in  general  from  the  arithmetical  sum  of  the  lengths, 
and  only  collinear,  or  parallel  vectors  obey  the  arithmetical  summation  law. 

The  introduction  by  definition  of  mathematical  entities  which  obey  dif¬ 
ferent  laws  from  the  usual  arithmetical  laws  is  an  important  structural  and 
methodological  innovation.  It  gives  us  the  useful  precedent  of  defining  our 
operations  to  suit  our  needs.  The  vector  calculus  accepted  as  the  definition  of 
the  sum  of  two  vectors  the  law  established  experimentally  in  physics  for  the 
sum  of  two  forces;  and  so  the  vector  calculus  from  the  beginning  was  struc¬ 
turally  a  particularly  useful  language  in  physics.  Only  since  Einstein  has  the 
value  and  importance  of  the  vector  calculus  for  physics  become  generally 
appreciated. 

If  we  have  two  vectors,  a  and  b,  start¬ 
ing  from  a  common  origin  O  and  complete 
the  parallelogram  as  in  Fig.  1,  then  the  di¬ 
agonal  of  the  parallelogram  will  be  the  re¬ 
quired  sum,  a+b,  by  definition .  Q 

If  we  choose  two  co-initial  vectors  of 
unit  length,  one  on  the  X  axis,  and  the  other 
on  the  Y  axis,  and  call  them  I  and  j,  we  can 
always  represent  any  vector  x  as  the  sum  of  Fig.  1 

two  vectors,  one  of  which  is  the  projection 

of  x  on  the  X  axis,  and  the  other  the  projection  of  x  on  the  Y  axis.  (See  Fig.  2.) 
Let  us  call  these  vectors  x'  and  x"  respectively.  Then  x  =x'  +  x",  by  definition. 
But  X'  differs  from  i  in  length  only,  hence  it  can  be  obtained  by  multiplying  1  by 

610  VIII.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  MATHEMATICS 

an  appropriate  number,  say  a.  Similarly,  x"  can  be  obtained  from  j  by  multi¬ 
plying  j  by  bf  and  so,  in  symbols,  x'  =ai,  x"  =b},  and  x  =ai+6j.  All  vectors 

of  the  plane  can  be  obtained  from  i  and  j  in  this 
Y  form.  The  numbers  a  and  b  are  called  com¬ 

ponents  of  x. 

Now  that  we  know  how  to  express  a  vector 
in  terms  of  its  components;  namely,  x=ai+6j, 
let  us  consider  a  vector  function /(x)  which  satis¬ 
fies  the  equation  /(x-f-y)  =/(x)  +/(y).  We  may 
take  ai  =x  and  b\  =y  and  x+y  =z  then  we  have 
/(z)  =/(x+y)  =/(ai)+/(&j).  But  since  a  and  b 
are  numbers,  we  have  /(ai)  =a/(i),  and  likewise, 
f{bj)  ~bf( j);  so  that/(z)  -a/(i)  +&/(]).  But /(l)  is  itself  a  vector  and  therefore 
expressible  in  the  form  a'i+6'j,  and,  /(j)  =ci+dj.  Hence,  /( z)  =a(a'i+6'j)-|- 
fc(d+dj)  =(aa'+&c)i+(a&'+6d)j.  In  general,  the  components  are  the  co¬ 
efficients  accompanying  i  and  j,  and  so  we  have  the  components  of  /(z)  — /(x  +y) 
in  terms  of  the  components  of  z;  and  we  see  how  the  components  of  a  vector 
are  changed  into  the  components  of  the  linear  vector  function  of  the  vector. 

In  general  terms,  a  continuous  vector  function  of  a  vector  is  said  to  be 
a  linear  vector  function  when  the  function  of  the  sum  of  any  two  vectors  is 
the  sum  of  the  functions  of  those  vectors;  that  is,  the  function  /  is  linear  if 
/( ri  +r2)  =/( ri)  +/(r2),  whence,  if  a  be  any  positive  or  negative  number  and 
if  /  be  a  linear  function  then  the  function  of  a  times  r  is  a  times  the  function 
of  r;  f(at)  ~a/(r). 

Linear  vector  operators  are  also  defined  by  a  similar  equation;  namely, 
L(a+b)  =Za-fLb. 

Let  us  recapitulate.  If  we  take  the  functional  equation  f(x+y)  =f(x)  +/(y), 
which  might  be  used  as  a  definition  of  linearity ,  and  which  is  based  on  additivity , 
and  take  x  =y  =  1,  then  we  have  /(I  +1)  =/(2)  and  also /(l)  +/(1)  -2/(1) ;  and 
so  our  original  equation  becomes  by  substitution  /(2)=2/(l).  It  is  obvious 
that  the  original  equation, /(x+y)  —f(x)  +f(y),  is  the  source  of  indefinitely  many 
such  relations  for  particular  numbers.  For  instance,  /(3)  =/(2+l)  =/(2)  4*/(l); 
but,  in  accordance  with  what  we  obtained  before,  /(2)=2/(l);  so  that 
/(3)  =2/(1)  +/(1)  =3/(1),  and  in  general,  f(x)  =x/(l).  So,  if  we  have  an  equation 
f(x+y)  =/(x)  +/(y)  for  numbers,  we  know  that  we  can  obtain  the  value  of  this 
function  for  any  x  if  we  know  it  for  1.  If  we  denote  the  function  of  1,  which 
is  a  constant ,  by  /( 1)  =k,  we  have  the  general  form  of  the  function  which 
satisfied  f(x+y)=f(x)+f(y)  expressed  by  f(x)  —kx.  In  words,  a  functional 
equation  of  the  above  type;  namely,  a  function  of  the  sum  equal  to  the  sum 
of  the  functions,  has  only  one  possible  type  of  solution;  namely,  when  /  is 
equivalent  to  a  multiplication  by  a  constant,  or ,/(x)  But  this  last  means 

proportionality.  The  values  of  the  function  are  proportional  to  the  arguments 
(variables).  In  fact,  let  us  consider  two  arguments,  that  is,  two  values  of  the 
independent  variables  x  and  y.  We  have,  as  shown  before,  f(x)=kx  and 

ON  LINEARITY 

f(y)  *=ky.  Dividing  the  first  by  the' second,  we  obtain  f(x)/f(y)  ~kx/ky  —  x/y\ 
or,  in  another  form,  f(x)/x  =f{y)/y  ~k. 

Let  us  consider  an  example.  We  know  from  elementary  geometry  that  if 
we  take  an  angle  a  and  draw  parallels  which  cut  the  sides  at  AA',  BB',  CC', 
DDr .  ,  the  corresponding  intercepts  are  propor¬ 
tional.  In  general,  the  lengths  of  the  segments  on 
the  left  side  are  not  equal,  neither  are  they  equal 
to  the  segments  on  the  right  side.  If  we  designate 
the  segment  AB  as  x  and  BC  as  y,  the  correspond¬ 
ing  segments  A'B'  and  B'C'  we  may  designate  as 
f(x)  and/(y),  respectively,  which  means  function 
of  x  and  function  of  y.  A'B' =f(x),  B'C'=f(y). 

But  the  above  intercepts  are  proportional,  which 
AB_ _B£  _  AB+BC 
A'B'~  B'C'~  A'B'+B'Cr 

means  that 

We  easily  see  from  Fig.  3,  that  AB -\-BC —AC  —  x+y;  and  A'B'  +B'C'  —  A'Cr 
and  so  A'C'  on  the  one  hand  is  f(AC)  =f(x+y)  and  on  the  other  hand  it  is 
f(x)+f(y)  and  therefore  /(x+y)  =/(x)  4-/(y).  We  could  multiply  examples  by 
taking  relations  between  central  angles  in  a  circle  and  arcs  of  its  circumference* 
In  fact,  any  problem  of  measure  in  £  geometry  could  be  used  as  an  example* 

In  our  development  we  started  with  definite  additive  natural  tendencies, 
not  only  in  our  highest,  yet  undeveloped,  mathematics,  which  we  call  our 
daily  and  scientific  language,  but  also  in  our  lowest,  but  perfected,  language 
which  we  call  mathematics.  In  this  perfected  language  the  notion  of  additivity 
is  connected  with  linearity ,  and  the  methods  of  approximation  are  also  founded 
on  additivity  and  linearity. 

Yet  the  world  around  us  in  its  more  fundamental  structural  aspects  is  not 
additive;  and  for  adjustment  we  must  find  means  of  passing  from  additive 
tendencies  and  formulations  to  non-additive  tendencies  and  formulations. 
Modern  mathematics  has  developed  these  methods,  and  modern  physics  is 
beginning  to  apply  them.  Let  us  repeat:  the  importance  of  linear  functions 
implies  the  importance  of  ‘straight’  lines.  They  are  important  on  two  counts: 
first,  because  they  are  simpler  than  all  other  curves,  so  that  naturally  we  want 
to  study  them  before  we  study  other  curves,  such  as,  for  instance,  circles  or 
the  other  conic  sections  in  elementary  geometry;  and  secondly,  because  all 
curves  can  be  approximated  by  straight  lines.  This  point  is  very  important, 
as  approximation  is  the  most  powerful  method  we  have  of  handling  com¬ 
plicated  situations. 

There  are  two  methods  of  approximating  a  curve  in  the  vicinity  of  a  point. 
If  we  are  interested  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  a  point  we  approximate  the 
curve  by  its  tangent,  as  the  tangent  approximates  the  curve  in  the  vicinity  of 
a  point  better  than  any  other  straight  line.  If  we  want  to  decrease  the  error 
which  we  make  in  this  approximation,  we  have  only  to  decrease  the  vicinity 
in  which  we  consider  it.  If  we  do  not  want  to  restrict  ourselves  to  a  small 

612  VIII.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  MATHEMATICS 

neighbourhood  we  have  to  use  more  complicated  methods  of  approximation. 
We  inscribe  into  the  curve  a  broken  line  which  consists  of  segments  of  straight 
ines.  he  beginnings  of  the  study  of  curves  consist  in  reducing  the  study  of 
curves  to;  (1)  The  study  of  straight  lines  connected  with  the  curves’  tangents 
which  is  the  point  of  departure  of  the  differential  calculus;  and  (2)  The  study 

of  the  inscribed  broken  lines,  which  is  the  point  of  departure  of  the  integral 
calculus. 

Now  curves  represent  only  the  simplest  dependences.  In  other  cases  we 
have  more  complex  kinds  of  functions;  for  instance,  vector  functions;  but  in 
every  case  we  have  linear  functions,  the  simplest  of  their  type;  and  other 
functions  are  studied  by  approximating  them  in  one  way  or  another  by  l.™>a, 
functions.  In  using  the  term  ‘function’,  we  mean  not  merely  numerical  functions 
but  also  operators,  which  are  to  the  ordinary  functions  what  ordinary  functions 
are  to  numbers.  A  general  definition  of  linearity  can  be  connected  with  that 
of  proportionality  in  the  following  manner.  If  two  variables  are  proportional 
one  to  another,  then  to  the  sum  of  any  values  of  the  first  corresponds  the  sum 
oi  the  corresponding  values  of  the  second. 

The  simplest  part  of  any  field  is  the  consideration  of  linear,  additive 
questions;  linear  equations  (equations  of  first  degree  in  algebra),  linear  dif- 
erential  equations,  linear  integral  equations,  linear  matrices,  linear  operators 
But  sooner  or  later  we  come  to  the  more  difficult  and  more  interesting  non-linear 
problems.  Perhaps  the  main  importance  of  the  General  Theory  of  Einstein 
les  in  the  fact  that  the  equations  of  physics  become  non-linear.  Now,  although 
non-linear  equations  can  be  approximated  by  linear  equations,  the  character 
of  a  world  determined  by  non-linear  equations  must  be  entirely  different  from 
a  world  determined  by  linear  equations.  In  a  linear  world  electrons  would  not 
repel  each  other  but  would  travel  independently  of  each  other,  and  there  could 
be  no  relation  between  the  charges  of  different  electrons.  But  we  know  that 
electrons  do  repel  each  other,  and  attract  protons,  and  that  their  charges  are 
equal.  In  physics,  if  a  system  can  be  described  by  linear  differential  equations, 
the  causal  trains  started  by  different  events  propagate  themselves  without 
interference ,  with  simple  addition  of  effects. 

The  properties  of  systems  which  can  be  described  by  linear  differential 
equations  have,  as  we  have  already  seen,  the  property  of  addUivity.  This  means 
that  the  result  of  the  effects  of  a  number  of  elements  is  the  sum  of  the  effects 
separately,  and  no  new  effects  will  appear  in  the  aggregate  which  were  not 
present  in  the  elements.  In  such  a  universe  there  is  ‘continuity’,  fields  are 
superposable,  wave  disturbances  are  additive,  ‘energy’  and  ‘mass’  are  inde¬ 
structible  ,  .  In  such  a  universe  we  can  have  two-valued  causality,  as  causal 
trains  started  by  different  events  propagate  themselves  without  interference , 
and  with  simple  addition  of  effects,  and  the  present  can  be  analysed  backwards 

possible^  SUm  °f  C  ementary  events’  that  is’  a  two-valued  causal  analysis  is 

If  our  equations  are  not  linear,  the  effects  are  not  additive  and  a  two- 
valued  causal  analysis  is  not  possible. 

ON  LINEARITY 

The  joint  effect  of  two  causes  working  together  is  not  the  sum  of  their 
effects  separately2,  and  we  need  oo -valued  causality. 

Analytically,  if  we  have  linear  differential  equations  and  we  have  one 
solution  yi  =/(*)  and  another  solution  y%  =  F(x)  then  their  sum  is  also  a  solution ; 
namely,  y3  =/(x)  +F(x).  If  the  differential  equations  are  non-linear  and  if 
yi=f(x)  and  y2  =  F(x)  are  two  solutions,  then  f(x)  +  F(x)  is  not  a  solution. 
