
Linear  problems  and  linear  equations  play  a  very  important  structural 
role  in  science  and  there  is  little  doubt  that  linear  equations  preponderate 
enormously,  although  many  fundamental  events  cannot  be  described  by  such 
equations.  A  universe  which  can  be  described  by  linear  differential  equations 
of  the  second  order  has  definite  structural  characteristics— in  the  main  in 
rough  accord  with  observation.  As  such  differential  equations  give  us  the 
tendency  of  a  process,  we  may  use  them  to  describe  large-scale  phenomena  by 
integration,  or  the  statistical  phenomena  of  great  numbers. 

Unfortunately,  the  study  of  non-linear  problems  is  structurally  very 
difficult  and  largely  a  problem  of  the  future. 

There  is  one  very  important  point  which  we  should  not  miss.  We  know 
already  that  there  is  a  fundamental  difference  between  different  orders  of 
abstractions.  Physical  abstractions  have  always  characteristics  left  out,  and 
our  higher  order  abstractions  are  further  removed  from  life,  but  they  have  all 
characteristics  included.  The  problem  of  sanity  being  a  problem  of  adjustment, 
we  must  somehow  correlate  these  abstractions  in  which  characteristics  are 
left  out  with  those  which  include  all  characteristics,  and  so  must  proceed  by 
approximations.  Mathematical  methods,  particularly  those  of  the  differential 
and  integral  calculus,  have  evolved  the  best  technique  of  approximation  in 
existence  today,  which,  as  we  have  seen,  is  strictly  connected  with  linearity 
or  additivity . 

A  similar  urge  which  prompted  us  in  the  expression  of  our  additive 
tendencies  and  methods  in  the  structure  of  language,  has  led  to  the  production 
of  the  calculus.  For  organisms  which  abstract  in  so  numerous  and  such  different 
orders,  the  methods  of  the  calculus  are  therefore  fundamental  psycho-logical 
devices,  conditioning  sanity. 

In  conclusion,  we  should  notice  two  quite  important  facts.  One  of  these 
is  that  the  nervous  system,  being  in  a  state  of  nervous  tension,  cannot  struc¬ 
turally  be  a  simple  additive  affair  in  all  its  functions,  a  fact  which  every  one 
of  us  has  experienced.  Too  many  stimulations  dull,  or  abolish,  or  change 
reaction  in  an  enormous  variety  of  ways.  Pieron,  as  a  result  of  experimenting 
in  association,  has  not  only  shown  the  complexity  of  these  processes,  but  also 
reaches  the  conclusion  that  the  associative  connections  are  non-linear.  ^  The 
other  most  important  point  is  that  structurally  the  term  ‘and  implies  addition. 
When  we  confuse  orders  of  abstractions  or  levels  of  analysis,  the  ‘and  additive 
implications  falsify  the  issues.  Thus  for  instance  two  atoms  of  hydrogen  and 
one  atom  of  oxygen  and  a  spark  produce  water.  The  second  ‘and’,  at  least, 
is  used  illegitimately,  as  it  applies  to  an  entirely  different  level  (the  spark) 
from  that  of  the  atoms.  Linguistically  we  introduced  additive  implications, 

614  VIII.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  MATHEMATICS 

while  empirically  we  are  dealing  with  most  complex  non-additive,  non-linear 
higher-degree  functions.  When  we  confuse  orders  of  abstractions,  as  we  all 
do,  the  ‘and’  is  bound  to  introduce  structurally  false  implications,  which  it  is 
very  difficult  to  avoid — the  more  so  since  these  semantic  problems  are  generally 
entirely  neglected. 

CHAPTER  XXXIV 

ON  GEOMETRY 

At  the  same  time  it  will  not  be  forgotten  that  the  physical  reality  of 
geometry  can  not  be  put  in  evidence  with  full  clarity  unless  there  is  an 
Abstract  theory  also.  .  .  .  Thus,  for  example,  while  the  term  electron  may 
have  more  than  one  physical  meaning,  it  is  by  no  mcanssueh  a  P™tean 
object  as  a  point  or  a  triangle,  <2S9)  Oswald  veblen 

Euclidean  space  is  simply  a  group.  (417, 

HENRI  POINCARfc 

It  is  only  in  Euclidean  “gravitationless”  geometry  that  integrability 
ht  *n  tSSD  HERMANN  WEYL 

°  The  fundamental  fact  of  Euclidean  geometry  is  that  the  square  of  the 
distance  between  two  points  is  a  quadratic  form  of  the  relative  co-ordinates 
of  the  two  points  ( Pythagoras’  Theorem).  But  tf  we  look  upon  this  law  as 
bring  stricUyvalid  only  for  the  case  when  these  two  points  are  infinitely  near , 
welmter^he  domain  of  Aiemann's  geometry .  (547,  Hermann  weyl 

parallel  displacement  of  a  vector  must  leave  unchanged  the  distance  which 
it  determines.  Thus ,  the  principle  of  transference  of  distances  or  lengths  which 
is  the  basis  of  metrical  geometry,  carries  with  it  a  p nnmpie  °f  «»"■ sf"eg?°{ 
direction;  in  other  words,  an  affine  relationship  is  Inherentinmetrical 
apace.  <s«>  Hermann  weyl 

But  before  dealing  noth  the  brain,  it  is  well  to  distinguish  a  second  char- 
acteristic  of  nervous  organization  which  renders  it  an  organization  in 
levels.  (411)  HENRY  FrfttON 

Section  A.  Introductory . 

The  main  metrical  rule  in  geometry  is  the  familiar  pythagorean  theorem. 
In  1933  this  rule  is  no  longer  considered  as  generally  valid  outside  of  the  euclid¬ 
ean  system*  as  its  proof  depends  on  the  doubtful  postulate  of  parallels.  It  is 
considered  as  an  empirical  generalization  in  which  the  relative  error  decreases 
when  the  distances  become  smaller.  Indeed  the  small  element  of  length,  ds, 
given  by  the  pythagorean  rule  is  considered  con- 
venient  and  reliable  in  our  exploration  of  the  / 

world. 

The  pythagorean  rule  states  that  in  any  right 
triangle,  ABC ,  the  square  of  the  side  opposite  the 
right  angle  (the  hypotenuse)  is  equal  to  the  sum 
of  the  squares  of  the  two  other  sides  (the  legs). 
In  symbols,  AB*  C2  +BC2.  If  we  build  squares 
on  all  three  sides  of  the  triangle  ABC  and  denote 
the  areas  of  the  squares  by  Cf,  Af,  and  B  then 
we  have  C  =Af  +5'. 

The  above  rule  is  also  the  main  metrical 
rule  for  co-ordinate  geometry,  which  gives  us 

A, 

o 

B* 

C 

pi 

Fig.  1 

the  length  of  the  line  segment  joining  any  two 

points.  Consider,  for  example,  two  points  in  two  dimensions,  Pi  and  P2,  whose 

616  VIII.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  MATHEMATICS 

co-ordinates  referred  to  a  pair  of  axes  in  the  plane  are  (#1,  yi)  and  (x2)  ^2)*  By 
drawing  the  lines  P\Q  and  P2Q  parallel  to  the  X  and  Y  axes  respectively,  a  right 
triangle  P1QP2  is  formed  whose  legs  PiQ  and  P2Q  are  equal  to  x2  —Xi  and  y2  -yi 
respectively,  whence  PiP2 ,  the  hypotenuse  of  the  right  triangle,  or  the  distance 
s  between  the  points,  is  equal  to  VPiQ2  +P2Q2,  or  $  *  V (x2  ~*i)2  -f  (yz  -  yi)2. 
If  we  pass  to  indefinitely  small  quantities  and  choose  to  deal  with  differentials 
we  have  ds2  =dx2  +dy2  where  dx  =x2—xi  and  dy -yz  —yi.  Usually  the  physicists 
treat  their  differentials  as  very  small  quantities  and  we  may  do  likewise,  although 
this  is  not  precisely  what  a  differential  represents. 

In  three  dimensions  similar  formulae  appear;  namely,  s2  =x2  +y2  +z2  for 
the  distance  of  a  point  from  the  origin  and  s  =V (x2  —  Xi)2+(y2—yi)2+(z2—  2i)2 

for  the  distance  between  two  points  Pi  (*1,  zx) 
and  P2  (x2,  y2f  z2),  and  also  ds2  =dx2  -My2  ~Mz2, 
for  the  indefinitesimally  small  distance  between 
two  points. 

In  referring  our  geometrical  entities  to  co¬ 
ordinate  axes,  or  frames  of  reference,  as  they  are 
called,  we  are  interested  in  the  properties  of  our 
geometrical  entities  and  not  in  the  accidental  char¬ 
acteristics  of  our  f  rames  of  reference,  or  the  acciden¬ 
tal  characteristics  of  the  form  of  representation  we 
are  using.  Mathematicians  discovered  long  ago 
that  the  form  of  representation  is  not  of  indiffer¬ 
ence  to  the  results  they  obtain.  Speaking  roughly 
they  have  discovered  that  in  one  form  of  representation,  they  obtained  character¬ 
istics  a,  b,  c%  d,  .  .  .  w,  n;  in  another  form,  characteristics  a ,  bt  cy  d,  .  .  .  p ,  q;  and 
in  still  another  form,  characteristics  at  bt  c,  dt  .  .  .  s,  t ,  .  In  cases  where  direct 
inspection  was  possible  they  find  by  checking  up  predicted  characteristics,  that 
such  characteristics  as  a,  bf  c,  d  in  our  example  actually  belong  to  the  subject  of 
our  analysis,  whereas  the  characteristics  m,  n,  q, ...  s,  t, ...  ,  do  not 

belong  to  our  subject  at  all,  but  vary  from  one  form  to  another  depending  on  the 
form  of  representation.  Such  facts  make  mathematicians  distinguish  between 
characteristics  which  are  intrinsic ,  which  actually  belong  to  the  subject  inde¬ 
pendently  of  the  form  of  representation;  and  those  which  are  extrinsic ,  which 
do  not  belong  to  the  subject,  but  are  accidental  and  vary  with  the  form  of 
representation  we  happen  to  use. 

If  we  mix  intrinsic  and  extrinsic  characteristics  we  have  a  structurally 
distorted  knowledge  of  our  subject.  Obviously  we  are  interested  in  methods  by 
which  these  two  types  of  characteristics  can  be  separated  and  distinguished. 

Such  methods  are  found  in  what  we  call  the  transformation  of  co-ordinates, 
which  means  the  passing  from  one  form  of  representation  to  another,  from  one 
system  of  co-ordinates  to  another  which  corresponds  to  translation  from  one 
language  to  another.  Obviously  those  characteristics  which  are  intrinsic  to  our 
subject  are  and  must  be  independent  of  the  accidental  selection  of  our  form  of 

Y 

ON  GEOMETRY 

representation,  and  therefore  should  remain  unchanged  when  we  pass  from  one 
frame  of  reference  to  another.  Any  characteristic  which  is  changed  by  such  a 
transformation  of  our  systems  of  reference  is  clearly  an  extrinsic  characteristic 
injected  by  the  form  of  representation  and  not  belonging  to  our  subject;  and  so 
the  transformation  of  co-ordinates  is  precisely  the  test  we  need  and  use. 

Let  us  take  for  instance  the  line  segment  P i P 2,  as  in  Fig.  3.  We  may  refer 
PiPt  to  a  system  0,  or  to  a  System  O'.  Obviously  the  length  of  the  line  P\Pi 
is  independent  of  the  axes  of  reference  used,  and  the  formula  for  the  length  of 
a  line  is  not  altered,  although  the  values  for  the  *’s  and  y's  are  different  m  the 
two  systems.  In  other  words,  the  sum  of  the  squares  of  the  differences  of  the 
co-ordinates  remains  invariant.  In  symbols,  _  _ 

S  -V  .(*,-*!)*+(  yt-yt?  -  v'  (*!'  -*!')* + W  -yiO*. 

Such  expressions,  however,  as  x\+x%  or 

yxyt . ,  are  not  characteristics  of  our  Y  p 

subject  but  characteristics  of  the  par-  fety-y' 

ticular  frame  of  reference  used,  and  so  / j  ' 

are  mostly  of  no  interest  to  us.  j  \ 

In  such  an  elementary  example  Y\  / *v4f  \  . 

as  given  here  we  are  directly  ac-  \  Uy'  ^  > 

quainted  with  our  entities,  and  so  \ 
we  can  inspect  them  directly  and  \.  i  > 

check  for  intrinsic  and  extrinsic  char-  \  j* 

acteristics.  But  when  we  deal  with  pL-g,  — * 

geometries  of  more  than  three  di-  \ 

mensions,  such  checking  becomes  very 

difficult,  if  at  all  possible,  and  so  new  Fig.  3 

methods  have  to  be  invented. 

If  we  wish  to  eliminate  the  unit  by  which  we  measure  our  lines,  this  can 
be  done  by  using  a  relation  called  a  ratio.  Let  us,  for  instance,  select  3  points 
A,  B,C,  and  write  the  invariant  formulae  for  the  distance  AB  and  AC  in  the 
form  Vte.-x1)i+(yi-yi)2  and  V  (x.-«i),+(ys-yi)2 

V  (xi-*i)2+(ys-yi)2 

then  the  ratio  P  —  ,  ,  ,  ,2 

v  (xj— *i)2+(ys— yi) 

is  independent  of  our  unit  of  measurement.  If,  for  instance,  this  ratio  R  -1.  we 
conclude  that  AB  =AC,  a  characteristic  which  belongs  to  our  lines  and  which 
is  independent  not  only  of  our  system  of  reference  but  also  of  the  unit  which  we  have 

US  A  great  step  forward  in  the  formulation  of  methods  which  lead  to  invariant 
and  intrinsic  formulations  was  made  in  the  invention  of  what  is  called  the  vector 
calculus  and  its  extension  in  the  modern  tensor  calculus.  A  few  explanations  o 

this  principle  will  be  of  interest. 

A  vector  is  roughly  a  directed  segment  of  a  straight  line  on  which  we  dis¬ 
tinguish  the  initial  and  the  terminal  points.  A  vector  has  thus  magnitude  and 
direction.  In  practice  we  deal  with  two  kinds  of  entities;  some  are  purely 

618  VIII.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  MATHEMATICS 

numerical,  establishing  a  specific,  mostly  asymmetrical,  relation  and  have  no 
direction,  as  for  instance,  mass,  density,  temperature,  energy,  electrical  charge, 
population,  mortality  , .  These  quantities  which  do  not  involve  direction  are 
called  scalar  quantities. 

Such  quantities  as  velocity,  acceleration,  electric  current,  stresses,  flow  of 
heat  or  fluids  .  ,  which  involve  not  only  magnitude  but  also  a  definite  direction, 
are  called  vector  quantities,  and  have  given  rise  to  a  special  calculus  called  the 
vector  calculus. 

The  invention  of  the  vector  calculus  was  a  most  revolutionary  and  bene¬ 
ficial  structural  and  methodological  step.  It  was  originated  independently  by 
Hamilton  and  Grassmann.  The  benefits  of  this  method  are  manifold,  but  we 
are  interested  mainly  in  but  two  of  them.  The  first  is  that  vector  equations 
are  simpler  and  fewer  in  number  than  co-ordinate  equations.  The  second,  and 
most  important,  is  that  the  language  of  vectors  is  independent  of  choice  of  axes, 
and  of  frames  of  reference.  It  is  naturally  invariant  for  any  transformations  of 
axes.  If  axes  are  needed  we  can  easily  and  simply  introduce  them,  but  we  al¬ 
ways  have  means  to  discriminate  between  intrinsic  and  extrinsic  characteristics. 
The  modern  tensor  calculus  which  made  the  general  theory  of  Einstein  possible 
is  simply  an  extension  of  the  vector  calculus. 

The  above  methodological  and  structural  remarks  are  of  fundamental 
semantic  importance  to  us  in  all  our  affairs.  Human  life  and  affairs  are  never 
free  from  linguistic  issues.  Their  role  is  similar  to  that  of  mathematics,  that  is 
to  say,  a  form  of  representation  gives  us  not  only  the  characteristics  which  are 
intrinsic  in  our  subject,  but  also  introduces  extrinsic  characteristics  which  do 
not  belong  to  the  subject  of  our  analysis  but  are  due  to  the  particular  language 
we  use  and  its  structure .  The  analysis  of  these  linguistic  issues  is  much  belated 
and  extremely  difficult  because  of  the  structural  complexity  of  our  language. 
These  issues  were  discovered  first  in  mathematics  because  of  its  clear-cut  struc¬ 
tural  simplicity ;  and  it  is  important  that  we  should  be  aware  of  such  new  and 
unexpected  fundamental  semantic  problems.  We  will  not  enlarge  upon  this 
phase  of  the  problem  here,  except  to  mention  that  the  whole  of  the  present 
work,  which  uses  a  different  language,  of  a  different  structure ,  already  shows 
the  usefulness  of  the  new  method.  Sometimes  we  discover  new  characteristics, 
and  sometimes  we  are  led  to  emphasize  characteristics  which  are  known  but 
have  not  yet  been  sufficiently  analysed. 

To  carry  our  linguistic  analogy  further,  we  may  take,  for  instance,  the 
statement,  ‘knowledge  is  useful’.  We  could  translate  this  statement  into  any 
other  language  and  it  would  preserve  its  meaning.  But  if  we  make  the  state¬ 
ment,  ‘knowledge  is  a  word  which  has  six  consonants  and  three  vowels',  such  a 
statement  may  be  false  when  translated  into  another  language.  Mathematics, 
being  a  language,  has  difficulties  similar  to  ordinary  language,  but  in  mathemat¬ 
ics  it  is  often  much  more  difficult  to  separate  from  other  statements  those  which 
are  purely  about  the  language  used.  The  so-called  tensor  calculus  attempts  to 
perform  this  last  task. 

ON  GEOMETRY 

The  tensor  calculus  is  an  extension  of  the  vector  calculus,  which  has  be¬ 
come  famous  since  Einstein.  It  gives  us  formulations  independent  of  any  special 
frame  of  reference.  In  using  it  we  are  automatically  prevented  from  ascribing 
to  the  events  around  us  characteristics  which  do  not  belong  to  them.  The 
tensor  equations  give  us  absolute  formulations,  absolute  being  understood  as 
relative,  no  matter  to  what.  Obviously  the  only  language  fit  to  express  the 
'laws  of  nature*  should  be  independent  of  the  particular  point  of  view  or  lan¬ 
guage  of  some  observer.  It  should  give  us  formulations  invariant  for  any  and 
all  systems  of  reference,  although  we  might  use  preferred  systems  of  reference, 
as,  for  instance,  the  principal  axes  of  an  ellipse,  without  any  danger.  The 
reader  should  not  miss  the  point  that  such  an  ideal  should  be  considered  as  the 
highest  ideal  in  science.  It  is  the  mathematical  species  of  a  theory  of  ‘universal 
agreement*.  The  above  sounds  simple  and  innocent;  but,  when  actually  applied, 
plays  havoc  with  most  of  our  old  ‘universal  laws’.  These  laws  do  not  survive 
this  important  and  uniquely  valid  test,  and  so  become  mere  local  gossip  instead 
of  being  the  ‘universal  laws’  that  they  claim  to  be.  We  will  return  to  the  struc¬ 
tural  problem  of  invariant  formulations  later.  At  present  we  must  explain  some 
other  simple  considerations. 

On  any  surface  we  need  two  numbers  or  ‘co-ordinates  to  specify  the  posi¬ 
tion  of  a  point,  and  so  a  surface  is  called  a  two-dimensional  manifold.  Points 
in  three-dimensional  manifolds  require  three  numbers;  points  in  four-dimensional 
manifolds  four  numbers;  and  similarly  for  any  number  of  dimensions. 

For  our  purpose,  it  is  enough  to  speak  in  two  dimensions,  as  our  statements 
can  easily  be  generalized  to  any  number  of  dimensions.  If  we  want  to  localize 
a  point  on  a  surface  it  is  enough  to  divide  the  surface  into  meshes  by  any  two 
line-systems  which  cross  each  other.  By  labeling  the  lines  of  each  system  with 
consecutive  numbers,  two  numbers,  one  from  each  system,  will  specify  a  par¬ 
ticular  mesh.  If  the  meshes  are  small  enough  we  will  be  able  to  locate  any 
point  accurately. 

These  specifying  labels  or  numbers  require  that  we  know  what  kind  of 
mesh  we  are  using.  Distances  between  points  are  independent  of  mesh  systems. 

For  the  above  reasons  it  is  important  to  have  more  data  about  the  mesh 
system  we  are  using,  which  means  that  we  have  formulae  which  express  the 
distance  between  two  points,  which  is  independent  of  the  mesh  systems,  in 
terms  of  the  mesh  system. 

We  have  already  seen,  in  our  study  of  the  differential  calculus,  that,  as  a 
rule,  it  is  simpler  to  deal  with  very  short  distances,  and  that  it  is  easy  to  pass 
to  larger  distances  by  the  process  of  integration.  As  yet  we  have  used  only 
plane  rectangular  systems  of  meshes  in  our  illustrations,  but  this  restriction  is 
not  necessary.  If  we  use  oblique  co-ordinates  (Fig.  4),  the  formula  for  the  ele¬ 
mental  distance  is  ds2  =dxi2~2kdxidxi+dx22t  where  'k  =  cosine  of  the  angle 
between  the  lines  of  partition. 

The  polar  co-ordinates  (Fig.  5)  of  the  point  P  are  the  distance  r=OP,  of 
the  point  from  the  origin  0,  and  the  angle,  6  =  ZXOP,  between  the  line  OP 

620  VIII.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  MATHEMATICS 

and  the  axis  OX.  The  formula  for  the  elemental  distance  in  polar  co-ordinates 

is  ds 2  -dr2  +r2d82. 

Fig.  6  shows  the  co-ordinates  frequently  used  by  geographers;  namely, 
geographic  longitude  and  latitude,  where  the  distance  ds 2  =d£2+cos2/SdA2. 

Fig.  4 

Fig,  5 

It  should  be  noticed  that  these  formulae  for  different  systems  of  co-ordinates 
are  different.  To  make  it  still  more  obvious  to  ocular  inspection,  we  will  tabulate 
them  in  one  lettering,  thus: 

ds 2  *  dx i2  +dx 22  for  rectangular  systems 

ds 2  —  dx i2  +x\2dx22  for  polar  systems 

ds2  —  dx i2  2kdx\dxi  -\-dx 22  for  oblique  systems 

ds2  =dx i2  +cos2xidx22  for  latitude  and  longitude  systems.1 

It  must  be  noticed  that  the  values  for  the  variables  are  not  equal  in  these 
different  equations.  It  is  not  necessary  for  the  reader  to  know  in  detail  how 
these  formulae  are  obtained,  but  it  is  necessary  to  see  that  they  are  different , 
that  they  have  different  structure.  The  numbers  of  different  co-ordinate  systems 
we  can  use  are  infinite,  but  in  practice  we  use  only  a  few  well-known  types. 
There  are  also  definite  and  simple  formulae  for  passing  from  one  system  of 
co-ordinates  to  another. 

We  should  not  assume  that  in  practice  we  always  know  what  system  of 
co-ordinates  we  are  employing.  For  instance,  before  we  learned  that  our  earth 
is  'round',  we  did  not  know  whether  in  our  measurements  we  were  employing 
the  flat  co-ordinates  of  a  plane  or  spherical  co-ordinates.  We  made  some 
measurements  and  then  we  had  to  discover  what  kind  of  formulae  would  fit 
these  measurements. 

To  find  out  what  kind  of  co-ordinate  system  we  are  using,  we  select  two 
points,  let  us  say  ( X\ ,  ^2)  and  (#i  +dxf  xz  +dx)  very  close  together,  make  our 
measurements  of  dst  and  then  test  our  ds  to  find  which  formula  it  fits.  If  we 
find  for  instance  that  our  ds2  is  always  equal  to  dx i2  ~\~dx^  we  may  assume  for 
simplicity  and  our  purpose  that  our  co-ordinate  system  is  plane  and  rectangular. 

If  our  measurements  fit  any  of  the  first  three  formulae  (1),  we  may  assume 
for  simplicity  and  our  purpose,  that  we  are  dealing  with  a  plane  surface,  as 
each  of  these  systems  belongs  to  the  plane.  But  if  we  find  that  the  actual 
measurements  of  ds2  are  such  that  they  never  fit  these  first  three  formulae, 
but  only  the  fourth  one,  we  know,  that  our  surface  is  not  plane  but  curved 

ON  GEOMETRY 

like  a  sphere.  Try  as  we  may,  we  Bhall  be  unable  to  build  on  a  plane  any 
co-ordinate  system  which  will  fit  the  last  formula.  Thus  we  arrive  at  >ni»- 
portant  conclusion;  namely,  that  from  measurements  we  have  a  structural  hint 
M  to  the  kind  of  world  we  are  in. 

Section  B.  On  the  notion  of  the  ‘Internal  Theory  of  Surfaced. 

Let  us  imagine  some  two-dimensional  beings  confined  to  their  surface 
and  unable  to  have  a  look  at  that  surface  from  our  third  dimension.  For  them 
our  third  dimension  would  be  ‘unthinkable’,  and  therefore  the  surface  of  a 
sphere  like  our  earth  which  is  curved  in  the  third  dimension  would  also  be 
‘unthinkable’  or  ‘beyond  them’.  Should  they  conduct  some  measurements  m 
their  ‘world’  and  find  that  these  measurements  did  not  fit  any  of  the  first  three 
formulae  but  only  the  fourth,  they  would  have  to  reconstruct  radically  their 
'world  conception'  and  conclude  that  their  world  was  a  spherical  surface.  Our 
own  situation  does  not  differ  radically  from  the  situation  of  the  inhabitants 
of  this  hypothetical  two-dimensional  world. 

If  we  find  ourselves  so  restricted  as  not  to  know  whether  we  are  finally 
dealing  with  a  flat  or  spherical  surface,  we  can  select  a  point  0  and  with  a 
definite  radius  R  describe  from  this  point  a  circle  ABC.  Then  we  can  measure 
the  circumference  of  this  circle.  Now  we  know  from  geometry  that  m  the  plane 
the  circumference  of  the  circle  L  =  2tR 

where  R  is  the  radius  of  the  circle  and  0 _ 

r  *=3.1415  ...  If  our  surface  is  flat  ~ 

(ABCD)>  our  measurement  of  L  and  R 
will  satisfy  the  relation  expressed  in 

the  formula.  But  if  the  surface  is  rr  t  . -^C 

curved,  our  R  —  OA  will  be  larger  than  ^  ^ 

K  =AO',  and  we  shall  find  that  our  x 

is  not  3.1415  .  .  .  ,  but  smaller.  We  ^ - -- — 

see  once  more  that  the  metrical  proper -  Yig  7 

ties  of  our  world  throw  some  light' on  its 
structural  character. 

We  should  notice  also  that  the  curvature  of  a  two- 
dimensional  surface  is  in  the  third  dimension  and  that 
it  is  the  means  of  giving  us  data  about  the  surface 
without  our  leaving  the  surface  and  going  into  a  third 
dimension.  It  is  easy  to  convince  oneself  about  these 
facts  by  taking  12  wires  or  strings  of  equal  length  and 
constructing  the  figure  shown  in  Fig.  8.  If  we  build 
it  on  a  flat  surface  the  12  equal  wires  will  fit  exactly. 

But  if  we  try  this  experiment  on  a  curved  surface,  for  Fig.  8 

instance  on  a  pillow-,  or  saddle-shaped  surface,  the 

last  closing  wire  will  not  fit,  and  will  be  too  short  or  too  long  depending  on  the 
kind  of  surfaces  we  have. 

Fig.  8 

622  VIII.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  MATHEMATICS 

The  formulae  (1)  have  been  generalized  to 

ds2  =gudxi2  +2glidxldxi  +g«dr j*  (2) 

for  two  dimensions  and  to 

ds2  =  gudxi2  +gt2dxi2  +gz*dxi2  +g4*d*42  +2gudx1dxi 
-\-2g\tflxidxi  -{-Igudxidxt  +  2gttdx2dxt  -\-2gudx2dx4  +  2g%  idxgdx^  ' 

for  four  dimensions.  It  is  easy  to  see  that  ds2  -dxi2  +dxz2  is  obtained  from  (2)  by 
taking  gn  -1;  gi2  ~0  and  g2j  =  1.  This  applies  to  formula  (3)  opt  of  which  we 
can  have  any  of  the  other  formulae  by  equating  some  of  the  g’s  to  zeros,  or  to 
one  or  to  other  values.  Formula  (3)  is  called  ‘the  generalized  pythagorean  rule1, 
of  which  the  ordinary  form  as  given  previously  is  only  a  particular  case.  We 
see,  by  comparing  the  formulae  (1)  with  (2)  and  (3),  that  these  g’s  are  not 
equal  for  different  systems  of  co-ordinates,  and  that  they  are  factors  in  measure- 
determination  which  represent  the  geometry  of  the  surface  considered.  It  is 
customary  to  write  the  above  formulae  in  an  abbreviated  form:  thus, 
=  22  2 gmndxmdXn,  where  we  give  to  tn  and  n  the  values  1,  2,  3,  4,  or, 
(m,  n  *  1,  2,  3,  4)  and  where  the  symbol  22  means  summation. 

We  will  now  explain  briefly  the  above  generalizations  and  the  meaning 
of  the  g’s  given  in  the  expressions. 

In  the  beginning  of  the  nineteenth  century  the  mathematician  Gauss 
formulated  the  internal  theory  of  surfaces  without  reference  to  the  plenum  in 
