which  they  are  embedded.  This  theory  perhaps  is  and  will  remain  a  model  on 
which  all  theories  should  be  built.  He  introduced  also  a  new  kind  of  co-ordinates 
which  have  become  of  paramount  importance,  and  which  since  Einstein  are 
called  gaussian  co-ordinates.  Gauss  investigated  the  theory  of  surfaces,  which 
are  in  general  curved,  embedded  in  three-dimensional  ‘space’.  In  1854  the 
great  mathematician  Riemann  generalized  the  two-dimensional  gaussian  theory 
to  a  continuous  manifold  of  any  number  of  dimensions.  Historically,  both 
Gauss  and  Riemann  can  be  considered  as  the  precursors  of  Einstein. 

Let  us  imagine  a  surveyor  to  have  the  task  of  mapping  a  thickly  wooded 
hilly  region.  Because  of  the  conditions  of  his  work,  he  can  not  use  optical 
instruments,  and  he  has  no  ‘straight  lines’  to  deal  with.  So  euclidean  geometry 
will,  in  general,  not  be  applicable  to  the  region  as  a  whole.  It  can  be  assumed, 
however,  that  euclidean  geometry  may  be  applied  to  very  small  regions  which 

can  be  considered  flat.  What  we  know  already 
about  the  differential  and  integral  calculus  shows 
us  that  such  approximations,  when  taken  on  a 
very  small  scale,  are  perfectly  reliable  and  jus¬ 
tifiable. 

The  surveyor  would  lay  out  on  his  ground  a 
network  of  smoothly  curving  lines,  in  two  fami¬ 
lies,  an  X  family  and  a  Y  family.  (Fig.  9.)  All 
the  curves  of  the  X  family  would  intersect  all 
the  curves  of  the  Y  family  but  no  X  curve 
would  intersect  another  X  curve,  nor  a  Y  curve 
another  Y  curve. 

ON  GEOMETRY 

Let  us  take  the  surveyor’s  network  and  label  the  curves  by  consecutive 
numbers  in  each  family.  The  essential  point  is  that  these  numbers,  (let  us  call 
them  the  X  and  Y  numbers)  do  not  represent  either  lengths,  or  angles  or  other 
measurable  quantities,  but  are  simply  labels  for  the  curves,  much  as  when 
we  label  streets  by  numbers. 

But  such  numbering  does  not  lead  us  far.  We  must  introduce  some  measure 
relations .  We  have  at  our  disposal  a  measuring  chain  and  the  arbitrary  meshes 
of  the  network  which  we  have  introduced.  The  next  step  is  to  measure  the 
small  meshes  one  after  another  and  plot  them  on  our  map.  When  this  is  done 
we  have  a  complete  map  similar  in  structure  to  our  region.  Because  of  the 
smallness  of  the  meshes  we  can  consider  them  as  small  parallelograms,  and 
such  parallelograms  can  be  defined  by  the  lengths  of  two  adjacent  sides  and 
one  angle. 

We  may,  however,  proceed  differently,  as  shown  on  Fig.  10. 

Let  us  select  one  mesh,  for  instance  the  one  bounded  by  the  curves,  3  and  4, 
and  by  the  curves  7  and  8,  Let  us  consider  a  point  P  within  the  mesh,  and 
let  us  denote  its  distance  from  the  point  O  (x  =3,  y  =  7)  by  This  distance 
could  be  directly  measured.  Let  us  draw  from  the 
point  P  parallels  to  our  mesh  lines  and  label  the 
intersections  with  mesh  lines  by  A  and  B,  respec¬ 
tively.  Let  us  also  draw  PC  perpendicular  to  the 
x  axis. 

The  points  A  and  B  then  also  have  numbers 
or  labels  or  gaussian  co-ordinates  in  our  network. 

The  co-ordinate  of  A  may  be  determined  by 
measuring  the  side  of  the  parallelogram  on  which 
A  lies  and  the  distance  of  A  from  O.  We  can  *gJ 
regard  the  relation  called  the  ratio  of  these  two  Fig.  10 

lengths  as  the  increase  of  the  x  co-ordinate  of  .  . 

A  towards  O.  We  shall  denote  this  increase  itself  by  choosing  0  as  the  origin 
of  the  gaussian  co-ordinates.  Similarly,  we  determine  the  gaussian  co-ordinate 
of  y  of  B  as  the  ratio  in  which  B  cuts  the  corresponding  side.  We  see  that 
these  two  ratios ,  which  for  brevity  we  call  x  and  y,  are  the  co-ordinates  of 

our  point  P.  ,  ,  f  .  . 

As  x  and  y  are  ratios  they  of  course  do  not  give  us  the  lengths  of  OA  and 
OB  but  the  lengths  are  given,  for  example,  by  ax,  and  by,  where  a  and  b  are 
definite  numbers,  to  be  found  by  further  measurements.  If  we  move  the  point 
P  about,  its  gaussian  co-ordinates  change  but  the  numbers  a  and  b  which  give 
the  ratio  of  the  gaussian  co-ordinates  to  the  true  lengths  remain  unchanged . 

We  find  the  length,  s ,  which  is  the  distance  of  the  point  P  from  0 ,  from 
the  right  triangle  OPC  by  the  pythagorean  rule:  s2  =  0P2  =OC*+CP*.  But 
OC-OA+AC  and  therefore  by  substituting  and  squaring  we  have 
s2  ssA02+20A‘AC-hAC2+CP2.  From  the  right  triangle  APC  we  have 
A&+CP*  =AP2,  whence  substituting  again  we  have  s2  =0A2+20A'AC^-APi. 
But  OA  =ax,  AP=OB  «&y,  and  as  AC  is  the  projection  of  AP=by,  it  also  has 

624  VIII.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  MATHEMATICS 

a  faced  ratio  to  it,  whence  we  may  put  AC~cy,  and  so  we  obtain  the  important 
ormula  s -a  x  +2  acxy  +b*y2,  in  which  a,  b,  c  are  ratios  given  by  fixed  numbers. 
Usually  this  formula  is  represented  differently,  a 2  is  designated  by  gn,  ac  by  gn 
and  b  by  fa;  whence  our  formula  becomes  2gllXy+gIiy*  in  which 

the  numbers  1 1, 12  and  22  are  simply  ordering  labels  without  quantitative  values 
mere  subscripts,  labels,  indices  .  ,  which  indicate  that  the  different  g's  have 

different  values.  We  see  that  the  above  formula  is  the  one  which  was  given 
previously  by  (2).  5 

The  g’s  with  different  labels  serve  just  as  sides  or  angles  for  the  determina¬ 
tion  of  the  actual  sizes  of  the  parallelograms  and  we  call  them  the  factors  of 
the  measure  determination.  They  may  have  different  values  from  mesh  to 
mesh,  but  if  they  are  known  for  every  mesh,  then,  by  the  last  formula  the 
true  distance  of  an  arbitrary  point  P,  within  an  arbitrary  mesh  from  the  origin 
can  be  calculated.2 

The  procedure  by  which  we  can  locate  any  point  on  the  surface  is  simple. 
If  our  point  P  is  between  the  two  curves  #=3  and  *=4  we  can  draw  nine 
curves  between  these  two  curves  and  label  them  3,1;  3,2;  .  .  .  ;  3  9  If  P  now 
lies  between  curves  3,1  and  3,2  we  can  draw  nine  curves  between  these  two 
curves  and  label  them  3,11;  3,12;.  .  .  j  3,19  ,  .  We  could  do  similarly  with  the 
y  curves  and  in  this  way  we  would  succeed  in  assigning  to  any  point  as  accurate 
a  pair  of  numerical  labels  as  we  pleased,  and  so  finally  have  the  gaussian 
co-ordinates  of  any  point.  We  used  nine  curves  simply  to  get  the  very  con¬ 
venient  decimal  method  of  labeling.  The  cartesian  co-ordinate  systems  which 
we  use  in  plane  geometry  obviously  represent  only  special  cases  of  gaussian 
systems. 

As  we  have  already  seen,  our  g's  are  ratios,  and  so  represent  numbers.  Such 
numbers  may  be  regarded  as  tensors  of  zero  rank  for  convenience  of  the  mathe¬ 
matical  treatment;  and  the  quantities  g„,  gxv,  g„,  may  be  treated  as  com¬ 
ponents  of  a  tensor.  Since  this  tensor  determines  the  measure  relations  in  any 
particular  region,  it  is  called  the  metric  fundamental  tensor.  Its  value  must  be 
given  for  the  region  in  which  we  want  to  make  our  calculations.  It  determines 
the  full  geometry  of  the  surface  in  a  given  region;  and,  conversely,  we  can 
a  so  determine  the  fundamental  tensor  in  a  given  region  from  measurements 
made  m  that  regmn,  without  any  previous  knowledge  of  how  our  curved  sur¬ 
face  is  embedded  m  ‘space’  at  the  place  in  question.  The  fundamental  tensor 
in  general  varies  continuously  from  place  to  place,  and  so  every  geometric 
manifold  may  be  regarded  as  the  field  of  its  metric  fundamental  tensor. 

Purely  mathematical  investigations  show  that  the  fundamental  tensor 
defines  a  number  called  the  ‘Riemann  scalar’,  which  is  completely  independent 
of  the  co-ordinate  system  and  leads  to  the  definition  of  the  curvature  tensor, 
which  can  be  connected  with  the  ‘matter  tensor’.3 

The  main  importance  of  the  introduction  of  such  arbitrary  curves  is  to 
produce  formulae  for  the  surfaces  which  remain  unaltered  for  a  change  of  the 
gaussian  co-ordinates— in  other  words,  which  remain  invariant.  This  was 
achieved  by  the  introduction  of  the  relations  called  ratios  which  are  pure 

ON  GEOMETRY 

numbers,  and  so  the  geometry  of  surfaces  becomes  a  theory  of  invariants  of 
a  very  general  type. 

On  curved  surfaces  there  are  in  general  no  straight  lines— there  are 
shortest  lines ,  which  are  called  ‘geodetic  lines’.  To  find  them,  we  divide  any 
arbitrary  lines  joining  two  points  into  small  elements,  which  we  measure,  and 
select  the  line  for  which  the  sum  of  these  elements  is  less  than  for  any  other 
line  between  the  two  points.*  Analytically  we  can  calculate  them,  when  the 
gfs  are  given,  by  the  aid  of  the  generalized  pythagorean  theorem.  The  geodetic 
lines,  and  also  the  curvature,  are  given  by  invariant  formulae,  which  represent 
intrinsic  characteristics  of  the  surface,  independent  of  any  co-ordinates.  All 
higher  invariants  are  obtained  from  these  invariants.4 

We  shall  not  attempt  to  give  an  explanation  of  the  tensor  calculus,  as  at 
present  there  is  no  elementary  means  of  presenting  a  brief  explanation;  short 
of  a  small  volume— at  least  the  writer  does  not  know  of  any.5 

The  name  ‘tensor’  originally  came  from  the  Latin  word  tendere-  to  stretch, 
whence  tensio  *  tension.  Nowadays,  however,  it  is  used  in  a  more  general  way; 
namely,  to  express  the  relation  of  one  vector  to  another,  and  not  necessarily 
to  imply  stress  or  tension.  As  an  example,  we  can  give  the  representation  for 
stresses  occurring  in  elastic  bodies,  which  originally  led  to  the  name.8 

As  we  have  already  seen,  when  we  deal  with  relations  of  vectors  our 
expressions  become  additionally  independent  of  units.  Such  equations,  inde¬ 
pendent  of  the  measure  code,  are  called  tensor  equations.7 

As  we  are  interested  in  equations  which  are  invariant  under  arbitrary 
transformations,  certain  functions,  called  tensors,  are  defined,  with  respect  to 
any  system  of  co-ordinates  by  a  number  of  functions  of  these  co-ordinates, 
called  the  components  of  the  tensor,  from  which  we  can  calculate  them  for  any 
new  system  of  co-ordinates.  If  two  tensors  of  one  kind  are  equal  in  one  system, 
they  will  be  equal  in  any  other  system.  If  the  components  vanish  in  one  system, 
they  vanish  in  all  systems.  Such  equations  express  conditions  which  are 
independent  of  the  choice  of  co-ordinates.  By  the  study  of  structural  laws  of 
the  formation  of  tensors  we  acquire  means  of  formulating  structural  laws  of 
nature  in  generally  invariant  forms.  Obviously,  such  methods  and  language 
are  uniquely  appropriate  for  physics  and  the  formulations  of  the  laws  of  nature. 
If  a  law  cannot  be  formulated  in  some  such  form,  there  must  be  something 
wrong  with  the  formulation  and  it  needs  revision. 

The  tensor  calculus  is  also  peculiarly  fitted  to  describe  processes  in  a  plenum. 
We  do  not  use  it  to  describe  the  metrical  conditions  but  to  describe  the  field 
which  expresses  the  physical  states  in  a  metrical  plenum. 

Eddington  gives  an  excellent  example  of  the  fact  that  it  is  definitely 
necessary  to  look  into  the  way  we  build  up  our  formulae  (structure)  and  the 
method  of  handling  them. 

*M  ore^ generally ,  the  geodetic  represents  a  track  of  minimum  or  maximum 
interval-length  between  two  distant  events,  either  of  them  being  umque  (one- 
valued)  in  a  given  case. 

626  VIII.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  MATHEMATICS 

The  problem  is  to  determine  whether  a  particular  kind  of  space-time  is 
possible.  We  must  investigate  the  different  g's  which  give  us  different  kinds 
of  space-time,  and  not  those  which  distinguish  different  kinds  of  mesh  systems 
in  one  space-time.  This  means  that  our  formulae  must  not  be  altered  in  any 
way  if  we  change  the  mesh  system. 

The  above  condition  makes  an  extraordinarily  simple  test  of  laws  that 
have  been  or  may  be  suggested.  Among  others,  Newton’s  law  is  swept  away. 
How  this  happens  can  be  shown  in  two  dimensions. 

If  in  one  mesh  system  (x,y)  we  have  ds2  =  gudx2+2glidxdy+g22dy2,  and  in 
another  system  (x  ,y  )  ds2  dx'2  -f-  dx' dy'  -j-gw'dy'2,  one  law  must  be 

satisfied  if  the  unaccented  letters  are  replaced  by  accented  letters.  Let  us 
suppose  that  the  law  gn  is  assumed.  We  change  the  mesh  system,  for 
instance,  by  spacing  the  y  lines  twice  as  far  apart,  that  is,  we  take  /  =y/2  and 
keep  x’-x.  Then  ds2=gndx2  +2gi*lxdy+gt2dy2  =gudx'2  +igl2dx’dy'  +4g22dy’2. 
We  see  that  £n'  =«n  and  gsj'-4gsl.  Whence  if  gu  is  taken  equal  to 
cannot  be  equal  to  £22'- 

A  few  examples  would  convince  us  that  it  is  extremely  easy  to  change  a 
formula  entirely  by  the  mere  change  of  mesh  systems.  It  seems  unnecessary 
to  emphasize  the  fact  that  'universal  laws',  to  be  ‘universal',  should  not  depend 
structurally  to  such  an  extent  on  the  accidental  and,  after  all,  unimportant 
choice  of  reference  systems.8  ' 

To  remedy  such  a  state  of  affairs,  impossible  in  mature  science,  the  tensor 
calculus  was  invented.  The  whole  general  theory  of  Einstein  seems  to  demand 
that  the  equations  of  physics  should  ultimately  be  expressed  in  tensor  forms; 
in  other  words,  that  ‘universal  laws'  should  cease  to  be  ‘local  gossip’;  a  demand 
which  must  be  granted,  and  on  this  point  the  Einstein  theory  is  beyond  criticism 
and  is  an  epochal  methodological  advance  of  an  irreversible  structural  lin¬ 
guistic  character. 

In  dealing  with  co-ordinate  systems  we  have 
heretofore  used  them  to  represent  only  ‘spatial' 
entities,  spreads  of  different  dimensions.  It  is 
desirable  to  become  acquainted  with  a  different 
use  of  co-ordinates,  in  which  one  of  them  will 
represent  ‘time’.  The  last  use  is  just  as  simple 
as  the  former,  but  the  graphs  which  we  obtain 
are  different. 

Let  us  take  the  simplest  example,  of  a  point 
P  moving  uniformly  along  a  straight  line  OX 
with  the  velocity  of  one  inch  per  second.  We 
could  represent  its  movement  in  one  dimension, 
as  in  Fig.  11,  and  say  that  our  point  P  is  at  Px 
after  one  second  (/  =  1),  at  Pa  after  two  seconds 
(/=*=  2)  .  ;  at  the  point  P„  after  n  seconds  (/=«). 

Section  C.  Space-time . 
ft?  3  5. 

Fio.-n. 

ON  GEOMETRY 

But  we  could  also  represent  this  movement  in  a  different  way.  We  could 
choose  two  mutually  perpendicular  axes  OX  and  OT  as  in  Fig.  12,  OX  repre¬ 
senting  the  ‘spatial*  actual  direction  of  the  movement  and  OT,  which  we  have 
heretofore  used  to  represent  a  second  ‘spatial*  co-ordinate,  now  representing 

the  ‘time*  co-ordinate.  . 

We  would  lay  off  on  the  X  axis  our  inches,  1,  2,  3, . . .  n,  and  on  the  T  axis 
our  seconds  1,  2,  3, .  . .  n.  In  our  two-dimensional  space-time  our  point  P  would 
be  at  the  point  O  (x  -0,  t  -0).  After  one  second  it  would  be  at  the  point  Pi 
(x  =  1,  t  —  1),  after  two  seconds  at  the  point  P2  (x  =  2f  t=2)  .  ;  after  n  seconds 
at  the  point  P„  (x=n,  t  =  n).  We  see  that  the  position  of  our  point  P  in  two- 
dimensional  space-time  would  be  represented  by  a  series  of  points  each  given 
by  two  data:  one  ‘spatial’,  the  other  a  corresponding  ‘time*.  If  the  intervals 
are  taken  indefinitely  small,  in  the  limit  our  ‘ moving ’  point  would  be  represented^ 
by  a  static  line  inclined  to  the  X  axis .  We  could  then  speak  either  of  our  ‘moving* 
point,  or  else  not  use  the  term  ‘moving’  but  speak  of  infinitely  many  static 
points ,  each  given  by  two  numbers,  one  representing  a  distance,  the  other 
‘time’.  Our  ‘moving*  point  would  become  a  static  world-line .  The  reader  should 
notice  that  in  this  case  we  have  structurally  changed  our  language  from  dynamic 
to  static,  and  raised  the  dimension.  Our  mathematical  ‘moving*  ‘point ,  which 
had  no  dimension  in  our  one-dimensional  ‘space’,  is  in  our  two-dimensional 
space-time  represented  by  a  static  one-dimensional  line. 

In  this  example  we  had  uniform 
translation.  We  did  not  introduce 
acceleration.  The  distances  were  pro¬ 
portional  to  the  ‘times’,  hence  our  line 
was  ‘straight*  and  inclined  to  the  X 
axis  at  a  constant  angle. 

Using  such  space-time  representa¬ 
tion  we  see  that  a  point  when  it  is  not 
‘moving’,  but  is  stationary,  is  repre¬ 
sented  by  a  line  parallel  to  the  ‘time 
axis  T ,  as  shown  at  A  on  Fig.  13.  Our 
point  A  is  getting  older,  so  to  speak,  but 
does  not  ‘move’.  In  the  next  case,  the  point  B  does  not  ‘move’  until  it  is  some 
seconds  old,  when  at  B'  it  begins  to  ‘move’  with  constant  velocity.  Point  C 
‘moves’  in  the  beginning  at  one  constant  velocity  until  Cf  where  it  acquires  a 
certain  different  velocity  and  the  direction  changes. 

In  Fig.  13,  D  represents  a  point  experiencing  a  series  of  sudden  changes 
of  velocities.  The  graph  is  a  succession  of  short  straight  lines  forming  a  broken 
line  or  open  polygon.  As  the  changes  of  velocity  occur  more  and  more  frequently 
the  sides  of  our  polygon  become  smaller  and  smaller;  and  in  the  limit,  as  the 
changes  of  velocity  become  continuous,  our  broken  line  becomes  a  smooth 

curve  E .  , 

Motion  with  continuously  changing  velocity  is  called  accelerated  or 

retarded  motion.  The  rate  of  change  of  velocity  is  called  acceleration  and  is 

Fig.  13 

628  VIII.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  MATHEMATICS 

represented  by  the  second  derivative  of  the  distance  with  respect  to  the  ‘time’- 

symbolically,  A  =dv /dt  =  d2s /dt%. 

It  is  important  to  notice  that  in  space-time  an  accelerated  motion  is  repre¬ 
sented  by  a  curved  line.  In  uniform  (constant  velocity)  motion  the  distances 
are  proportional  to  the  'times',  and  the  line  is  straight  and  its  equation  is  of 
the  first  degree.  In  accelerated  motion  the  distances  are  not  proportional  to 
the  'times',  the  lines  are  curved  and  the  'time'  element  dt  enters  in  the  second 
degree  at  least;  namely,  as  dt 2. 

For  example,  let  us  study  the  graph  of  the  motion  represented  by  the 
equation  x=At2/2  which  means  that  the  distance  x  is  proportional  to  the 

Let  OX  (Fig.  14)  be  the  'spatial'  axis, 
and  OT  the  'temporal'  axis.  We  lay  off 
on  our  T  axis  equally-spaced  points,  repre¬ 
senting  the  seconds  1,  2,  3,  4  .  ,  and  calcu¬ 
late  the  distances  x  for  each  of  these  values 
from  the  equation  x=At2/2  where  A 
represents  a  constant  acceleration. 

Let  us  assume  that  the  constant  ac¬ 
celeration  A  is  given  as  4  metres  per 
second  per  second.  The  equation  x^M1/! 
becomes  x~2 1\  Corresponding  to  the  values  f=0,  1,  2,  3,  4  .  ,  we  have  the 
values  x  -0,  2,  8,  18,  32  ,  .  If  we  plot  these  points,  and  assume  that  the  change 
is  continuous,  we  may  join  the  points  by  a  continuous  curve,  which  represents 
the  motion  of  the  point  as  a  curved  world-line. 

Similarly,  in  three-dimensional  space- time,  a  point  moving  uniformly  in 
the  plane  XY  would  be  represented  in  the  plane  XY  by  the  line  AB ,  and  in 
three-dimensional  space-time  by  the  static  line  AB\  where  the  'times’  are 

As  we  have  already  seen,  non-recti- 
linear  motion  may  be  considered  as  accel¬ 
erated  motion.  We  will  generalize  the 
above  to  the  case  where  any  curved  path 
is  traversed  with  constant  velocity.  In  this 
case  the  direction  of  the  velocity  is  changed. 
If  we  take  the  motion  of  a  point  which 
describes  a  circular  orbit  with  constant 
velocity,  it  is  easy  to  find  its  acceleration, 
which  is  called  in  this  case  centripetal 
acceleration. 

.  .  Let  us  consider  a  point  P,  moving  in 

a  circular  orbit  with  a  constant  velocity  v,  as  given  in  Fig.  16.  If  at  a  certain 
time’  it  is  at  At  after  a  short  interval  t,  it  will  be  at  B.  The  direction  of  the 
velocity  will  be  changed  from  AAf  to  BB'. 

proportional  to  the  distance. 

square  ol  the  ‘time  . 
T 

ON  GEOMETRY 

If  we  construct  the  triangle  DCE  by  drawing  CD  parallel  and  equal  to 
AA't  and  CE  parallel  and  equal  to  BB',  we  see  that  the  angle  ZDCE  is  equal 
to  the  angle  ZA'A"B'  because  the  sides  are  parallel,  and  it  is  also  equal  to  the 
angle  ZAOB  whose  sides  are  perpendicular  to  A  A'  and  BB'.  The  triangles 
ABO  and  CDE  are  similar  be¬ 
cause  they  are  isosceles  and 
the  angles  between  the  equal 
sides  are  equal.  Clearly  the 
side  DE~w,  represents  the 
supplementary  velocity  which 
transforms  A  A'  into  BB'.  We 
know  that  in  similar  triangles 
the  sides  are  proportional  so 
we  can  write  DE/  CD  —AB/  OA . 

By  inspection  of  our  figures  we 
seethatZXE  —w;  CD  —  v;OA  —r, 
the  radius  of  the  circle.  The 
chord  AB  may  be  taken  as  the 
arc  AB  of  the  circle,  provided 
the  ‘time’-interval  is  taken  sufficiently  small.  Let  us  write  chord  AB  =s.  We 
have  w/v  -s/r  or  w  =sv/r.  If  we  divide  both  sides  of  our  equation  by  t  we  have 
w/t-sv/tr .  But  w/t=A,  the  acceleration,  and  s/t  =v  hence  A  =v2/ r.  In  words, 
the  centripetal  acceleration  is  equal  to  the  square  of  the  velocity  in  the  circle 

divided  by  the  radius.  . 

The  above  formula  is  of  structural  importance  because  it  is  the  foundation 
for  the  empirical  proof  of  Newton’s  law  of  gravitation.  For  our  purpose  it  is 
important  for  other  reasons,  to  be  stated  later. 

There  are  two  more  diagrams  which  should  be  considered,  in  this  connec¬ 
tion.  Fig.  17  represents  the  plane  circular  motion  of  a  point  P  whose  orbit  in 
the  plane  XY  is  the  circle  PAB.  In  three-dimen¬ 
sional  space-time  the  plane  circular  orbit  of  J  - - 

motion  would  be  represented  by  the  static  '  s - 

cylindrical  helix  (or  screw-line)  with  axis  parallel 
to  the  ‘time’  axis  T .  (Fig.  17.)  We  should  note 

that  the  motion  is  dynamically  circular  in  the  XY  *  y 

plane,  yet  a  three-dimensional  space-time  repre-  / 

sentation  gives  us  a  stationary  helix.  /  _  ; 

Similarly  for  vibrational  movements  which  / 

could  be  represented  in  one  dimension  by  to-and-fro  /  a 

movements  on  the  X  axis  from  A  to  B  and  from  B  to  / 

A .  (Fig.  18.)  If  we  introduce  our  space-time  form  of  J L - - >  X 

representation  by  introducing  the  T  axis,  our  vibra-  Fic.  17 

tional  world-line  would  be  represented  structurally 

by  a  wave-line  along  the  T  axis.  In  particular,  if  the  vibrational  motion  is  simply 
harmonic,  a  proper  choice  of  the  ‘time’  unit  makes  the  wave-line  a  sine  curve.9 

630  VIII.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  MATHEMATICS 

Becoming  thoroughly  familiar  with  these  few 
simple  examples  takes  away  a  great  deal  of 
mystery  from  the  Minkowski-Einstein  and  the 
new  quantum  world.  We  see  that  after  all  there 
is  nothing  extraordinary  in  the  fact  that  in 
languages  of  different  structures  we  get  different 
x  forms  of  representations  and  pictures,  and  that 
in  a  world  where  accelerations  abound  we  may 
very  profitably  use  the  term  ‘curved’. 

When  we  come  to  speak  about  the  Einstein 
theory,  the  four-dimensional  space- time  world  of 
Minkowski,  and  the  new  quantum  mechanics, 
we  shall  have  considerable  use  for  these  few 
notions  and  illustrations. 

Section  D.  The  application  of  geometrical  notions  to  cerebral  localisation. 

In  the  present  work  we  are  dealing  in  the  main  with  structure  and  the 
justment  of  the  structure  of  our  languages  to  empirical  structures,  and  at 
is  point  it  will  be  of  use  to  suggest  some  of  the  consequences  which  follow 
from  what  has  been  said. 

The  question  of  cerebral  localization  is  a  difficult  and  vital  problem.  In 
tonner  days  it  was  supposed  that  the  brain  had  individualized  centres  with 
stnctly  defined  functions.  Attempts  were  made  to  ascribe  to  definite  cerebral 
parte  definite  functions  such  as  ‘memory’,  ‘intelligence’,  ‘morality’,  ‘talents’ 
in  the  meantime,  experimental  facte  disproved  such  structural  views,  and  as  a 
reaction  another  tendency  appeared;  namely,  to  deny  any  localization. 

Modern  researches  show  unmistakably  that  both  of  these  extreme  ten¬ 
dencies  are  at  variance  with  experimental  structural  facte.  It  appears  that  the 
lower  centres  play  a  more  important  role  according  as  the  terminal,  or  higher 
centres,  are  less  developed  and  that  there  is  considerable  variability,  at  least  in 
man,  not  only  from  the  morphological  and  histological  aspects  but  also  from 
e  functional  aspect.  It  was  found  impossible  to  generalize  from  the  particular 
development  of  centralization  and  functional  distribution  in  one  species  to  the 
distribution  in  another  species.  Localization  may  vary  even  in  one  individual 
under  different  circumstances.10  Metabolism,  and  slight  disturbances  in  the 
functioning  of  a  neuron,  were  also  found  to  have  a  most  far-reaching  influence, 
shown  in  its  relations  to  other  groups  of  neurons.  The  problems  of  localization 
are  far  too  complex  to  attempt  even  an  account  of  them,  the  more  so  since  the 
rea  er  will  find  excellent  accounts  of  them  in  the  large  literature  on  the  subject. 

e  general  conclusion  reached  by  practically  all  investigators  is  that  some 
localization  of  nervous  function  does  exist,  yet  it  has  a  certain  variability  which 
depends  on  an  enormous  number  of  factors. 

The  methods  explained  in  this  chapter  will  enable  us  to  suggest  a  method 
by  which  we  can  orient  ourselves  in  the  bewildering  complexity  of  the  function¬ 
ing  of  the  nervous  system. 

ON  GEOMETRY 

One  of  the  main  difficulties  is  that  the  structure  of  this  world  is  such,  that 
it  is  made  up  of  absolute  individuals,  each  with  unique  relationship  toward 
environment  (in  the  broadest  sense) ;  and  we  have  to  speak  about  it  in  terms  of 
generalities.  ‘Laws’  .  ,  formulated  in  the  old  two-valued  ways ,  can  never  account 
adequately  for  the  facts  at  hand,  being  only  approximations.  The  mathematical 
methods  which  have  already  been  explained  give  us  at  once  a  great  advantage. 
We  have  seen  that  if  we  have  a  function,  y  =/(*),  let  us  say,  and  take  the  graph 
of  this  function,  to  every  point  of  the  graph  there  corresponds  a  pair  of  values 
