X  and  y.  We  have  seen  also  that  each  of  the  four  quadrants  I,  II,  HI,  IV  has 
a  characteristic  pair  of  signs.  In  quadrant 
I,  both  x  and  y  are  positive;  in  II,  x  is 
negative  and  y  positive;  in  III,  both  x and 
y  are  negative;  and  finally,  in  IV,  x  is  posi¬ 
tive  and  y  negative.  We  can  easily  see  that 
the  value  of  the  variables  may  be  thought 
of  as  variable  conditions  different  for  each 
individual,  and  that  definite  localizations 
correspond  to  them.  In  our  example  we 
had  to  do  with  a  function  of  one  inde¬ 
pendent  variable,  and  we  had  a  one¬ 
dimensional  line,  curved  in  two  dimen¬ 
sions.  When  we  had  a  function  of  two 
independent  variables  we  had  a  surface, 

which  in  general  was  curved  in  a  third  ,  .  , 

dimension.  By  analogy  we  may  pass  to  any  number  of  dimensions,  where  by 
dimension  we  do  not  mean  anything  mysterious,  but  roug  y  t  e  num  er  o 

variables  involved  in  the  problem.  , 

We  see  that  if  we  think  of  the  activity  of  the  nervous  system  in  terms  of  a 
mathematical  function  with  an  enormous  number  of  variables,  we  shall  not 
only  have  place  for  the  uniqueness  of  each  individual,  determined  by  the  va  ue 
of  the  variables  and  the  character  of  the  function,  but  that  this  would  a  so 
imply  a  localization ,  which  is  permanent  in  a  given  individual  at  a  given  time  ; 
which  again  implies  the  totality  of  ‘circumstances’  ,  .  Our  function  would  be 

Y 

N  =}{x  1,  X2,  *3,  .  .  *  *»)•  f  _  .  . ..  (  .. 

In  fact  it  is  hard  to  see  how  it  is  possible  to  analyse  the  activities  of  the 

nervous  system  in  any  other  way.  The  facts  are,  that  every  organism  is  an 
individual,  distinct  and  different  from  others,  and  so  we  must  have  means  to 
take  this  individuality  into  account.  Different  values  for  different  variables 
take  care  of  this  point.  Similarities  are  accounted  for  by  the  general  structural 
character  of  the  functions.  For  instance,  any  quadratic  equation  with  two  un¬ 
knowns  gives  us  a  conic  section.  An  equation  of  the  type  y2  =ax  represents  a 
parabola,  the  graph  of  any  equation  of  the  form  xy  =a  represents  a  hyperbola  ,  . 
For  every  definite  set  of  values  of  our  variables  the  implied  localization  is  also 
definite,  which  corresponds  to  the  fact  that  in  a  given  individual  at  a  given 
'time’  .  ,  the  localization  is  definite.  One  value  for  the  whole  function  can  be 

632  VIII.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  MATHEMATICS 

reached  by  giving  different  sets  of  values  to  the  different  variables.  For  in¬ 
stance,  in  the  function  z=*5x-2y-~  1,  if  x  =  l  and  y- 1,  then  s=  2;  but  we  can 
have  s  — 2  by  taking  x-2  and  y  —  3.5.  Or  if  one  of  the  conditions  be  non-ex¬ 
istent,  which  means  that  the  value  of  one  of  our  variables  is  zero,  for  instance, 
x  =0,  we  still  could  have  the  value  z  -2  by  taking  y  =  —  l.S.  This  fact  accounts 
for  the  many-to-one  correspondences  of  causal  factors,  typified,  for  instance, 
by  sunshine  or  cod  liver  oil  producing  a  similar  effect. 

It  should  be  understood  that  in  what  is  said  here,  the  numerical  values  do 
not  matter.  In  most  of  the  cases  we  are  not  advanced  enough  to  be  able  to 
deal  with  such  numerical  values.  What  is  to  be  emphasized  is  the  structure  of 
the  language  we  use.  The  method  should  enable  us,  instead  of  dealing  with 
generalizations  in  the  old  language,  which  somewhere  have  to  be  contradicted, 
to  use  a  language  of  mathematical  structure  which  shall  account  for  the  facts 
and  leave  room  for  the  great  individual  varieties  of  organisms  in  structure  and 
function. 

After  all,  we  should  not  be  surprised  that  the  theory  of  functions  and 
language  of  functions  is  structurally  appropriate  in  expressing,  and  so  in  under¬ 
standing,  the  functioning  of  the  nervous  system,  or  any  other  system.  Per¬ 
sonally  I  have  benefitted  greatly  through  this  method;  and  many  baffling 
structural  complexities  have  been  much  simplified. 

Structurally,  when  we  use  the  language  of  functions,  variables .  ,  we 
automatically  introduce  extensional  structure,  as  already  explained,  and  we 
have  at  our  disposal  methods  of  translation  of  different  orders  of  abstractions — 
dynamic  into  static,  and  vice  versa — which  is  a  neurological  structural  necessity 
for  being  rational  and  sane.  And  surely  science  should  try  to  be  rational.  It 
should  be  stressed  again  that  in  our  problem  numerical  values  matter  very 
little,  but  structure  and  method,  for  the  many  reasons  already  explained,  are 
of  paramount  importance.  Perhaps  even  the  value  of  numbers  is  due  mainly 
to  the  structural  fact  that  it  has  forced  upon  us  extensional  and  relational 
methods.  It  is  the  only  language  which  is  in  accordance  with  the  structure  and 
functioning  of  the  nervous  system,  and  so  helps  to  co-ordinate  these  activities 
instead  of  disorganizing  them. 

That  these  simple  structural  dependences  have  been  discovered  so  late  is 
really  astonishing.  The  only  explanation  I  can  give  of  this  is  that  we  have  been 
so  engrossed  in  generalizing  and  generalizations  that  we  lost  sight  of  the  fact 
that  in  life  we  deal  structurally  with  absolute  individuals ,  and  that  the  only 
language  which  preserves  the  extensional  structural  individuality  for  its  elements 
is  found  in  mathematics — specifically,  in  numbers. 

It  may  be  that  a  study  of  mathematical  structure  and  the  psycho-logics  of 
mathematics  will  give  results  of  unparalleled  human  values,  particularly  for 
our  sanity.  The  problems  of  sanity  are  problems  of  adjustment,  and  no  means 
of  adjustment  should  be  disregarded.  It  may  also  be  that  the  main  importance 
of  mathematics  will  be  found  some  day  to  be  more  in  the  mathematical  methods 
and  structure  which  it  has  originated,  methods  forced  upon  the  mathematician 

ON  GEOMETRY 

by  the  relational  character  of  the  entities  he  has  to  deal  with,  than  in  the  pos¬ 
sible  combinations  of  these  entities  themselves. 

At  any  rate,  we  must  sadly  admit  that  the  problems  of  mathematical 
methods  and  structure  and  the  psycho-logical  values  of  mathematics  have  so 
far  received  very  little  attention,  since  we  have  failed  to  realize  their  human 
Importance.  In  the  future  this  problem  will  be  further,  and  thoroughly,  in¬ 
vestigated. 

PART  IX 

ON  THE  SIMILARITY  OF  EMPIRICAL 
AND  VERBAL  STRUCTURES 

The  theory  of  relativity  has  resulted  from  a  combination  of  the  three 
elements  which  were  called  for  in  a  reconstruction  of  physics:  first,  delicate 
experiment:  secondly,  logical  analysis;  and  thirdly,  epistemological  con¬ 
siderations.  (457)  bertrand  russell 

The  essence  of  Einstein’s  generalization  is  its  final  disentanglement  of 
that  part  of  any  physical  event  which  is  contributed  by  the  observer  from 
that  which  is  inherent  in  the  nature  of  things  and  independent  of  all  ob- 

E.  T.  BELL 

Even  Leibniz  formulated  the  postulate  of  continuity,  of  infinitely  near 
action,  as  a  general  principle,  and  could  not,  for  this  reason,  become  recon¬ 
ciled  to  Newton’s  Law  of  Gravitation,  which  entails  action  at  a  distance 
and  which  corresponds  fully  to  that  of  Coulomb.  (547)  Hermann  weyl 

This  limitation  to  what  is  directly  observable  is  ultimately  based  on 
Mach’s  philosophy  and,  directly  inspired  by  Mach,  led  three  decades  ago 
to  the  propagation  of  the  so-called  theory  of  "Energetics,  which  sought 
to  recognise  only  quantities  of  energy  as  physically  given  and  observable 
quantities.  (481)  A*  sommerfeld 

CHAPTER  XXXV 

ACTION  BY  CONTACT 

The  difficulty  involved  is  that  the  proper  and  adequate  means  of  describ- 
ing  changes  in  continuous  deformable  bodies  is  the  method  of  dtfferenHal 
equations .  .  .  .  They  express  mathematically  the  physical  conception  of 
contiguous  action.  (45)  MAX  B0RN 

The  analysis  of  ‘matter’,  ‘space’,  and  ‘time’  from  the  point  of  view  of 
structure  and  of  orders  of  abstractions  has  led  us  to  far-reaching  conclusions. 
Let  us  summarize  the  semantic  results,  and  consider  some  of  the  immediate 
consequences. 

We  may  begin  by  recalling  the  difference  between  the  lower  order  and 
higher  order  abstractions.  The  lower  order  abstractions  are  given  to  us  by  the 
lower  nerve  centres.  They  are  ‘dynamic’,  ‘continuous’,  non-permanent,  shifting, 
unreliable,  and  above  all  un-speakable. 

They  have  a  character  of  immediacy,  because,  structurally  in  terms  of 
order,  they  are  closest  to  outside  events.  They  come  first  in  order  in  the  func¬ 
tioning  of  the  nervous  system.  We  always  associate  with  them  some  ‘objectivity’ 
as,  by  necessity,  the  eventual  definition  o f  an  ‘object’  starts  at  this  level. 

It  should  be  emphasized  over  and  over  again  that,  speaking  correctly, 
on  this  level  we  cannot  define  anything,  since  abstractions  on  this  level  are 
fundamentally  un-speakable .  We  may  look,  listen,  handle,  feel .  ,  but  cannot 
speak  and  therefore  cannot  define.  The  moment  we  define  our  objects,  we 
are  no  longer  on  the  level  of  lower  order  abstractions.  By  neurological  structural 
necessity  we  have  passed  to  the  higher  nerve  centres  (speech),  and  higher 
order  abstractions.  This  is  what  is  meant  when  we  say  that  this  lower  level 
is  unspeakable . 

Because  these  lower  order  abstractions  are  closer  to  the  outside  events, 
and  because  they  come  first  in  order ,  they  have  a  special  character  of  immediacy, 
with  which  we  must  start.  The  struggle  begins  when,  through  some  primitive- 
made  doctrines  or  structural  assumptions  (metaphysics),  we  try  to  avoid  going 
any  further  than  these  lower  order  abstractions.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  this  is  an 
impossibility,  because  of  the  very  structure  of  our  nervous  system.  However 
intensely  we  believe  that  it  is  possible  to  do  so,  and  however  ‘emotionally’  we 
attempt  to  do  it,  we  are  cherishing  delusions,  which  easily  become  morbid 
identifications,  delusions,  illusions,  and  often  hallucinations. 

This  level  being  unspeakable ,  the  only  way  to  function  on  this  level  is 
to  look,  listen  .,  but  to  be  silent  outwardly  as  well  as  inwardly.  This  last 
condition  represents  a  most  beneficial  semantic  state,  really  difficult,  perhaps 
impossible,  to  acquire  without  training. 

The  higher  order  abstractions  appear  to  be  products  of  the  activity  of 
the  higher  nerve  centres,  further  removed  from  the  external  events  and  lacking, 
therefore,  in  immediacy.  But  these  higher  abstractions  are  static  and  so  may 

638  IX.  ON  EMPIRICAL  AND  VERBAL  STRUCTURES 

be  analysed.  They  have  a  separable  unit  ‘quantum*  structure,  which  can  be 
treated  individually.  It  should  be  carefully  noticed  that  the  static  character 
of  these  higher  order  abstractions  is  the  origin  of  their  separable  quantum 
character,  conditioned  by  the  human  nervous  structure.  They  are,  if  properly 
treated,  reliable  and  are  uniquely  responsible  for  our  being  time-binders. 

Again,  by  the  structural  necessity  of  our  nervous  system,  we  deal  first 
with  lower  order  abstractions,  and  next  with  higher  order  abstractions.  It 
must  be  noticed  that  no  one ,  unless  he  is  (pathologically)  entirely  deprived  of 
the  higher  nerve  centres,  is,  or  can  be,  an  exception.  We  all  deal  with  lower 
abstractions  first,  and  with  the  higher  next,  no  matter  how  perfect  or  imperfect 
these  abstractions  may  be. 

The  general  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions,  the  lack  of  theories,  and 
therefore  of  structural  understanding  of  the  entirely  different  characters  of 
these  distinct  orders  of  abstractions,  leads  to,  and  must  result  in,  identification 
or  confusion  of  orders  of  abstractions.  As  the  different  processes  are  going  on, 
whether  we  will  it  or  not,  in  every  single  one  of  us,  they  may  result  in  the 
delusional  ascribing  of  the  characteristics  of  the  higher  order  abstractions  to 
the  lower  order  abstractions,  as  for  instance,  permanence,  immutability . , 
somewhere  involving  ‘infinities*.  When  objectified,  we  have  such  semantic 
disturbances  as  fanaticism,  absolutism,  dogmatism,  finalism  .  ,  which  often 
become  morbid  semantic  states. 

A  similar  confusion  may  lead  to  the  delusional  ascribing  of  the  charac¬ 
teristics  of  the  lower  order  abstractions  to  the  higher  ones.  Under  such  delusions 
we  ascribe  to  the  higher  abstractions  fluidity,  shiftiness,  non-permanence, 
‘non-knowability*.  ,  which  results  in  pessimism,  cynicism,  disregard  for  science, 
bitterness,  fright,  hopelessness  and  other  equally  vicious  semantic  disturbances. 
These  in  turn  affect  by  structural  necessity  the  proper  working  of  the  entire 
organism,  which  always  works  as-a-whole. 

The  A  -system  and  other  older  systems  were  not  only  built  before  these 
facts  became  structurally  known  but  were  actually  based  on  such  confusion. 
Hence  their  viciousness.  By  building  a  language  and  a  method  of  this  nature 
they  perpetuated  and  made  effective  mechanically  through  the  structure  of 
language,  a  harmful  confusion.  This  language  being  not  in  accordance  with 
the  structure  and  functioning  of  the  nervous  system  and  the  world,  must 
produce  pathological  results  somewhere. 

We  have  already  seen  that  the  use  of  the  ‘is*  of  identity  is  unconditionally 
delusional.  Naturally,  attitudes  (affective,  lower  order  abstractions)  which 
can  assert,  (higher  order  abstractions)  that  so  and  so  on  objective  levels  ‘is’ 
so  and  so,  must  lead  to  pathological  results.  In  science  this  is  a  profoundly 
unsatisfactory  state  of  affairs  and  needs  structural  revision. 

Mathematicians,  though  in  the  main  unconscious  or  innocent  of  the 
structural,  semantic,  and  neurological  issues  involved,  nevertheless  have  solved 
this  problem  by  producing  methods  of  passing  from  one  order  of  abstractions 
to  another,  from  dynamic  to  static,  and  vice  versa.  The  influence  of  these  dis¬ 
coveries  has  also  affected  the  other  sciences  unconsciously .  Without  consciously 

ACTION  BY  CONTACT 

^cognizing  it,  the  modern  trend  of  science  is  to  banish  from  its  habits  and 
methods  the  application  of  the  ‘is’  of  identity.  . 

So  in  science  we  have  to  use  an  actional,  ‘behaviouristic’,  ‘functional , 
‘operational’  language,  in  which  we  do  not  say  that  this  and  this  ‘is’  so  and  so, 
but  where  we  describe  extensionally  what  happens  in  certain  order .  We  describe 
how  something  behaves ,  what  something  does ,  what  we  do  in  our  research  work  ,  . 

If  one  asks,  for  instance,  what  is  ‘length’,  what  is  ‘space’,  what  is  ‘time’,  what 
is  ‘matter’.  ,  the  only  correct  answer  would  be,  ‘As  you  asked  the  question 
verbally,  and  I  answer  it  verbally ,  the  above  terms  remain  terms ,  which  beside 
structure,  have  no  connection  whatsoever  with  the  external  world\  Yet 
undoubtedly  we  are  interested  in  this  external  world  and  we  should  like  to 
use  a  language  which  would  help  us  in  understanding  this  world  better.  What 
shall  we  do?  It  seems  that  if  we  produce  a  language  which  is  similar  in  structure , 
to  the  external  world,  somehow,  as  a  map  or  picture  is  similar  in  structure 
to  the  region  it  pictures,  we  should  have  a  uniquely  appropriate  language. 
How  can  we  do  it?  It  is  quite  simple  the  moment  we  discover  the  principle. 
First  of  all,  abandon  completely  the  A  ‘is’  of  identity,  and,  instead,  describe 
ordered  happenings  in  an  actional  and  functional  language.  Such  a  language 
shares  with  the  external  world  at  least  the  multi-dimensional  order  of  happen¬ 
ings,  and  it  gives  us  a  solution. 

It  is  easy  to  see  that  arguments  (verbal)  about  ‘matter’,  ‘space’,  ‘time’.  , 
will  never  become  anything  else  than  verbal.  All  uses  of  the  ‘is’  of  identity, 
must  lead  to  delusional  evaluation.  The  situation  is  radically  changed  when 
we  use  an  actional  or  functional  language,  when  we  describe  what  a  physicist 
does  when  he  finds  his  ‘length’  or  ‘second’  or  any  other  entity  he  is  interested  in. 

We  should  notice  here  that  the  above  procedure  involves  extremely  far- 
reaching  structural  and  semantic  consequences.  First  of  all,  we  abandon  the 
vicious  use  of  the  ‘is’  of  identity,  and  eliminate  the  semantic  disturbance  called 
identification.  We  introduce  automatically  the  full  psycho-logical  working 
mechanism  of  order ,  extensional  methods  and  discrimination  between  the  orders 
of  abstractions.  We  introduce  the  four-dimensional  and  differential  methods, 
we  build  up  static  units,  ‘quanta’,  and  so  introduce  measurement  and  its 
language  called  mathematics,  which  leads  to  structure  and  so  to  knowledge 
at  each  date. 

It  will  be  useful  to  recall  why  mathematics  and  measurements  are  somehow 
so  important  in  our  lives.  Our  nervous  system,  as  we  have  seen,  exhibits  dif¬ 
ferent  activities  on  different  levels.  On  one  level  the  abstractions  are  shifting, 
non-permanent;  on  the  other  static  and  permanent  in  principle.  This  is  expressed 
in  our  lives  in  a  longing  for  some  permanency,  some  security,  some  ‘absolutes’. 
Mathematics  formulated  this  tendency  first  and  with  full  success.  Mathematics 
has  not  only  formulated  full  and  successful  theories  of  ‘change’,  as,  for  instance, 
the  theory  of  functions  and  the  different  calculi,  but  also  full-fledged  and 
remarkable  theories  of  invariance  under  transformations.  These  new  theories 
of  invariance  are  actually  absolute  formulations  in  the  only  sense  in  which  the 

640  IX.  ON  EMPIRICAL  AND  VERBAL  STRUCTURES 

te^‘fbS?1Ute’  ,haS  a  meaning:  name,y-  relative,  no  matter  to  what;  all  of 
which  leads  to  the  only  content  of  knowledge — structure. 

The  whole  Einstein  theory  should,  in  this  sense,  be  called  the  ‘theory  of 
the  absolute  ,  and  can  be  expressed  as  the  simple  demand  that  ‘universal  laws’ 
should  be  formulated  m  an  invariant  form,  a  most  revolutionary  demand  and 
yet  so  structurally  natural  that  no  one  can  deny  it. 

When  we  mathematize  or  speak  about  potential  or  actual  measurements 
we  are  dealing  with  ordered,  extension al,  actional,  behaviouristic,  functional  and 
operational  entities,  and  so  we  build  up  a  language  which  at  least  has  a  similar 
structure  to  the  external  events.  Numbers  imply  units,  quanta,  but  also  order. 
It  seems  that  number  is  the  only  abstraction  upon  which  we  all  must  agree 
We  never  doubt  that  a  statement,  such  as  that  ‘I  have  in  my  pocket  five  pennies’, 
may  be  perfectly  definite  and  ascertainable  for  all.  The  specific  and  unique 
relations  called  numbers  seems  to  have  absolute  significance.  It  must  be  added 
that  the  existence  of  non-quantitative  branches  of  mathematics  does  not  alter 
what  is  said  here.  In  these  branches,  the  asymmetrical  relation  of  order  remains 
paramount  and  we  may  treat  numbers  from  either  of  their  two  aspects,  the 
cardinal  or  the  ordinal.  ’  e 

The  epoch-making  significance  of  the  Einstein-Minkowski  work  consists 
precisely  in  the  fact  that  they  were  the  first  to  apply  the  above,  though  without 
it  is  true,  formulating  the  general  principle.  The  lack  of  such  a  general  A 
epistemological  formulation  retards  considerably  the  understanding  of  their 
wor  ,  and  so  laymen  miss  the  enormous  structural,  and  semantic  beneficial 
effect  upon  the  proper  working  of  our  nervous  system  and  our  sanity. 

Before  giving  a  short  methodological  account  of  the  Einstein  theory  it 

T-L  e,.Wf  to  recaU  some  structural  and  semantic  conclusions  which  the 
differential  calculus  suggests. 

When  we  were  dealing  with  the  notion  of  a  variable,  we  saw  that  the 
variable  might  be  any  element  selected  out  of  an  ordered  aggregate  of  elements. 

e  can  select  elements  relatively  widely  separated  from  each  other,  as,  for 
instance,  the  numbers  1  and  2,  or  points,  let  us  say,  an  inch  apart.  It  is  obvious 
that  if  we  choose,  we  can  make  the  gaps  smaller,  and  postulate  an  infinity  of 
intermediate  steps.  When  we  make  our  gaps  smaller,  the  elements  are  ordered 
more  densely  and  closer  together.  In  the  limit,  if  we  choose  indefinitely  many 
elements  between  any  two  elements,  our  series  become  compact,  if  we  still 

have  a  possibility  of  gaps;  or  they  eventually  become  what  we  call  continuous, 
when  there  are  no  more  gaps. 

Without  legislating  as  to  whether  the  entities  we  use  in  physics  are  ‘con- 
tinuous  ,  ‘compact’,  or  ‘discontinuous’,  we  may  grant  that  the  maximum 
elucidation  of  the  above  terms  in  mathematics  is  very  useful.  We  can  easily 
see  that  in  terms  of  action  a  continuous  series  gives  us  action  by  contact,  since 
consecutive  elements  are  indefinitely  near  each  other.  As  the  differential  and 
integral  calculus  were  built  on  the  structural  assumption  of  continuity,  the  use 
of  the  calculus  brings  us  in  touch  not  only  with  our  x  but  also  with  its  indefinitely 
close  neighbour  x+dx.  We  see  that  the  calculus  introduces  a  most  important 

ACTION  BY  CONTACT 

structural  and  semantic  innovation;  namely,  that  it  is  a  language  for  describing 
action  by  contact,  in  sharp  contradistinction  to  the  structural  assumption  of 
action  at  a  distance. 

Let  us  illustrate  the  above  by  a  structural  example.  Consider  a  series  of 
equal  small  material  spheres  connected  with  each  other  by  small  spiral  springs 
as  shown  on  Fig.  1. 

12  3 

Fig.  1 

These  little  spheres  all  have  inertia,  because  of  which,  and  because  of 
the  little  springs,  they  resist  displacement.  If  we  displace  the  first  of  our  spheres 
either  in  the  transverse  or  longitudinal  direction,  it  acts  upon  the  second  sphere, 
which  in  turn  acts  upon  the  third  , .  We  see  that  the  disturbance  of  equilibrium 
of  the  first  little  sphere  is  transmitted  like  a  wave  to  the  next  sphere  and  so 
along  the  whole  series.  The  most  significant  point  in  the  analysis  of  such  a 
wave  of  excitation  is  that  it  is  not  transmitted  with  some  'infinite  velocity’,  or 
'infinitely  quickly’  or  in  'no  time’.  The  action  of  each  sphere  is  slightly  delayed 
owing  to  its  inertia,  that  is,  it  does  not  respond  'instantaneously'  to  an  impulse. 
It  must  be  noticed  that  the  displacement  is  not  due  to  a  velocity,  but  to  an 
acceleration,  which  is  a  change  of  velocity  and  requires  a  short  interval  of 
'time*.  The  change  in  velocity  again  requires  an  interval  of  ‘time’  to  overcome 
inertia  and  produce  displacement.  Similar  reasoning  applies  to  a  long  train  just 
being  started  by  the  engine.  The  cars  being  coupled  together  by  more  or  less 
elastic  means,  the  engine  may  be  moving  uniformly  and  some  of  the  last  cars 
still  be  stationary.  The  pull  of  the  engine  is  not  transmitted  instantaneously 
but  with  a  finite  velocity ,  due  again  to  the  inertia  of  the  cars. 

We  see  that  the  only  structurally  adequate  means  of  describing  changes  in 
continuous,  deformable  materials  is  to  be  found  in  differential  equations  which 
express  a  method  of  dealing  with  action  by  contact . 

We  have  already  seen  that  this  action  by  contact  involves  also  the  finite 
velocity  of  propagation,  a  fact  of  crucial  structural  and  semantic  importance. 
In  the  history  of  science  we  can  distinguish  three  periods.  The  first  was  naturally 
the  period  of  action  at  a  distance,  the  best  exemplified  by  the  work  of  two 
great  men,  Euclid  and  Newton.  In  it  we  find  of  course,  a  superabundance  of 
'infinities’.  With  the  advent  of  the  differential  calculus,  and  the  introduction 
of  differential  equations  in  the  study  of  nature,  the  notion  of  action  at  a  distance 
became  more  and  more  untenable.  We  had  a  period  of  pseudo-contiguous 
action,  which  indeed  involved  differential  equations;  but  the  velocity  of  propa¬ 
gation  was  not  introduced  explicitly,  and  so  there  remained  an  implicit  structural 
assumption  of  'infinite  velocity’  of  propagation.  As  an  example  of  such  pseudo- 
contiguous  action  we  can  cite  the  older  theories  of  potential,  which  give  differen¬ 
tial  equations  for  the  change  in  the  intensity  of  the  field  from  place  to  place, 

642  IX.  ON  EMPIRICAL  AND  VERBAL  STRUCTURES 

but  which  do  not  contain  members  that  express  a  change  in  ‘time’,  and  hence 
do  not  take  into  account  the  transmission  of  electricity  with  finite  velocity.1 

The  modern  theories,  as  for  instance,  the  Maxwell  theory  of  electromag¬ 
netism,  and  the  Einstein  theory,  are  based  on  action  by  contact .  These  theories 
not  only  use  the  differential  method,  but  they  also  introduce  explicitly  the 
finite  velocity  of  propagation. 

The  invention  of  differential  geometry  with  the  recent  contribution  of 
Weyl,  which  we  have  already  mentioned,  transforms  the  geometry  of  Euclid 
from  a  language  of  action  at  a  distance  into  contact  geometry,  or  a  language 
of  indefinitely  near  action. 

It  should  be  mentioned  perhaps  that  the  riemannian  differential  geometry 
is  more  general  than  all  the  £  geometries  which  preceded  it,  and  includes  them, 
as  well  as  the  £  geometry,  as  special  cases.  Perhaps,  as  Weyl  points  out,2  the 
investigation  of  the  famous  fifth  postulate,  which  was  the  beginning  of  £ 
geometry,  was  accidental  in  importance  and  the  main  structural  value  of  the 
£  geometries  lies  precisely  in  the  application  of  the  differential  methods  to 
geometry  which  was  originated  by  the  great  work  of  Riemann.  This  work, 
we  see,  has  carried  us  from  metaphysical  action  at  a  distance  to  a  physical 
action  by  contact.  In  passing  from  the  older  mechanics  to  electromagnetic 
events  a  very  striking  analogy  appears,  which  explains  the  finite  velocity  of 
propagation. 

In  mechanics,  when  we  have  waves  in  an  elastic  medium,  the  finite  velocity 
of  propagation  is  due  to  the  delay  which  occurs  due  to  the  inertia  of  materials. 
Now  inertia  is  determined  by  acceleration  {dts/dP),  which  represents  the  rate 
of  change  of  the  velocity  ( v=ds/dt ),  velocity  itself  being  a  rate  of  change  of 
displacement.  We  see  that  this  retardation,  or  negative  acceleration,  is  repre¬ 
sented  by  a  double  differentiation. 

Something  analogous  occurs  in  electromagnetic  events.  The  rate  of  change 
of  the  electric  field  (de/dt)  determines  the  magnetic  field;  and  then  the  rate  of 
change  (dh/dt)  of  the  latter  determines  the  electric  field  at  a  neighbouring 
point.  The  advance  of  the  electric  field  from  point  to  point  is  thus  conditioned 
by  two  differentiations  with  respect  to  'time’,  which  is  quite  analogous  to 
acceleration. 

It  is  due  to  this  double  differentiation  with  respect  to  'time'  that  the 
formulation  of  electromagnetic  waves  are  structurally  possible.  If  the  partial 
effects  were  to  occur  without  loss  of  'time’,  no  propagation  of  the  electric  waves 
would  occur.  The  maxwellian  'field  equations’  not  only  express  the  above- 
mentioned  relations,  but  introduce  structurally  the  finite  velocity  of  propaga¬ 
tion  which  makes  the  Maxwell’s  electromagnetic  theory  structurally  a  contact 
theory. 

The  Einstein  theory  is  also  structurally  a  contact  theory,  and  it  may  be 
said  that  it  was  originated  by  this  contact  tendency,  and  has  carried  it  to  the 
limit,  as  we  shall  see  later.  The  gaussian  theory  of  surfaces,  whose  extension 
to  any  number  of  dimensions  was  made  by  Riemann,  also  represents  action 
by  contact.  This  theory  does  not  state  the  laws  of  surfaces  on  a  large  scale, 

ACTION  BY  CONTACT 

but  only  their  differential  properties,  the  coefficients  of  the  measure  determina¬ 
tion,  the  invariants  which  we  can  form,  and  the  curvature  and  its  measure. 
The  form  of  a  surface  and  its  characteristics  can  then  be  calculated  by  a  process 
similar  to  the  solution  of  differential  equations  in  physics. 

We  are  now  in  a  position  to  understand  why  the  newer  physics  and  the 
j systems,  which  are  built  entirely  on  the  foundations  of  action  by  contact, 
found  the  E-system  unsatisfactory.  The  .E-system  was  built  on  the  structural 
assumption  of  action  at  a  distance,  and  we  had  to  select  the  E  geometries  as 
originated  by  Gauss,  Lobatchevski,  Riemann,  and  others,  which  gave  to  physics 
the  necessary  geometry  of  action  by  contact. 

But  the  question  of  action  at  a  distance  versus  action  by  contact  has 
also  an  experimental  aspect  which  makes  the  latter  theory  more  satisfactory. 

Faraday  (1791-1867)  was  not  a  learned  academician,  and  he  was  much 
freer  from  scientific  prejudices  than  any  of  his  contemporaries.  From  a  book¬ 
binder’s  apprentice  he  became  through  his  genius  one  of  the  founders  of  modern 
physics.  His  method  of  experimenting  was  to  try  every  possible  experiment 
and  note  what  happened. 

In  1838  Faraday  made  an  important  structural  discovery;  namely,  that 
the  mutual  action  between  two  electrically  charged  bodies  depends  upon  the 
character  of  the  intervening  medium.  Faraday  established  by  this  experiment 
that  the  capacity  of  a  spherical  condenser  changes  when  another  material  is 
used  as  the  separating  medium,  rather  than  air.  He  found  that  the  capacity 
became  twice  as  large  when  the  medium  was  paraffin,  three  times  as  large  for 
shellac,  six  times  as  large  for  glass,  and  about  eighty  times  as  large  for  water. 

This  experiment  became  the  foundation  of  the  new  theory.  The  old  ‘action 
at  a  distance*  theory  postulated  that  the  electrostatic  field  was  merely  a 
geometrical  structure  without  physical  significance,  while  this  new  experiment 
showed  that  the  field  had  physical  significance.  Every  charge  acts  first  upon 
its  immediate  surroundings,  and  it  is  only  through  the  medium  of  these  that 
the  action  is  propagated.  The 
discovery  of  displacement  cur¬ 
rents  necessitated  an  extension 
of  his  point  of  view  to  all 
distances.3 

Faraday  was  so  impressed 
