by  this  discovery  that  he  aban¬ 
doned  the  older  theories  of 
action  at  a  distance  and  formu¬ 
lated  a  structurally  new  theory 
of  contiguous  action  for  electric 
and  magnetic  events.  Any  one 
can  convince  himself  of  the  fact  that  the  fields  represent  very  actual  physical 
conditions  by  taking  a  sheet  of  paper,  sprinkling  some  iron  dust  upon  it  and 

644  IX.  ON  EMPIRICAL  AND  VERBAL  STRUCTURES 

putting  a  magnet  under  the  paper.  He  will  find  that  the  particles  of  iron  dust 
arrange  themselves  in  a  very  definite  structure  as  shown  in  Fig.  2. 

Faraday  also  discovered  that  the  forces  between  two  magnetic  poles  like¬ 
wise  depend  on  the  medium  that  happens  to  be  between  them.  He  concluded 
correctly  that  the  electric  as  well  as  the  magnetic  forces  are  produced  by  a 
state  of  tension  in  the  intervening  medium. 

These  two  examples  will  suffice  as  illustrations,  but  it  can  be  said  in  general 
that  all  modern  physics  gives  ample  proofs  of  the  correctness  of  Faraday's 
structural  point  of  view.  Some  physicists,  for  instance  Helmholtz,  built  special 
devices  to  test  the  correctness  of  this  theory.  As  a  matter  of  fact  the  success 
of  the  whole  electromagnetic  theory  of  Maxwell,  which  is  structurally  built  as 
a  contact  theory,  in  which  the  velocity  of  propagation  is  considered  finite,  is 
in  itself  one  of  the  best  proofs  of  the  correctness  of  the  theory. 

The  finite  velocity  of  light  was  discovered  by  Olaf  Romer  in  1676  and  has 
since  been  repeatedly  verified.  This  velocity  is  usually  denoted  by  c  and  is 
known  to  be  approximately  300,000  kilometres  per  second,  that  is, 
c=3xl010cm./sec.,  or  186,000  miles  per  second. 

In  1856  Weber  and  Kohlraush  calculated  a  certain  constant  which  appears 
in  the  electromagnetic  theory,  and  discovered  that  the  constant  had  the 

dimension  of  velocity,  and  that  its  numerical  value  was 

3  Xl010cm./sec.,  which  is  the  exact  value  for  the  velocity  of  light.  This  fact 
led  Maxwell  to  associate  light  with  electromagnetic  waves,  a  view  justified  by 
experiments.  In  1888  Hertz  not  only  established  once  more  the  interrelation 
of  optics  and  electrodynamics  but  found  that  the  velocity  of  propagation  of 
electromagnetic  waves  is  finite  and  exactly  equal  to  the  velocity  of  light.4 

Outside  the  exact  sciences  the  principle  of  action  by  contact  is  making  but 
slow  progress,  perhaps  because  of  A  s,r  and  the  lack  of  structural  formulations 
of  the  general  issues  at  hand.  We  are  happy  to  find  a  notable  exception  in  the 
biological  work  of  Professor  C.  M.  Child,  who  has  laid  down  a  foundation  for 
A  biology  and  his  system  is  structurally  based  on  action  by  contact.  This 
A  biology  has  been  applied  to  neurology  by  Professor  C.  J.  Herrick.  This 
present  work,  being  a  ^-system,  must  follow  the  methodological  and  structural 
advances  explained  here,  and  the  A  biology  and  neurology  founded  by  Child 
and  Herrick. 

It  is  interesting  to  follow  up  the  structural  merging  of  geometry  and  physics. 
There  are  certain  Smiths  and  Browns  who  call  themselves  physicists.  There 
are  some  rooms  with  various  instruments,  which  are  called  physical  labora¬ 
tories.  The  activities  of  the  physicists  which  interest  us  are  twofold.  First, 
these  scientists  come  to  their  laboratories,  manipulate  their  instruments,  note 
the  positions  of  some  pointers,  manipulate  the  instruments  again,  note  posi¬ 
tions  again  ,  .  This  represents  the  unspeakable  level  of  activity.  Whatever 
happens  happens,  but  there  is  no  speaking  to  be  done  on  that  level. 

ACTION  BY  CONTACT 

Later  the  scientist  describes  his  experiments  in  words.  Obviously  there  are 
two  entirely  different  stages  in  building  physics,  which  usually  we  do  not  dis^ 

tinglQui*te  obviously  the  unspeakable  level  cannot  be  called  'physics’  and  so 
we  must  apply  the  term  to  the  higher  order  abstractions  on  the  verbal  level; 
namely,  to  the  reasoned  verbal  account  of  what  the  experimenter  saw,  or  felt, 
or  experienced,  in  general  abstracted  on  the  lower  levels;  summarized,  general¬ 
ized  .  ,  in  higher  orders. 

Physics  represents  then  a  verbal  discipline.  Being  verbal,  it  needs  a  lan¬ 
guage.  What  language  shall  we  select?  As  we  want  to  have  a  science  called 
physics,  we  shall  naturally  try  to  use  the  most  structurally  correct  language  in 
existence,  so  by  necessity  we  must  look  in  the  direction  of  mathematics. 

In  mathematics  we  find  originally  two  entirely  different  disciplines.  One 
we  may  call  arithmetic;  the  other,  geometry.  Becoming  acquainted  with  these 
two  originally  separated  languages,  we  find  that  the  actual  experiments  and 
the  stimuli  for  many  experiences  of  importance  to  us,  are  outside  our  skins;  so 
we  try  to  choose  the  one  of  these  two  languages  which  is  the  more  closely  re¬ 
lated  in  structure  to  the  lower  abstractions— that  is,  to  what  we  see,  feel ,  . 
Naturally  we  have  an  inclination  toward  the  geometrical  languages,  dealing 
with  'lines’,  'surfaces’,  'volumes’ . ,  terms  for  which  we  find  immediate  and 
quite  obvious  applications.  By  further  investigation  we  find  that  of  late  both 
languages  have  become  so  developed  in  structure,  that  either  can  be  translated 
perfectly  into  the  other.  This  fact  makes  geometry  the  link  between  the  higher 
order  abstractions  and  the  lower  order  abstractions.  We  have  seen  that  physics , 
as  well  as  geometry,  must  be  considered  verbal  disciplines  and  their  fusion 

becomes  a  very  natural  fact.  ^  (  .  , 

It  is  true  that,  as  yet,  ‘time’  appears  as  the  bothersome  factor,  but  time 
may  very  well  be  represented  geometrically,  except  that  our  diagrams  and 
figures  look  a  little  different.  For  instance,  a  flat  circular  orbit  in  two-dimensional 
'space’  becomes  a  helix  in  three-dimensional  space-time,  a  vibrational  motion 
in  one-dimensional  'space’  becomes  a  wave-line  in  two-dimensional  space-time  ,  . 
'Time’,  when  properly  represented,  becomes  simply  another  geometrical 

dimension.  ,  .  ,  . 

It  should  not  be  forgotten  that  mathematicians  obtain  most  of  their  struc¬ 
tural  inspirations  from  physics  and  build  up  mathematical  theories  to  supp  y 
the  structural  needs  of  the  physicist.  We  see  an  excellent  example  of  this  in  the 
R  geometries.  In  the  days  of  Euclid,  when  physics  hardly  existed,  we  had 
‘emptiness’,  ‘action  at  a  distance’,  and  such  notions  as  were  quite  satisfactory 
for  the  needs  of  surveyors  and  builders.  With  the  development  of  astronomy 
and  physics,  curved  lines  became  more  and  more  structurally  important,  and 
the  haziness  of  the  definition  of  'straight  line’  also  became  apparent.  The 
notion  of  ‘emptiness’  also  became  slowly  structurally  untenable.  Such  geometers 
as  Gauss,  Lobatchevski,  and  others,  began  to  demand  that  the  axioms  o 
geometry  be  tested  by  experiment.  With  the  introduction  of  ‘curvature  ,  the 
‘straight  line’  became  only  a  special  case  of  a  curve  with  zero  curvature. 

646  IX.  ON  EMPIRICAL  AND  VERBAL  STRUCTURES 

The  invention  of  the  differential  calculus  also  had  a  tremendous  structural 
influence.  It  introduced  continuity  as  a  basic  assumption  in  the  vast  structure 
of  science,  and  cleared  the  way  for  psychologically  trained  scientific  workers  in 
structural  continuity,  and  therefore  in  action  by  contact. 

The  discovery  that  light  appears  as  electromagnetic  waves  and  the  finite 
velocity  of  both,  made  the  notion  of  ‘absolute  emptiness'  structurally  un¬ 
tenable;  and  so  E  geometry  with  its  action  at  a  distance,  ‘emptiness’  and  neglect 
of  gravitation  and  electricity,  became  very  unsatisfactory.  Indeed  if  our  uni¬ 
verse  were  Et  light  could  not  reach  us. 

Leibnitz,  who  invented  the  differential  calculus  independently  of  Newton 
formulated  a  postulate  of  action  by  contact,  and  therefore  could  not  become 
reconciled  to  Newton’s  Law  of  Gravitation  which  was  structurally  a  law  of 
action  at  a  distance,  corresponding  fully  to  Coulomb’s  law  in  electricity.  The 
atter  law  states  that  the  force  exerted  by  two  electrically  charged  bodies  upon 
each  other  is  inversely  proportional  to  the  square  of  the  distance  between  them 
and  acts  m  the  direction  of  the  line  joining  them.6  * 

f  JHe  lntrodu(;tlon  bV  Faraday  of  the  structural  notion  of  a  ‘field’,  instead 
of  the  notion  of  electrical  charges  acting  at  a  distance,  introduced  the  notion  of 
a  strain  of  the  electrical  field,  which  appears  structurally  as  ‘lines  of  forces’. 
Here  we  already  have  a  ‘fulness’  of  ‘lines’  and  a  big  step  toward  the  structural 
fusion  of  physics  with  geometry  has  been  taken. 

he  transition  from  E  to  riemannian  geometry  corresponds  structurally 
to  the  transition  from  physics  based  on  action  at  a  distance  to  physics  based 
on  action  by  contact.  The  fundamental  metrical  theorem  of  E  geometry  is  the 
Pythagorean  rule,  which  expresses  the  fact  that  the  square  of  the  distance  be¬ 
tween  two  points  is  a  quadratic  form  of  the  co-ordinates  of  th«  points.  If  we 
regard  this  theorem  as  strictly  valid  only  in  the  case  of  points  which  are  very 
near  each  other,  we  pass  at  once  from  E  geometry  to  differential  geometry. 

y  doing  so  we  gain  a  notable  structural  advantage,  as  we  dispense  with  the 
necessity  of  defining  our  co-ordinates  more  precisely;  because  the  Pythagorean 

law,  when  expressed  m  differential  form,  is  invariant  for  arbitrary  transfer- 
mations.6 

Semantically,  Riemann  was  the  immediate  predecessor  of  Einstein,  al¬ 
though  Einstein  was  not  directly  influenced  by  him.  In  differential  geometry 
we  ought  to  start  with  indefinitesimaily  near  points,  and  depend  for  the  analysis 
of  greater  distances,  areas  and  volumes,  on  integration.  The  difficult  notion  of 
straight  line  has  to  be  replaced  by  the  notion  of  the  shortest  line  (geodetic), 
which  is  easily  defined  by  differential  methods  and  found  empirically.  In  the 
o  er  method,  the  length  of  a  curve  was  to  be  found,  in  general,  by  the  process 
of  integration.  The  length  of  a  ‘straight  line'  between  two  points  was  supposed 
to  be  defined  as  a  whole,  and  not  as  the  limit  of  a  sum  of  indefinitely  little  bits 
Riemann  considered  that  a  ‘straight  line'  does  not  differ  in  this  respect  from  a 
curve.  Measurements  which  are  always  performed  by  means  of  some  instru¬ 
ment  are  physical  operations,  and  their  results  depend  for  their  interpretation 

action  by  contact 

upon  the  theories  of  physics.  Dealing  with  geodetics  is  therefore  preferable  to 
dealing  with  ‘straight  lines’.7 

We  see  that  the  problem  was  ripe  for  a  final  stroke  of  genius.  Einstein’s 
structural  discovery  of  the  dependence  of  ‘space’  and  time  ,  and  Minkowski  s 
success  in  giving  a  geometrical  interpretation  to  the  Einstein  theory  accom¬ 
plished  the  probably  irreversible  fusion. 

Three-dimensional  kinematics  becomes  four-dimensional  geometry,  three- 
dimensional  dynamics  can  be  considered  as  four-dimensional  statics . 

We  see  immediately  the  human,  psycho-logical,  semantic  and  neurological 
importance  of  this  fact.  Our  nervous  system  by  its  structure  produces  ab¬ 
stractions  of  different  orders,  dynamic  on  some  levels,  static  on  others.  The 
problems  of  sanity  and  adjustment  become  problems  of  translation  from  one 
level  to  another,  for  which  the  structural  advances  in  science  supply  us  with 
methods  of  solution. 

It  should  be  noticed  that  the  semantic  gain  due  to  the  above  facts  is  con¬ 
siderable,  and  that  being  structural,  it  is  practical  as  well  as  theoretical.  The 
fact  that  geometry  has  lost  its  old  restricted  status,  which  formerly  applied 
principally  to  what  could  be  ‘intuitively  visualized’  and  has  been  further  ab¬ 
stracted  to  apply  to  what  can  be  ‘conceived’,  has  merged  geometry  with  the 
rest  of  mathematics.  This  merging  represents  a  great  structural  and  semantic 
step  forward,  and  makes  possible  the  treatment  of  geometrical  problems  by 
purely  analytical  means.  It  liberates  geometry  from  the  restrictions  of  lower 
order  abstractions.  By  using  ‘geometrical  intuition'  (lower  order  abstractions) 
we  find  again  a  great  help  in  analysis. 

In  the  cyclic  nerve  currents,  our  so-called  ‘intuitions’  (lower  order  ab¬ 
stractions)  are  not  structurally  isolated  from  our  ‘conceptions'  (higher  order 
abstractions),  but  both  are  intimately  connected  and  influence  each  other. 
Modern  advances  are  not  only  in  perfect  accord  with  the  ‘organism-as-a-whole’ 
principle,  but  indeed  give  us  excellent  proofs  that  this  principle  is  sound.  ‘Psy¬ 
chologists’  miss  a  great  deal  by  disregarding  this  important  and  unique  form  of 
human  behaviour  which  we  call  mathematizing. 

CHAPTER  XXXVI 

ON  THE  SEMANTICS  OF  THE  EINSTEIN  THEORY 

It  is  precisely  here,  in  an  improved  understanding  of  our  mental  relations 
to  nature,  that  the  permanent  contribution  of  relativity  is  to  be  found. 

We  should  now  make  it  our  business  to  understand  so  thoroughly  the 
character  of  our  permanent  mental  relations  to  nature  that  another  change 
in  our  attitude  such  as  that  due  to  Einstein,  shall  be  forever  impossible. 

(55)  p.  W.  BRIDGMAN 

It  is  not  my  aim  to  expound  the  Einstein  Theory  as  such.  There  are  many 
excellent  and  competent  books  written  on  this  subject.  I  have  already  explained 
and  stressed  several  structural  points  which  in  the  last  analysis  are  the  founda¬ 
tion  of  Einstein’s  work.  Many  'thinkers’  through  the  ages  have  felt  vaguely  the 
dangers  of  the  structure  of  language  and  the  viciousness  of  objectification,  that 
is,  of  the  delusional  ascribing  of  objective  values  to  verbal  forms.  This  vague 
feeling,  of  course,  is  useful  in  individuals,  but  it  is  a  private  benefit,  which 
cannot  be  made  public  without  some  sort  of  formulation.  The  stroke  of  genius 
of  Einstein  was  that  he  produced  a  non-elementalistic,  linguistic  system  of  new 
structure.  Einstein,  being  a  physicist,  decided  rightly,  as  we  understand  now, 
to  be  entirely  actional,  behaviouristic,  functional,  and  operational,  and  to  stop 
gambling  on  words.  The  older  el  linguistic  problems  of  ‘matter’,  ‘space’,  and 
‘time*  were  in  such  a  mess,  due  to  the  objectification  of  verbal  structures,  that 
it  was  useless  to  talk  any  more  in  the  old  way.  He  decided  to  describe  what  a 
physicist  does  when  he  measures  ‘space’  and  ‘time’,  and  to  abandon,  perhaps 
unconsciously,  the  ‘is’  of  identity. 

It  seems  unnecessary  to  stress  the  simple  fact  that  when  we  measure  a 
piece  of  wood,  for  example,  we  mark  it  off  with  another  piece  of  material  which 
we  have  accepted  arbitrarily  as  our  ‘unit  of  length’.  The  coincidence  of  our 
‘unit’  with  the  intervals  between  the  marks  is  again  judged  by  an  extremely 
complex  electromagnetic-neural  process,  which  was  quite  disregarded  until 
Einstein.  Our  judgement  is  conditioned  by  the  light  rays  travelling  with  finite 
velocity  which  excite  our  nervous  system  through  the  retina,  this  excitation  in 
turn  also  travelling  with  finite  velocity.  We  see  that  the  apparently  simple 
measurement  of  a  ‘length’  is  really  an  extremely  complex  process,  in  which  the 
finite  velocity  of  light  and  of  the  nerve  currents  plays  a  very  important  role. 
Naturally,  if  we  were  to  assume  an  ‘infinite’  velocity  of  the  propagation  of  light, 
our  verbal  speculations  about  ‘space’  and  ‘time’  might  be  perhaps  entertaining, 
but  they  would  nevertheless  be  fundamentally  and  structurally  wrong. 

Similar  remarks  apply  to  the  measurement  of  ‘time*.  What  do  we  mean 
when  we  say  that  a  train  has  arrived  at  the  station  at  9  o’clock?  We  mean  no 
more  and  no  less  than  that  the  arrival  of  the  train  coincided  with  the  arrival 
of  the  pointer  of  a  clock  at  a  point  marked  9  on  the  clock  face.  In  other  words, 

SEMANTICS  OF  THE  EINSTEIN  THEORY 

we  saw  ‘simultaneously’  the  arrival  of  the  train  and  the  pointer  of  the  clock 

reaching  the  mark  9.  r ,  A  n 

Our  judgement  about  the  results  of  measurements  of  time  depends  on  the 
seen  coincidence  of  events— in  this  case,  of  the  arrival  of  the  train  with  the 
arrival  of  the  pointer  of  the  clock  at  the  mark  9.  Similar  considerations,  which 
applied  to  the  measurements  of  lengths’,  apply  also  to  the  measurements  of 

We  see  with  Einstein  that  if  we  want  to  make  any  headway  we  shall  have 
to  investigate  the  two  key  terms;  namely,  ‘velocity’  and  ‘simultaneity  . 

The  newtonians  take  a  particular  delight  in  accusing  Einstein  of  being  a 
‘psychologist’  and  not  a  physicist.  We  have  already  stressed  the  physical  sub¬ 
jectivity  of  physical  instruments.  What  is  said  there  applies,,  not  only  to  t  e 
retina  of  the  eye,  but  also  to  a  photographic  camera,  or  to  a  microscope  or  tele¬ 
scope,  or  any  other  instrument.  Before  an  energetic  packet,  be  it  a  light-impulse 
or  a  bullet,  is  able  to  accomplish  any  result  it  must  first  reach  its  mark  and  so 
the  finite  velocity  of  propagation  must  be  taken  into  consideration,  which  is  a 
hard,  established,  empirical  structural  fact.  So  the  criticisms  of  the  newtonians 
are  simply  shallow  and  unscientific  (1933).  They  disregard  most  important 
empirical  physical  facts,  and  so  simply  defend  a  semantic  disturbance  without 

aiding  science  (1933).  .  t  j 

With  the  einsteinians,  we  treat  the  eye  on  the  same  footing  as  we  would 
treat  the  camera  or  any  other  physical  instrument.  Even  the  newtonians  must 
admit  that  when  they  photograph  some  happening  on  the  sun,  for  example,  t  e 
happening  actually  occurred  (approximately)  eight  minutes  fee/ore  the  photo¬ 
graphic  plate  was  affected.  The  eight  minutes  is  the  ‘time’  taken  by  the  light 
to  reach  the  earth  from  the  sun. 

Let  us  analyse  the  term  ‘velocity’  first.  We  find  ourselves  here,  as  in  any 
other  human  problem,  on  two  distinct  levels  of  abstraction,  and  we  must  dis¬ 

criminate  between  them.  ..  ,  t 

Let  us  take  up  the  verbal  level  first.  We  see  that  before  we  can  talk  about 
our  terms  ‘space’  or  ‘time’,  ‘length’  or  ‘seconds’,  we  have  to  know  a  great  deal 
about  the  term  ‘velocity’.  How  do  we  define  the  term  velocity  ?  We  define 
it  as  ‘space  divided  by  time’,  v=s/t.  We  see  that  on  the  verbal  level  the  situation 
is  perfectly  hopeless  and  no  result  can  be  expected  from  verbal  gambling,  ft 
may  be  added  that  older  notions  were  based  on  objectification,  or  confusion 
between  the  two  levels  of  abstraction,  and  the  affective  belief  in  the  magic  of 
words,  identification  playing  most  of  the  structural  havoc. 

How  about  the  instrumental  level,  the  silent  level  of  the  lower  order  ab¬ 
straction?  On  this  level,  we  find  that  physicists  in  their  actions,  behaviour, 
operations .  ,  have  elaborated  a  fairly  definite  technique  for  finding  the  data 
they  require.  So  we  see  that  there  is  no  choice,  we  must  start  on  this  level. 

But  starting  on  this  level  is  not  all,  and  not  enough.  We  must  somehow 
talk  about  these  doings  and  operations.  Hence  we  must  select  a  language  which 
in  its  structure  will  reflect  the  structure  of  these  actions  and  operations.  1  here- 
fore  we  must  abandon  the  ‘is’  of  identity  and  describe  in  the  asymmetrical 

650  IX.  ON  EMPIRICAL  AND  VERBAL  STRUCTURES 

language  of  order  the  happenings  recorded  by  an  instrument  or  by  our  lower 

nerve  centres. 

Without  going  into  details  we  may  summarize  the  results  as  achieved  by 
the  physicists.  Experiments  by  the  physicists,  as  indicated  by  the  coincidences 
of  pointers  on  different  instruments,  have  seemingly  established  the  fact  that 
the  velocity  of  light,  as  defined  by  behaviouristic,  operational  instrumental 
means,  is  a  constant ,  c  =  3-1010  cm./sec.,  independent  of  the  relative  velocity  of 
the  observers.  By  the  'observers’  we  mean  again  the  readings  on  the  instru¬ 
ments  which  the  observer  carries  with  him.  Now  this  result  contradicts  flatly 
the  established  verbal  expectations  which  we  reached  on  verbal  levels  through 
the  elementalistic  structure  of  language  and  the  semantic  disturbance,  of 
ascribing  objective  existence,  to  the  terms  ‘space’  and  ‘time’. 

•  Til6  jltUati.°"  '?  aCUte‘  Sha11  we  follow  our  semantic  disturbances  and 
reject  hard  empirical  structural  facts,  or  shall  we  accept  the  experimental  facts 
and  eliminate  semantic  disturbances? 

As  usual,  the  answer  is  implied  by  the  method  of  putting  the  question. 
We  accept  the  experimental  facts  and  revise  our  semantic  disturbances.  In 
this  case  a  psychiatrist  might  be  a  useful  co-worker  with  the  physicist. 

The  einsteinian  revolution  is  structurally  and  semantically  so  fundamental 
that  every  intelligent  person  should  be  acquainted  with  it.  It  will  therefore  be 
as  well  to  consider  some  of  its  details. 

In  classical  mechanics  we  had  the  classical  mechanical  principle  of  rela¬ 
tivity;  namely,  that  all  mechanical  equations  have  one  form  for  two  co-ordinate 
systems  moving  uniformly  with  respect  to  each  other.  The  above  has  a  very 
simple  empirical  meaning.  If  we  travel  in  a  train,  let  us  say  at  a  velocity  of 
50  miles  an  hour,  all  our  activities  in  the  train  have  one  familiar  relative  velocity 
as  if  the  tram  were  at  rest.  If  we  throw  a  ball  with  a  velocity  of  20  miles  an 
hour  to  another  passenger  on  the  train  in  the  direction  of  the  movement  of  the 
train,  the  ball  will  not  reach  the  other  passenger  with  the  velocity  of  20  miles 
an  hour  plus  the  additional  50  miles  an  hour  velocity  of  the  train  but  will  reach 
him  with  the  velocity  as  if  the  train  were  standing  still.  Not  so,  however,  if  the 
ball  were  thrown  to  an  observer,  standing  on  the  tracks.  The  ball  might  hurt 

.umLbnCa?e  ItLwould  have-  relative  to  him,  the  velocity  of  20  miles  an  hour  of 
the  ball  plus  the  velocity  of  50  miles  an  hour  of  the  train,  or  in  all,  a  velocity 
of  70  miles  an  hour.  1 

Quite  probably,  even  our  remote  ancestors  who  used  artificial  means  of 
transportation  on  land  or  water  did  not  overlook  the  structural  fact  that  me¬ 
chanical  events  happen  in  just  one  way,  whether  the  system  is  at  rest  or  in 
relative  motion.  With  the  advent  of  verbal  formulations  of  physics  and  me¬ 
chanics,  such  happenings  were  formulated  verbally;  and  so,  slowly,  the  language 
of  old  structure  with  its  consequent  objectifications  was  built. 

Now  on  verbal  grounds,  which  seemed  to  be  justified  by  experimental, 
macro-mechanical  facts,  we  concluded  that  one  law  should  prove  valid  in  the 
case  of  electrodynamic  and  optical  events. 

SEMANTICS  OF  THE  EINSTEIN  THEORY 

To  reformulate  the  above  in  simple  symbols,  let  us  imagine  two  parallel 
co-ordinate  systems,  O'  and  0",  of  which  the  second  moves  with  a  velocity  u 
relative  to  the  first  in  the  common  x  direction.  If  we  denote  the  co-ordinates 
of  the  first  system  by  single  primes,  and  the 
co-ordinates  of  the  second  system  by  double  V*  Y" 
primes,  then,  as  usual,  the  co-ordinates  of  a 
point,  P,  in  the  second  system  would  be  con¬ 
nected  with  its  co-ordinates  in  the  first  system  \ 

by  the  equation  x"=x'—utt  which  means  that  ^"j V 

the  x"  co-ordinate  is  less  than  the  x*  co-ordinate  „  i 

by  the  amount  that  our  second  co-ordinate  0«  ■ 

0"  V' 

system  has  moved;  namely,  by  a  =ut.  We  gave  ^  ^ 

the  diagram  in  two  dimensions  because  it  is  simpler, 

and,  as  we  have  assumed  that  the  displacement  is  parallel  to  the  x  axis,  the 
other  co-ordinates  remain  unaltered,  y"  =yf,  z"  -zf.  'Time'  by  the  older  as¬ 
sumptions,  being  ‘objective*  and  ‘absolute*  would  be  ‘the  same’;  namely,  /"  =tf 
(‘absolute  time*).  The  classical  law  of  relative  motion  states  that  if  the  equation 
of  motion  in  the  first  system  is  f  {x',  y',  s',  /)  =0,  this  function  must  also  be 
zero  when  xf  is  replaced  by  its  new  value;  namely,  (x'  —ut)  =x"  so  that 
0-0. 

Let  us  see  if  the  above  conditions  hold  true  when  we  deal  with  the  propa¬ 
gation  of  light  in  spherical  waves .  - 

OB2=OA2+AB2  Z 

OB2  =*2+y2 
OP2  =  OB2  +  BP2 
OP2  =x2+y2H~s2 
c2t2=x2+f+z2 

If  we  select  a  three  dimensional  co¬ 
ordinate  system  0,  the  distance  s  of  the 
point  P  from  O  is  equal,  by  the  Pytha¬ 
gorean  rule,  to  s2~x2+y2+z2,  If  we 
assume  that  a  light  ray  is  travelling  from  q 
0  to  P,  the  distance  s  could  then  be 
represented  by  the  product  of  the  velocity  Fig*  2 

of  light  c  by  the  ‘time*  or  ct.  The  square  of  this  distance  would  then  be  c2t2  -s2. 
We  have  x2  -by2  +s2  =c2t2,  or  x2  +y2  ~hz2  -  c2t2  -  0. 

We  can  easily  convince  ourselves  that  if  the  last  equation  for  light-waves 
holds  good  in  the  first  co-ordinate  system  it  cannot  hold  in  the  second. 

Writing  the  last  equation  in  our  primed  letters,  we  have  x'2  +y'2  ~\rP2  —  cH2  =  0. 
If  we  pass  to  our  second  system  of  co-ordinates  moving  uniformly  in  the  X 
direction  with  the  velocity  u  relative  to  the  first  system,  our  y',  s',  /,  do  not  alter 
by  assumption,  but  only  x”=x'  —  ut.  We  would  have  by  substituting  xf  —ut 
for  and  retaining  the  primed  values  for  y",  s",  t: 

(x' -ut)2  +y'2  +z'2 -c2t2  =x'2  -  2x'ut  +u2t2  -by'2  +z'2 -cH2 
=x'2+y'2+z'2-c2t2+(u2t2-2x'ut ). 

■ 

(i) 

652  IX.  ON  EMPIRICAL  AND  VERBAL  STRUCTURES 

But,  by  assumption,  x'*+y’*+zr* -c*t* -0,  and  therefore  equation  (1) 
cannot  be  zero  unless  (u2t2—2x'ut)  **0.  This  last  condition  would  mean  that 
our  second  system  of  co-ordinates  is  also  at  rest.  We  see  that  for  Hght-waves 
the  older  mechanical  principle  of  relativity  does  not  hold,  as  the  equations  are 
altered  when  we  pass  from  one  system  of  co-ordinates  to  another  which  moves 
with  uniform  velocity  relative  to  the  first. 

To  indicate  this  more  obviously,  we  will  express  it  in  formulae.  Consider 
two  co-ordinate  systems  O'  and  O",  in  which  the  second  moves  with  a  uniform 
velocity  in  the  X  direction  relative  to  the  first.  If  for  the  light-waves  the  equa¬ 
tion  x  2 -by  2+2/2  —c2t2  —  0  holds  in  the  first  system,  a  similar  equation  for  the 
second  moving  co-ordinate  system,  x"2+y"2+z"2 -c2t2  =0,  cannot  be  true.  In 
other  words,  x/2+y'2+z'2 -cH2^  x”2+y'/2+z"2 -c2t2;  whence  we  have  an 
inequality ,  fundamentally  contradicting  the  classical  principle  of  relativity. 

This  extraordinary  and  unexpected  inequality,  because  it  contradicted 
structurally  the  classical  mechanical  principles  of  relativity,  which  apparently 
had  been  well  established  experimentally,  created  a  baffling  semantic  situation 
which  was  profoundly  unsatisfactory. 

What  could  we  do  about  it?  Should  we  abandon  the  older  principle  of 
mechanical  relativity;  or  should  we  have  two  different  laws,  one  for  the  older 
gross  macroscopic  mechanical  relativity,  and  another  for  optical  and  electro¬ 
dynamic  events;  or  should  we  investigate  the  fundamental  structural  assump¬ 
tions  which  underlie  our  formulae,  and  see  if  the  discrepancy  is  not  due  to  some 
prejudice  or  some  structural  dogma  which  we  have  overlooked  for  centuries? 

If  a  solution  of  the  last  kind  should  be  found  it  would  naturally  be  most 
satisfactory.  The  admission  of  two  relativities,  one  for  the  mechanical  events, 
the  other  for  the  optical  events,  would  be  against  the  whole  trend  of  science! 
which  requires  the  unification  of  theories. 

Such  a  structural  revision;  namely,  the  rooting  out  of  the  old  unjustified 
dogma  which  made  all  the  trouble,  was  the  work  of  Einstein's  genius.  In  this 
epoch-making  discovery  he  was  assisted  in  the  beginning  by  the  famous 
Michelson-Morley  experiment,  since  performed  repeatedly  with  similar  results, 
seemingly  proving  that  the  velocity  of  light  is  a  constant  no  matter  what  the 
relative  motion  of  the  observer.  If  we  take  the  equation  for  the  spherical 
propagation  of  light- waves  x2+y2+z2—  c2t2  -0  or  x2+y2-\-z2  ==c2/2; 

V#2 +y2 -(-s2 

tnerl  c~  "  in  one  system  of  co-ordinates, 

_  j  vV* +✓*+*'*  . 

ana  c=s  ~  m  another  system  of  co-ordinates, 

are  equal,  which  stated  in  another  form  would  mean  that 
x2  -by2  +z2  -cH2  =x'2  -by'2  +z'2  - cH 2. 

The  experiment  says  this  relation  is  true;  the  arguments  already  advanced  show 
it  cannot  be  true.  So  we  have  to  hunt  for  some  error  or  compensation. 

With  Einstein  s  explanation,  the  finding  of  the  error  is  simplicity  itself. 
In  the  older  mechanical  relativity  our  ‘space’  and  ‘time’  were  objectified ,  we 

SEMANTICS  OF  THE  EINSTEIN  THEORY 
