
endowed  them  with  objective  values  of  definiteness  and  rigidity,  we  dealt  with 
‘absolute  space*  and  with  ‘absolute  time’,  which  was  ‘unchanging’  and  ‘the 
same  for  all’.  In  the  older  assumptions  our  velocities  varied .  If  A  had  a  velocity 
of  5  centimetres  per  second,  for  instance,  and  B  was  overtaking  A  with  a  ve¬ 
locity  of  7  centimetres  per  second,  the  relative  velocity  between  A  and  B  would 
be  7-5  =2  cm.  per  second.  The  units  of  *  space*  and  ‘ time *  were  definite ,  immutable 
and  did  not  and  could  not  vary ,  which  followed  directly  from  the  assumptions  of 
an  ‘objective*  ‘absolute  space*  and  ‘absolute  time  . 

In  the  case  of  light,  we  came  in  contact  with  a  velocity  which  did  not  vary 
for  any  observer  no  matter  what  his  relative  motion.  The  velocity  c  was  found 
to  be  constant,  so  the  natural  assumption  to  make  is  that  our  ‘ space*  and  * time * 
vary  for  different  observers. 

In  the  above  equations  as  they  stand,  ‘absolute  time’,  t  =/,  the  ‘same’  for 
all  observers  is  assumed,  which  made  such  equality  impossible.  Assuming  dif¬ 
ferent  ‘times*  for  different  observers,  t  for  the  first,  and  t'  for  the  second,  such 
a  compensation  transforms  our  inequality  into  an  equality,  as  demanded  both 

by  the  experiment  and  by  the  theory.  Instead  of  writing 

*2  +y2  +z2  „c2t2  =x'2  +y/2  +z'2  _c2^  (*«*), 

which  cannot  be  true ,  we  write, 

*»+y*  +s2  -  cV  -*'2  +/2  +z'2  -c2f'2  — 0,  (t tf) 
which  can  be  true.  We  should  notice  that  in  the  first  equation  we  have  on  both 
sides  t,  which  makes  the  equation  impossible,  whereas  in  the  second  equation 
we  have  on  the  left-hand  side  t  and  on  the  right-hand  side  a  different  t ;  namely ,  tf. 

The  above  considerations  mean  that  there  is  a  definite  structural  discrepancy 
between  the  old  language  and  the  empirical  world,  requiring  a  fundamental 
structural  linguistic  revision.  This  revision  has  been  accomplished,  and  is  known 
as  the  Einstein  theory.  It  is  not  implied  that  Einstein’s  work  is  final,  but  that 
it  shows  clearly  the  structural  errors  of  the  old  elementalism  to  which  we  can 
never  return. 

In  other  words,  in  the  older  mechanics  we  had  definite  and  permanent 
‘time’  (absolute)  and  varying  relative  velocities.  Dealing  with  light-waves  we 
find  experimentally  that  the  velocity,  c,  of  light  does  not  vary  with  the  relative 
motions  of  the  observers  and  we  must  assume  a  variable  time  to  preserve  our 
equations. 

An  obvious  objection  can  be  raised  to  this:  why  alter  our  habitual  notions 
of  ‘time’?  Can  we  not  keep  the  old  $.r  and  find  some  other  method  of  compen¬ 
sation,  less  bothersome  and  less  revolutionary?  The  older  physicists  and  Einstein 
give  a  long  and  convincing  list  of  perfectly  sufficient  reasons  for  such  a  change, 
yet  their  arguments  always  leave  us  somehow  in  doubt,  with  the  feeling  of  a 
lurking  possibility  that  the  old  can  be  preserved. 

What  has  already  been  said  in  this  work  about  structure  and  semantic 
disturbances  and  the  fact  that  the  terms  ‘matter’,  ‘space’,  and  ‘time’  are  not 
objects ,  which  they  cannot  be,  removes  perhaps  for  good  and  all,  the  last  doubt 
as  to  the  revolutionary  and  epoch-making  significance  and  value  of  the  struc¬ 
tural  linguistic  discoveries  of  Einstein.  On  these  grounds  alone  the  return  to 

654  IX.  ON  EMPIRICAL  AND  VERBAL  STRUCTURES 

the  old  is  impossible.  The  old  is  due  to  objectification  of  the  structural  peculi¬ 
arities  of  the  old  el  language,  and  to  semantic  disturbances,  which  at  the  present 
low  level  of  our  development  is  inevitably  the  result  of  copying  lower  animals 
in  our  'thinking',  a  pathological  process  for  'man'. 

It  will  be  well  to  explain  at  this  point  why  I  said  that  the  Michelson-Morley 
experiment  only  assisted  Einstein,  and  only  seemingly  proved  the  constant 
velocity  of  light.  Historically,  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  beginning  of  the 
theory  of  Einstein  was  suggested  by,  and  had  its  physical  basis  in  this  ex¬ 
periment.  In  reality,  as  the  whole  of  this  present  work  about  structure  shows, 
the  two  issues  are  quite  independent.  The  fact  of  the  finite  velocity  of  light  has 
never  been  challenged,  on  the  contrary  it  is  becoming  more  and  more  solidly 
established,  both  empirically  and  theoretically,  simply  because  an  ‘infinite 
velocity1  has  no  meaning. 

With  the  structural  results  of  this  present  work,  and  the  establishment  of 
the  fact  of  the  finite  velocity  of  light,  the  whole  Einstein  theory  has  a  perfectly 
solid  structural,  linguistic  foundation  (1933).  Nevertheless  it  is  extremely 
gratifying  that  the  latest,  very  important,  and  painstaking  work  of  Doctor 
Roy  J.  Kennedy  seems  once  more  to  add  fundamental  experimental  support 
to  the  correctness  of  the  Einstein  theory,*  From  the  point  of  view  of  structure, 
Einstein  merely  eliminated  some  primitive,  perhaps  even  animalistic,  remains 
of  objectification  which  still  lingered  in  the  structure  of  our  language  of  ‘matter’, 
‘space*,  and  ‘time’.  These,  being  animalistic,  were  unfit  for  humans;  vitiating 
not  only  our  daily  lives  but  science  as  well.  (Eddington  in  The  Mathematical 
Theory  of  Relativity ,  p.  196,  uses  the  term  ‘pre-human’  in  a  similar  connection.) 

It  must  be  recalled  that  the  definition  of  velocity  is  connected  in  a  circular 
way  with  ‘space’  and  ‘time’.  That  is,  in  the  definition  of  the  relation  of  velocity, 
0 V=s/i ),  ‘space*  and  ‘time’,  the  definition  of  any  one  of  our  three  terms  depends 
upon  our  definition  of  the  other  two;  whence  there  are  many  possible  ways  of 
verbal  adjustment. 

As  we  saw,  the  mechanical  verbal  principle  of  relativity  with  which  we  are 
all  familiar  was  not  structurally  able  to  account  satisfactorily  for  a  similar 
relativity  of  optical  and  electrodynamic  events.  The  older  formulae  of  trans¬ 
formations  were,  as  already  given,  x'  =x-ut,  y'  «*y,  z'  =z,  t  =t.  These  formulae 
are  called  the  Galileo  transformations  in  honour  of  the  founder  of  mechanics; 
and,  as  we  have  seen,  structurally  they  are  not  general  enough. 

If  we  consider  the  equation  x2 +y2 -\~z2  —c2t2  =0  and  x'2  -f/2  +z'2  —  c2t'2  =  0, 
we  find  that  the  galilean  transformations  do  not  satisfy  them.  Lorentz  and 
Einstein  have  found  another  set  of  transformations  which  satisfies  uniquely  the 
above  equations.  These  formulae  of  new  structure  are  called  the  Lorentz- 
Einstein  transformation,  and  are  given  by  the  following  equations :  x'  =j3  (x  —vt), 
y'  =?,  z'  =z,  tf  =/3  (t—vx/c2);  where  v  is  the  relative  velocity  of  one  system  with 

*See  ‘The  Velocity  of  Light’,  in  Nature,  Aug.  20,  1932,  by  R.  J.  Kennedy,  and 
his  latest  paper  (No.  261)  in  the  Bibliography. 

SEMANTICS  OF  THE  EINSTEIN  THEORY 

respect  to  the  other,  c,  as  usual,  represents  the  velocity  of  light,  and  the  factor 

/9=1/V  (1  -»7eJ). 

The  most  striking  characteristic  of  these  formulae  is  that  if  we  assume 
that  c,  the  velocity  of  light,  is  ‘infinite’,  all  the  expressions  containing  e11  would 
become  zero,  c2  entering  only  in  the  denominators  of  fractions.  In  such  a  limiting 
case  /S  =  1  /V  (1-0)  =  1/1-1  and  x'  =  (x  -ut),  j  =y,  s'  =s,  t'  =f  which  are  the 

older  galilean  transformations.  , 

Thus  there  appears  the  astonishing  fact  that  all  the  pre-einsteinian  physics 
and  mechanics  which  involved  the  structural  assumption  of  the  galilean  trans¬ 
formation,  had  a  tacit  structural  assumption  of  the  infinite  velocity  of  light. 
This  assumption,  known  since  1676  to  be  false  as  to  facts,  remained  unnoticed 
before  Einstein. 

As  c  =3Xl010  cm. /sec.,  c2^9xl020  is  a  very  large  number,  whence  the 
fractions  vx/c 2  and  v2/c2  are  very  small,  and  0  differs  very  little  from  unity. 

If  we  apply  the  Lorentz-Einstein  transformation  instead  of  the  older 
galilean  transformation  to  mechanical  problems,  the  changes  are  so  small  that 
they  can  hardly  be  detected  by  experiments,  the  terrestrial  velocities  v  or  vx 
being  so  small  in  comparison  with  the  square  of  the  velocity  of  light. 

The  galilean  transformations  are  experimentally  shown  to  be  structurally 
invalid  for  optical  and  electrodynamic  events.  The  Lorentz-Einstein  transfor¬ 
mations  satisfy  structurally  the  optical  and  electrodynamic  events,  and  also 
apply  to  the  older  mechanical  problems.  We  see  that  the  Lorentz-Einstein 
transformations  are  more  general ,  as  they  include  the  galilean  transformations 
as  a  particular  case  when  we  assume  c  -oo. 

In  a  few  instances,  where  we  deal  with  large  velocities,  the  values  of  the 
fractions  containing  the  square  of  the  velocity  of  light  become  appreciable  and 
allow  experimental  testing.  As  yet  all  such  experiments  have  verified  the 

Einstein  theory.  t 

We  should  repeat  again  that  the  achievement  of  Einstein  was  the  building 

of  a  linguistic  system  similar  in  structure  to  the  world,  which  eliminated  a  patho¬ 
logical  pre-human  factor  of  objectification  of  terms.  Such  structural  elimination 
was  bound  to  bring  some  sanity  to  our  theories;  and  this  fact  is  independent  of 
experiments  in  physical  laboratories.  However,  it  is  gratifying  to  find  that  ex¬ 
periments  support  (1933)  the  Einstein  theory.  It  was  particularly  gratifying 
in  the  beginning,  when  physicists  and  Einstein  himself  believed  that  his  theory 
would  stand  or  fall  by  experiment.  Today  we  see  that  this  theory  represents 
such  an  enormous  general,  structural,  epistemological,  psycho-logical,  and 
methodological  non-elementalistic  advance,  that  no  matter  what  the  experiments 
show  or  may  show  in  the  future  we  cannot  return  to  a  language  of  the  old,  el, 
obviously  wrong,  structure  of  the  pre-einsteinian  days.  As  usual,  the  negative 
results  are  the  important  ones.  No  matter  what  experiments  may  show  we  shall 
never  again  accept  the  silent  structural  assumption  of  ‘infinite  velocity  for 
light,  when  we  know  positively  that  the  velocity  is  finite.  We  shall  never  again 
treat  terms  of  ‘matter',  ‘space',  and  ‘time’  as  objects— lower  order  abstractions, 
when  we  know  that  they  represent  terms — higher  order  abstractions.  When 

656  IX.  ON  EMPIRICAL  AND  VERBAL  STRUCTURES 

once  this  is  realized,  we  cannot  ascribe  'finiteness’  or  ‘infiniteness’,  'definiteness’, 
‘rigidity*.  ,  to  terms ,  verbal  forms,  forms  of  representation.  From  this  point  of 
view  we  may  consider  the  Einstein  theory  as  an  irreversible  gain.  If  it  had 
achieved  only  the  elimination  of  various  structural  prejudices  and  dogmas,  it 
has  done  well;  and  at  least  this  much  Einstein  has  already  achieved. 

The  structural,  verbal,  cortical  quest  for  invariance  in  our  formulations 
also  becomes  apparent.  The  older  mechanics  were  invariant  under  the  galilean 
transformation,  equations  preserved  their  form  in  different  systems  of  co¬ 
ordinates.  In  the  special  theory  of  relativity  the  new  laws  are  invariant  under 
the  Lorentz-Einstein  transformation.  In  this  special,  or  restricted,  theory  of 
relativity  only  uniform  relative  motion  was  taken  into  account.  If  we  generalize 
the  principle  of  relativity  to  any  kind  of  relative  motion  we  pass  from  the 
restricted  to  the  general  theory,  which  demands  that  the  laws  of  physics  should 
be  formulated  in  a  generally  invariant  form  for  any  arbitrary  transformations. 

For  this  structural,  cortical  reason  it  is  necessary  to  express  all  the  laws  of 
physics  in  tensor  equations,  which  satisfy  such  conditions  of  general  invariance. 
If  this  cannot  be  done,  there  must  be  something  wrong  with  our  language,  as 
such,  and  with  our  verbal  laws.  We  require  structural  revision  of  those  laws  so 
as  to  be  able  to  express  them  in  tensor  equations.  The  newtonian  law  of  gravi¬ 
tation  and  the  older  form  of  the  law  of  conservation  of  energy  are  perhaps  the 
most  remarkable  examples.  They  do  not  survive  such  minimal,  and  yet  entirely 
justified,  structural  requirements  as  those  of  the  general  theory  of  Einstein,  and 
therefore  they  cannot  be  structurally  satisfactory. 

We  have  already  seen  that  the  equation  jc2  -j-y2  -fz2  =  c2t2  or  x2  f  y2  -fz2  — c2/2  =  0 
represents  the  equation  of  the  spherical  propagation  of  light  with  the  finite  veloc¬ 
ity  c .  The  discovery  that  the  velocity  of  light  is  a  universal  constant  for  all 
observers,  and  the  above  equation,  led  historically  to  the  re-discovery  by  Einstein 
of  the  Lorentz  transformation  which,  as  we  have  seen,  has  assumed  such  over¬ 
whelming  structural  importance.  The  meaning  of  these  facts  is  worth  considering. 

^  In  Chapter  XVII  we  analysed  briefly  the  elementalistic  language  of  ‘matter’, 
space  ,  and  ‘time  ,  and  came  to  the  conclusion  that  to  eliminate  objectification 
we  must  abandon  the  semantic  disturbance  and  the  use  of  the  term  ‘is*  of 
identity.  Instead,  we  must  use  an  actional  functional  language  to  describe 
ordered  functioning,  behaviour,  or  operations.  By  necessity  we  were  led  to  a 
‘contact’  method.  We  also  discovered  that  in  accepting  the  above  structural 
methods  we  were  compelled  to  discriminate  between  different  orders  of  ab¬ 
straction,  since  what  we  see,  feel,  and  experience  is  not  what  we  say  about  it. 
We  found  that  on  the  ‘objective’  level  of  our  actual  activities,  (manipulating 
instruments .  ,)  which  represent  the  silent  unspeakable  level,  we  could  never 
find  a  situation  in  which  the  old  language  of  ‘matter’,  ‘space’,  and  ‘time’  could 
be  used  without  coming  violently  into  conflict  with  the  properly  analysed 
facts.  We  came  to  the  conclusion  that  this  language  was  not  structurally  satis¬ 
factory,  for  verbally ,  ‘space’,  ‘time*,  and  ‘matter*  were  supposed  to  be  quite 
clear-cut  and  separate  entities,  while  in  actual  experience  we  never  could  find 
such  separated  objective  entities.  It  became  obvious  that  the  structure  of  the 

SEMANTICS  OF  THE  EINSTEIN  THEORY 

old  language  of  'matter1,  ‘space*,  and  ‘time’  was  different  from  the  structure  of 
the  outside  world  as  we  now  know  it.  We  found  ourselves  in  a  situation  where 
we  had  to  choose  either  to  keep  the  old  language  which,  as  it  differed  from  them 
in  structure,  could  never  give  a  coherent  account  of  facts  at  hand,  or  else  to 
build  up  a  new  language  with  structure  similar  to  that  of  the  outside  world,  in 
order  to  have  the  possibility  of  coherent  conversation  about  it. 

The  invention  of  such  a  new  language  is  of  course  an  extremely  difficult 
undertaking.  In  fact,  it  requires  some  genius  to  invent  new,  more  structurally 
similar,  forms  of  representation  for  the  old  facts.  Lorentz,  Einstein,  and  Min¬ 
kowski  prepared  and  finally  produced  such  a  structurally  new  language.  The 
difficulty  was  that  verbally  we  had  already  separated  what  empirically  could 
not  be  separated.  The  problem  was  to  amalgamate  somehow  the  old  struc¬ 
turally  elementalistic  language  of  ‘space*  and  ‘time’  into  a  noh-elementalistic 
language.  The  key  to  such  an  amalgamation  is  found  in  the  light-wave  equation 
which  gives  us  the  structural  information  about  the  world,  x2+^+z2 —cH2, 

This  equation  represents  an  equality.  The  left-hand  side  is  expressed  in 
‘spatial’  terms  only — the  distance  between  two  points  O  and  P,  The  right-hand 
side  expresses  the  ‘spatial’  length,  but  in  a  ‘temporal*  term.  We  see  that  here 
we  have  means  of  translation,  and  a  possibility  of  amalgamation  of  two  ele¬ 
mentalistic  languages,  which  were  not  supposed  to  be  intertranslatable. 

The  Lorentz-Einstein  transformation  formulae  are  x'  =£  (x—  vt),  y'=y, 
zf  -zt  tr  - j8  (t—vx/c2)  where  v  is  the  relative  velocity  of  the  two  systems  of  co¬ 
ordinates,  c,  the  constant  velocity  of  light,  and  0  -  l/v  (1  ~v2/c2). 

The  formulae  for  x '  and  t*  which  typify,  on  the  left-hand  side,  xr  a  ‘spatial’ 
length  and  tf  a  ‘time’,  are  of  particular  interest.  We  see  that  on  the  right-hand 
side  of  the  expressions  the  value  of  the  ‘spatial’  xf  is  given  by  0  ( x  —vt)  which 
involves  ltime\  The  value  of  ‘time’,  t(  is  given  by  j8  (/—  iw/c2),  which  involves 
the  ‘spatial’  length  x.  So  we  see  that  our  amalgamation  is  complete,  and  separa¬ 
tion  impossible.  The  above  formulae  express  structurally  the  simple  experi¬ 
mental  fact  that  ‘space’  and  ‘time*  cannot  be  separated.  At  this  point  we  are 
not  ready  to  discuss  ‘matter*.  This  will  be  considered  further  on  in  this  work 
(see  Chapters  XL  and  XLI). 

The  above  formulae  have  also  a  very  important  physical  and  experimental 
meaning,  as  they  introduce  the  ‘contact’  methods  into  our  language.  Our 
actual  measurements  of  ‘space’  and  ‘time’  are  strictly  connected  with  readings 
on  some  instruments,  and  involve  therefore  coincidences  between  pointers  and 
‘simultaneity’.  In  all  instances  the  finite  velocity  of  propagation  of  signals  must 
be  taken  into  consideration.  When  our  instrument,  or  the  eye,  is  affected  by 
signals  there  is  always  a  delay  due  to  the  finite  velocity  of  the  propagation  of 
the  signals;  These  delays  are  part  and  parcel  of  our  experiment,  and  so  our 
formulae  must  contain  terms  explicitly  involving  this  finite  velocity  of  propaga¬ 
tion.  This  innovation  involves  not  only  a  most  profound  structural  epistemo¬ 
logical  and  semantic  revolution  but  supplies  the  very  factor  that  enables  us  to 
formulate  more  structurally  satisfactory  languages  (theories),  which  Lorentz, 
Einstein,  and  Minkowski  have  produced. 

658  IX.  ON  EMPIRICAL  AND  VERBAL  STRUCTURES 

We  have  been  contrasting  finite  and  ‘infinite’  velocities.  Let  us  say  frankly 
that  ‘infinite’  velocity  is  a  polite  way  of  speaking  about  blunders  of  observation. 
‘Infinite’  velocity  is  meaningless.  Velocity  is  defined  as  v  -s/t  and  if  t  is  taken 
as  zero  or  in  other  words,  if  one  of  the  fundamental  factors  in  our  definition  is 
lacking,  our  definition  ceases  to  define  the  term  in  question — in  this  case,  velocity. 
So  when  the  term  ‘time’  is  lacking,  we  have  no  velocity ,  by  definition;  so,  to 
speak  or  speculate  about  ‘infinite’  velocity  is  simply  making  noises,  and  not 
saying  anything.  The  negative  of  this  noise ;  namely,  saying  that  velocity  is  not 
‘infinite’,  or  in  a  positive  sense,  that  velocity  is  ‘finite’,  is  on  a  different  verbal 
footing,  although  it  remains  a  polite  invitation  to  stop  talking  non-sense. 

It  should  be  noticed  carefully  that  the  general  theory  of  Einstein  is  a  high 
structural  generalization  of  the  special  theory;  and  that  both  of  them  are 
generalizations  of  the  classical  mechanical  principle  of  relativity.  It  is  founded, 
not  on  the  introduction  of  any  extraordinary  structural  assumptions,  but  on 
the  elimination  of  some  unjustified  and  false-as-to-facts  structural  assumptions, 
such  as  that  of  the  ‘infinite’  velocity  of  light. 

Both  the  theory  of  Einstein,  and  the  theory  presented  in  this  work  are  long 
overdue.  The  Einstein  theory  could  have  been  formulated  as  soon  as  we  dis¬ 
covered  the  finite  velocity  of  light,  in  1676.  It  should  be  noticed  that  this  last 
discovery  was  also  overdue,  as  it  did  not  require  experiments  to  establish  the 
finite  velocity  of  light.  It  was  sufficient  to  establish  the  meaningless  character 
of  ‘infinite’  velocity,  which  on  symbolic  grounds,  could  have  been  accomplished 
much  earlier,  and  to  conclude,  that  the  velocity  of  light  must  be  finite.  This 
example  shows  the  hampering,  blocking,  semantic  effect  which  different  mean¬ 
ingless  verbal  structures  have  on  us.  To  express  this  high  and  satisfactory 
structural  generalization,  Einstein  had  to  select  the  most  general  and  struc¬ 
turally  appropriate  language  in  existence.  He  chose  at  some  stage  of  his  work 
the  language  of  E  and  four-dimensional  geometries  in  general  and  that  of  the 
differential  geometry  and  the  tensor  calculus  in  particular.  In  the  latest  field 
theory,  Einstein  and  Mayer  introduce  a  new  more  general  and  very  revolutionary 
mathematical  language  where  vectors  and  tensors  in  an  w-dimensional  spread 
may  have  m  components. 

At  present  it  appears  that  two  other  very  general  mathematical  disciplines 
will  be  used  increasingly  in  the  future.  One  of  them  is  the  theory  of  groups ;  the 
other  is  analysis  situs .  In  the  latter  we  study  only  these  characteristics  of  figures 
that  are  unaffected  (invariant)  by  continuous  deformation  produced  without 
tearing.  Two  structural  points  are  relevant  for  us  in  this  connection:  namely, 
that  the  analysis  situs  is  fundamentally  a  differential  and  also  an  ordinal  dis¬ 
cipline,  based  on  asymmetrical  relations.  In  the  next  chapter,  as  an  illustration 
of  the  actional,  behaviouristic,  functional,  operational,  differential,  contact 
method  a  short  account  will  be  given  of  the  way  Einstein  structurally  treated 
‘simultaneity’.  The  elimination  of  the  old  structural  dogma  about  ‘simul¬ 
taneity’  resulting  from  the  semantic  disturbance  of  objectification  of  ‘time’,  is 
one  of  the  outstanding  achievements  of  Einstein  and  is  historically  the  begin¬ 
ning  of  his  theory. 

CHAPTER  XXXVII 

ON  THE  NOTION  OF  ‘SIMULTANEITY* 

So  we  see  that  we  cannot  attach  any  absolute  signification  to  the  concept 
of  simultaneity,  but  that  two  events  which,  viewed  from  a  system  of  co¬ 
ordinates,  are  simultaneous,  can  no  longer  be  looked  upon  as  simultaneous 
events  when  envisaged  from  a  system  which  is  in  motion  relatively  to  that 

/I.'*  A.  EINSTEIN 

In  the  older  days  we  accepted  as  self-evident  the  structural  assumption 
that  there  is  sense  in  such  a  statement  as  that  an  event  A  on  the  sun  was  Simul¬ 
taneous’  with  an  event  B  on  the  earth.  We  assumed  also  that  the  ‘moments  of 
our  consciousness’  had  a  universal  ‘meaning’.  We  tacitly  assumed,  for  instance, 
that  when  we  saw  or  photographed  an  event  on  the  sun,  that  it  happened  just 
the  moment  we  saw  it.  Such  structural  assumptions  were  rudely  disturbed  by 
the  discovery  of  the  finite  velocity  of  light.  Today  we  know  that  when  we  see 
or  photograph  an  event  on  the  sun,  that  event  happened  approximately  eight 
minutes  earlier,  as  it  takes  about  eight  minutes  for  the  light  from  the  sun  to 
reach  our  earth.  We  begin  to  realize  that  the  moments  of  our  perceptions  have 
no  universal  significance. 

We  inquire  first  what  we  mean  structurally  by  simultaneity.  We  do  not 
need  to  go  into  details.  The  application  of  functional  and  contact  methods, 
even  in  the  rough,  will  assist  us.  We  can  speak  in  terms  of  instruments.  For 
instance,  we  can  build  a  special,  very  fast  moving  picture  camera,  C,  with  two 
lenses  D  and  E,  at  two  opposite  sides,  and  a  calibrated  film,  F,  running  rapidly 
through  the  middle  of  the  camera  as  shown  in.  Fig.  1.  If  we  focus  our  double 
camera  on  two  flashes,  A  and  B,  occurring  at  ‘equal  distances  ,  L,  from  the  film, 

we  say  that  the  flashes  occur  simultane¬ 
ously  by  definition  if  the  pictures,  a  and 
b  of  the  flashes  A  and  B,  appear  exactly 
opposite  each  other  on  the  film,  or  if  we 
have  one  picture.  If,  under  the  condi¬ 
tions  of  the  experiment,  where  the  dis¬ 
tances  between  the  origins  of  the  flashes 
and  the  film  are  equal,  and  our  film  is 
moving  very  rapidly,  the  pictures  of  the 
flashes  do  not  occur  exactly  opposite 
each  other,  but  one  picture  is  separated 
from  the  other,  then  we  have  two 
pictures,  and  conclude,  by  definition , 

r 

Fig.  1 

that  the  flashes  are  not  simultaneous. 

We  introduce  this  hypothetical  instrument  to  show  that,  in  discussing 
physics,  and  the  theory  of  Einstein  in  physics,  we  do  not  speak  of  ‘psychology’ 
or  personal  ‘subjectivity’,  but  that  we  do  deal  with  the  inherent  physical  sub- 

660  IX.  ON  EMPIRICAL  AND  VERBAL  STRUCTURES 

jectivity  of  the  instruments  and  the  finite  velocity  of  propagation.  When  we 
discuss  the  psycho-logical  or  methodological  or  semantic  significance  of  science 
and  scientific  method,  we  deal  with  different  subjects. 

When  we  use  the  term  ‘observer'  we  mean  an  observer  so  equipped  that  he 
can  do  whatever  is  demanded  of  him. 

What  was  said  about  the  definition  of  ‘simultaneity*  by  the  aid  of  the 
camera,  applies  also  to  ourselves. 

The  problem  of  prime  importance  before  us  is  to  find  out  if  ‘simultaneity*, 
as  defined,  has  an  ‘absolute’  and  universal  significance,  or  if  it  is  perhaps  a 
private  and  relative  notion. 

We  will  carry  out  the  analysis  in  two  ways,  the  first  by  example,  which 
will  be  instructive,  though  perhaps  not  completely  conclusive;  the  other,  by 
the  use  of  the  Lorentz-Einstein  transformation. 

Let  us  perform  our  last  experiment,  which,  with  modern  methods  seems  to 
be  feasible,  in  a  slightly  more  complicated  form. 

We  can  select  a  dark  night  in  which 
flashes  will  photograph  well  even  at 
considerable  distances.  We  can  place 
powerful  projectors  at  A  and  B,  and  we 
place  our  camera  so  that  the  film  will 
come  exactly  at  C,  midway  between  A 
and  B.  We  can  start  the  mechanism  of 
the  rapidly  moving  film  and,  by  an 
electrical  contact  made  at  C,  we  can 
produce  a  short  flash  from  each  of  the 
two  projectors.  Because  of  the  assump¬ 
tions,  AC— CB,  and  equal  velocity  of 
the  propagation  of  electrical  currents 
and  light-waves  in  all  directions  we  shall 
have  by  the  structural  definitions  which 
condition  the  experiment,  one  picture 
in  Fig.  2,  say  at  the  spot  of  our  moving 
film  marked  by  5.  The  rays  of  light  from 
A  and  B  would  arrive  ‘simultaneously* — 
that  is,  ‘at  the  same  time’ — and  would 
affect  our  moving  film  in  one  spot .  Our 
definition  was  for  a  stationary  observer, 
and  under  the  conditions,  the  experi¬ 
ment  was  fairly  definite — all  the  under¬ 
lying  structural  assumptions,  of  course, 
being  taken  for  granted. 

Now  consider  an  observer,  as  shown  in  Fig.  3,  moving  uniformly  in  the 
direction  from  A  to  B. 

Let  us  assume  that  he  is  also  equipped  with  a  similar  sort  of  moving  picture 
camera  as  the  stationary  observer,  and  that  just  before  he  passes  the  point  C 

SIMULTANEITY 

the  electrical  impulse  to  the  projectors  is  sent.  Let  us  assume  further  that  the 
mark  5  on  his  moving  film  is  exactly  at  the  focal  point  of  the  camera  as  C  is 
passed.  The  electrical  impulses  travelling  from  C  to  A  and  B  would  travel  the 
distance  AC  =BC(  produce  the  flashes  A  and  B  which  again  would  travel  with 
finite  velocity  in  all  directions.  During  the  interval  these  impulses  and  light¬ 
waves  are  travelling,  our  observer  is  moving  from  A  toward  B,  and  spot  5  on  his 
moving  film  is  no  more  at  the  focus  of  the  camera.  Obviously  he  will  meet  the 
light-wave  from  B  first,  at  C',  let  us  say,  when  mark  6  on  his  film  is  at  the  focus 
(Fig.  3).  After  another  short  interval  when  he  reaches  C "  and  mark  7  on  his 
film  is  at  the  focus,  the  light-wave  from  A  overtakes  him  (Fig.  4). 

So  we  see  that  what  was  ‘simultaneous’  (by  definition)  and  produced  one 
impression  on  the  moving  film  of  the  stationary  observer,  was  not  ‘simultaneous  , 
(again  by  definition),  for  the  moving  observer,  as  his  film  registers  two  pictures. 

As  both  observers  use  similar  instruments  and  one  set  of  definitions,  ob¬ 
viously  both  are  entitled  to  claim  that  their  records  on  the  film  are  conclusive. 
So  the  first  can  claim  that  the  flashes  were  ‘simultaneous’,  the  second  can  claim 
that  they  were  not  ‘simultaneous’.  The  reverse  is  equally  true.  If  the  moving 
observer  had  one  picture,  and  claimed  ‘simultaneity’,  the  stationary  observer 
would  have  two  pictures,  and  deny  ‘simultaneity’. 

But  when  two  observers  are  equally  justified  in  making  two  opposing  claims 
where,  by  their  very  meanings,  there  is  only  one  possible,  we  must  conclude 
that  the  claim  itself  is  meaningless.  We  see  that  ‘absolute  simultaneity  is  a 
fiction  and  impossible  to  ascertain,  as  it  would  depend  on  some  impossible 
'absolute  motion’,  or  ‘infinite  velocity’  of  propagation  of  signals.  .  ^ 

The  analytical  form  of  showing  the  impossibility  of  ‘absolute  simultaneity 
is  very  simple,  and  follows  directly  from  the  Lorentz-Einstein  transformation. 

Let  us  imagine  two  observers,  one  in  an  S  system  of  co-ordinates  (s,  y,  z,  0 
and  another  in  an  S'  system  of  co-ordinates  (#',  /,  z',  t')  moving  relatively  with 
the  velocity  v. 

Let  us  assume  two  events  happening  in  the  unprimed  system  at  the  point 
(#i,  yi,  si)  at  the  ‘time’  k,  and  the  other  at  the  point  ( x2 ,  yz,  )  at  the  ‘time  k. 
According  to  the  Lorentz-Einstein  transformation  the  ‘times’  at  which  the  two 
events  occur  relatively  to  the  primed  system  are  given  by  the  formula^ — 
h'  =0  (h -x& /c2),  k'  =0  (k -x2v A2),  where  as  usual  0  =  l/v  1  -v2 /cK 
If  we  assume  that  in  our  unprimed  system  S  the  two  events  were  simul¬ 
taneous',  which  means  that  they  ‘occurred  at  the  same  time’,  h  would  be  equal 
to  k,  that  is,  h=k,  or  h-k=Q.  Let  us  find  the  difference  between  the  two 
primed  ‘times'  in  the  moving  system  5',  and  see  if  this  difference  is  zero,  which 

would  mean  that  the  primed  times  are  equal.  . 

Returning  to  our  formulae  which  give  us  the  values  for  the  primed  system 

(1) 

‘times’,  we  express  their  difference  as 

k'-k'  =0  (h-xiv/c2)  -0  (k-x2v/c2)  =0  (i h-k+x2v/c2-xiv/c  ). 

But  we  assumed  h -k  =0;  therefore  h' -t2  «0  {x2vfc2 -xy/c2).  . 

This  last  formula  shows  clearly  that  //  ~k'  cannot  be  zero ;  or  in  other  words, 

ti  cannot  be  equal  to  t2  unless  x\  —  x2. 

662  IX.  ON  EMPIRICAL  AND  VERBAL  STRUCTURES 

