The  two  events  which,  for  an  observer  in  the  unprimed  system,  happen 
'simultaneously',  (/i  =t$ ,  or  t\  —  h  ”0)  at  different  places,  (or  xi  not  equal  to  x2, 
Xx9^  Xi)t  cannot  be  'simultaneous*  for  the  moving  observer  in  the  primed  sys¬ 
tem  S',  but  will  happen  at  different  'times'  (ti  is  not  equal  to  ti ,  or  t\  -ti  j*  0). 

It  is  extremely  instructive  to  consider  further  what  happens  in  measuring 
‘times*  and  'lengths'  in  systems  which  are  moving  relatively  to  each  other. 

If,  in  the  equation  (1)  above,  we  assume  xx  =x2,  this  means  that  both  events 
occur  at  one  place  in  the  stationary  unprimed  system  S. 

By  changing  the  signs  and  cancelling  the  terms  with  Xx  and  x2,  which  are 
equal  and  of  opposite  signs,  we  have  ti-ti=P  (h~h)  whence,  substituting 
for  ft  its  value  I/'n/  1  —v2/c2,  we  obtain 

k'~h'=vi-!*/c2 

This  last  formula  brings  out  a  few  remarkable  issues.  In  terrestrial  velocities 
the  square  of  the  velocity  of  the  motion  v 2  of  the  observer  in  the  primed  system 
S’  is  very  small  as  compared  with  the  square  of  the  velocity  of  light  c2,  so  the 
fraction  v*/c2  is  small,  Vl  -i fi/c2  differs  very  little  from  unity  but  the  whole 
denominator  is  less  than  unity,  and  so  ti  —t\  is  not  equal  to  t%  —t\t  but  greater. 

In  other  words,  the  interval  of  'time'  between  the  two  events  appears 
larger  to  the  observer  in  the  primed  moving  system  than  to  the  observer  in  the 
stationary  unprimed  system.  In  general,  among  all  systems  in  a  state  of  uni¬ 
form  relative  motion,  that  one  in  which  two  events  occur  at  one  place ,  is  char¬ 
acterized  by  the  fact  that  the  'time'  interval  between  the  two  events  appears 
shortest  to  an  observer  in  this  system.  The  shortest  interval  means  that  to  an 
observer  in  the  system,  the  events  run  their  course  most  rapidly.  A  process 
which,  with  reference  to  a  given  system,  occurs  in  one  place,  appears  to  run  its 
course  most  rapidly  to  an  observer  in  that  system,  but  more  slowly  to  a  moving 
observer  in  any  other  system. 

The  more  rapid  the  relative  motion,  the  slower  the  process  will  appear, 
and,  in  the  limit,  if  an  observer  could  move  with  the  velocity  of  light,  vt=c2f 
the  denominator  of  our  equation  would  become  1 — 1=0  and  ti —ti  would 
become  'infinite'  and  all  events  would  be  at  a  standstill. 

As  the  formulae  for  length,  x  and  x't  involve  the  ‘times'  and,  as  we  see, 
the  intervals  of  'time'  are  dependent  on  the  relative  velocities,  by  a  similar 
process  of  reasoning  we  find  that  the  standards  of  length  are  also  relative,  and 
that  the  length  L’  in  the  primed  system  is  represented  by  V  =  La/  1  —v2/c2. 
In  other  words,  to  an  observer  who  sees  the  rod  in  motion,  it  will  appear 
'shortened',  and  among  all  systems  in  a  state  of  uniform  relative  motion,  the 
one  in  which  the  rod  is  at  rest  is  distinguished  from  all  others  by  the  fact  that 
in  it  the  rod  appears  longer  than  in  any  other  system.  For  instance,  a  metre 
rod  lying  on  the  earth  in  the  direction  of  its  motion  would  appear  to  an  observer 
on  the  sun  to  be  shortened  by  S  X 10”7  cm.  In  the  limit,  when  v  =c,  the  fraction 
£2  =  L  1  —  1  *=0  and  U  =0,  which  means  that  to  an  observer  moving  with  the 
velocity  of  light,  a  three-dimensional  body  would  appear  as  two-dimensional, 

SIMULTANEITY 

or  a  two-dimensional  figure  as  one-dimensional.  The  co-ordinates  y  and  s,  as 
we  have  seen,  do  not  enter  into  consideration  as  they  are  equal  in  both  systems 
moving  relatively  in  the  X  direction,  and  the  ‘time’  co-ordinates  are  inde¬ 
pendent  of  them. 

If  a  body  at  rest  appears  to  the  observer  in  the  unprimed  system  as  a 
sphere,  it  will  appear  as  an  oblate  spheroid  to  an  observer  in  the  primed  system. 

We  see  that  structurally  not  only  ‘simultaneity*  and  ‘time’  are  not  ab¬ 
solute  but  also  that  length,  and  therefore  shape ,  is  relative. 

We  have  seen  that  the  ‘shortest*  and  ‘longest*  values  are  important  char¬ 
acteristics  of  the  motion.  This  suggests  why  in  the  general  theory  of  Einstein 
we  are  interested  in,  and  introduce,  geodetics. 

It  should  be  mentioned  here  that  the  Lorentz  transformation  has  been 
reached  by  difficult  considerations  involving  Maxwell’s  electromagnetic  field 
equations,  unrelated  to  the  Einstein  theory.  Einstein  found  the  Lorentz  trans¬ 
formation  by  the  simplest  consideration  connected  with  his  theory.  The  finding 
of  such  important  equations  by  two  methods,  entirely  different  structurally, 
must  be  considered  as  a  convincing  proof  of  the  fundamental  importance  of 
such  formulae,  the  more  so  since  they  follow  from  very  simple  and  fundamental 
structural  principles  which  in  themselves  cannot  be  denied  because  they  are 
negative  in  character.  Negative  statements  are  on  a  different  footing  in  the 
new  systems;  they  follow  structurally  from  a  A  orientation,  just  as  the  older 
positive  dogmas  were  the  structural  results  of  aristotelianism  and  the  delusional 
results  of  identification. 

The  facts  mentioned  concerning  the  measures  of  length  and  the  behaviour 
of  clocks  do  not  present  any  paradoxes.  They  simply  say  that  these  discrepancies 
are  mutual  and  inevitable,  as  any  measurement  is  only  a  measurement  when 
it  can  be  registered  by  an  instrument,  or  seen,  or  recorded  in  some  way.  If  the 
measuring  rods  and  clocks  are  moving  relatively  to  us,  what  we  see  or  what 
our  instruments  record  is  not  what  is  happening  on  the  moving  system,  which 
no  one  can  see  or  record  from  outside  the  system.  What 
reaches  us  is  simply  what  the  light-waves  or  other  signals 
moving  with  finite  velocity  (and  therefore  retarded  by  a 
motion  away  from  us)  bring  to  us.  As  all  existing  methods 
of  communication  and  all  known  signals  have  finite  veloci¬ 
ties,  these  structural  differences  which  are  conditioned  by 
the  inherent  characteristics  of  the  world  should  be  taken 
into  consideration  in  modern  science. 

If  we  draw  a  square  ABCD  (Fig.  5)  and  an 
aviator  E  were  to  pass  this  square  sign  with  a  velocity 
of  161,000  miles  a  second*  in  the  direction  AB , 

*1  deliberately  select  such  a  velocity  so  as  to  make  the  contraction  given  by  the 
formula  V  —  L V 1  —  tf/c*  —  1/2.  With  this  aim  we  must  make  the  fraction  repre- 
sented  by  zi’/c’ =  3/4,  then  1-3/4  =  1/4  and  /l/4=J/2;  We  findthe  jquareof 
our  velocity  v  by  taking  3/4  of  the  square  of  the  velocity  of  light  —  %<r  ana 
find  u  =  £Vr3  =  161,000  miles  a  second. 

664  IX.  ON  EMPIRICAL  AND  VERBAL  STRUCTURES 

he  would  see— and  any  instrument  carried  by  him  would  register  it — the  sides 
of  our  square  (AB=BC  =  CD  =DA)  in  the  direction  of  his  flight,  namely  AB 
and  CD ,  as  ‘contracted’  to  half  their  length.  If  he  turned  at  right  angles,  the 
sides  AB  and  CD  would  ‘expand’  and  the  other  sides,  which  are  at  right  angles, 
BC  and  DA ,  would  ‘contract’.  For  us  the  sides  AB  and  BC  are  equal ,  for  him 
one  appears  twice  the  other.  To  him  our  square  appears  oblong. 

Under  such  natural  structural  conditions  it  is  a  fundamental  fallacy  to 
ascribe  to  ‘lengths'  or  ‘shapes’  or  ‘times’  any  ‘absolute’  significance.  If  we  grasp 
the  structural  fact  that  ‘length’  and  ‘duration’  are  not  things  inherent  in  the 
external  world,  nor  are  ‘matter’,  ‘space’,  and  ‘time’,  but  that  they  appear  as 
relations  between  events  and  some  specified  observer,  and  forms  of  representa¬ 
tions,  then  all  paradoxes  would  disappear. 

A  suggestion  which  concerns  visualization  may  be  helpful.  If  we  realize 
the  structural  fact  that  words  are  not  the  objects  they  represent,  we  shall  always 
discriminate  automatically  between  what  we  see,  feel .  ,  on  the  level  of  lower 
order  abstractions,  and  what  we  say  on  the  level  of  higher  order  abstractions. 
When  we  have  conquered  that  single  difficulty  we  could  never  then  identify 
the  two  different  orders  of  abstractions.  We  would  evaluate  the  terms  ‘matter’, 
space  ,  and  ‘time’  as  forms  of  representation,  and  non-objects,  and  we  would 
describe  events  in  a  functional,  operational,  behaviouristic  language  of  order. 
If  we  realize  and  feel  the  finite  velocity  of  propagation  of  all  processes,  we  may 
visualize  all  that  has  been  explained  here.  Diagrammatizing  and  even  follow¬ 
ing  with  one’s  hand,  the  visualized  order  of  occurrences,  helps  enormously.  Try 
to  visualize  how  the  aviator  in  the  last  example  is  flying  away  and  how  much 
more  slowly  the  light  impressions  from  the  earth  are  reaching  him  or  his  in¬ 
struments,  and  the  difficulties  will  soon  vanish. 

We  shall  also  be  greatly  helped  in  our  power  of  visualization  when  we 
become  acquainted  with  the  structure  of  the  Minkowski  four-dimensional 
world.  An  explanation  of  this  appears  in  the  next  chapter. 

CHAPTER  XXXVIII 

ON  THE  ‘WORLD’  OF  MINKOWSKI 

Moreover,  the  really  fundamental  things  have  a  way  of  appearing  to  be 
simple  once  they  have  been  stated  by  a  genius,  who  was  in  thiacase  Min- 
kowski.  (43U  G-  Y-  BAINICH 

We  have  already  freely  used  the  structural  term  ‘dimension’  and  only 
hinted  at  its  meanings.  Before  we  approach  the  Minkowski  world  we  must 
summarize  roughly  what  for  our  purpose  we  should  know  about  dimensions. 

There  is  nothing  mysterious  about  the  term  'dimension*.  First  of  all,  the 
dimensionality  of  a  manifold  is  not  inherent  in  the  manifold  as  such.  It  is  a 
characteristic  of  order  and  so  of  structure.  A  manifold  can  be  ordered  in  different 
ways,  so  that  it  follows  that  one  manifold  may  have  different  dimensionality, 

depending  on  how  we  order  it.  ... 

A  manifold  which  has  linear  order  and  structure  is  called  one-dimensional. 
A  two-dimensional  manifold  is  then  a  linearly  ordered  manifold  of  linearly 
ordered  manifolds , . 

IT., .ally  we  speak  about  oUr  ‘space’  of  daily  experiences  as  a  three- 
dimensional  manifold,  but  this  is  true  only  with  reference  to  points,  and  not 
true  with  reference  to  lines  or  spheres.  The  manifold  of  all  spheres  in  space 
is,  for  instance,  a  four-dimensional  manifold;  so  also  is  a  manifold  of  lines. 

Let  us  explain  the  line-dimensionality  of  our  ‘space’  in  terms  of  lines. 
A  line  can  be  given  by  two  points— one,  let  us  say,  in  the  floor  of  our  room, 
the  other  in  the  ceiling.  Each  of  these  points  is  given  by  two  co-ordinates; 
it  has  two  degrees  of  freedom;  and  so  our  ‘space’  is  a  four-dimensional  (2x2) 
manifold  in  lines .  This  means  that  to  distinguish  any  line  in  our  ‘space’  from 
any  other  line  we  would  have  to  have  four  data .  Similarly,  if  we  deal  with 
spheres,  a  manifold  made  up  of  spheres  requires  four  data,  three  for  locating 
the  centre  and  one  giving  the  radius  of  the  sphere.  The  above  examples,  of 
course,  do  not  exhaust  the  structural  possibilities.1 

The  term  ‘dimension’  does  not  apply  solely  to  what  we  call  ‘space’.  The 
term  applies  to  any  manifold  which  we  can  order  in  some  particular  way. 
Manifolds  or  aggregates  abound  everywhere  in  our  lives.  The  domain  of 
colours,  for  instance,  is  a  manifold;  and  so  is  the  domain  of  tone,  or  of  re¬ 
membrances  ,  .  No  manifold  in  itself  has  any  dimensionality.  To  ascribe 
dimensionality  to  the  manifold  we  must  first  order  it  and  the  number  of  its 
dimensionality,  or  its  ascribed  or  discovered  structure,  may  differ  according 
to  the  principle  of  ordering  used. 

In  discussing  dimensionality  we  have  two  purposes.  First,  to  dispel  t  e 
semantic  fright  about  this  simple  term;  and,  second,  to  suggest  means  for 
visualization,  which  for  our  purpose  are  of  great  neurological  importance. 

When  we  say  that  the  world  is  structurally  a  four-dimensional  manifold, 
we  mean  only  that  according  to  our  experience  and  the  structure  of  our  nervous 

666  IX.  ON  EMPIRICAL  AND  VERBAL  STRUCTURES 

system  the  world  of  our  experience  is  represented  by  a  fourfold  order.  We  can 
order  the  events  as  to  the  right  and  to  the  left,  forward  and  backward,  up  and 
down  and  sooner  and  later.  In  our  experience  this  fourfold  order  is  completely 
united,  and  cannot  be  separated  unless  we  deliberately  choose  to  neglect  some 
of  these  orderings. 

Nor  does  it  mean  that  all  these  dimensions  are  ‘identical’.  We  are  accus¬ 
tomed,  for  instance,  to  consider  the  three  dimensions  of  ‘space’  as  ‘identical’ 
or  at  least  equivalent.  Is  this  true  in  life?  Can  we  disregard,  for  instance,  the 
structural  difference  between  vertical  and  horizontal?  If  we  did,  quite  probably 
as  Eddington  remarks,  we  should  come  to  an  untimely  end,  and  break  our 

Obviously  if  we  visualise  our  plenum,  as  made  up  of  lines  or  particles  bv 
necessity  we  visualize  structurally  a  four-dimensional  manifold.  It  should  be 
noticed  that  a  four-dimensional  ‘absolute  void’,  or  ‘absolute  nothingness’ 
besides  being  non-sense,  cannot  be  visualized  at  all,  because  it  could  have 
no  structure. 

We  see  that  all  metaphysical  ‘fourth  dimensions’  are  not  only  non-sense 
but  usually  indicate  a  pathological  semantic  disturbance.  The  intensity  of 
such  disturbances  is  often  high,  because  it  is  entirely  impossible  for  a  sane 
person  to  deal  with  such  meaningless  noises.  The  victim  is  obsessed  with 
attempts  to  do  the  impossible,— a  semantically  hopeless  and  painful  task. 

Such  objectifications  of  terms  are  very  dangerous  and  science  should  try, 
y  proper  emphasis,  to  eliminate  them.  Outside  of  science  the  term  ‘dimension’ 
has  no  meaning  and  ought  to  be  definitely  abandoned  in  our  speculations, 
for  the  sake  of  sanity. 

The  notion  of  ‘time’  as  a  ‘fourth  dimension’  is  by  no  means  new.  It 
appeared  in  a  vague  form  centuries  ago.  The  notion  however  was  not  formu¬ 
lated  properly,  and  therefore  was  unworkable.  Instead  of  helping  science 
it  only  hindered  it.  ’ 

Inspired  by  Einstein’s  work,  the  mathematician  Minkowski,  whose  work 
had  been  mainly  in  the  theory  of  numbers,  began  to  work  at  the  theory  of 
manifolds  of  any  number  of  dimensions.  In  1908  he  delivered  his  famous  and 
semantically  epoch-making  address  on  Space  and  Time  which  fused  geometry 
and  physics  structurally.  In  this  address  he  insisted  that  the  connection  between 
space  and  time’  as  given  by  the  Lorentz-Einstein  formulae  is  not  accidental 
but  exhibits  that  inner  connection  or  structure  to  which  we  had  not  naid 
enough  attention.2  v 

In  our  experience,  ‘space’  and  ‘time’  can  never  be  entirely  separated,  as 
already  explained,  and  so  Minkowski  combined  them  into  a  higher  entity  which 
is  called  the  Minkowski  world’.  In  the  world  of  experience  the  datum  appears 
to  be,  not  a  place  and  a  point  of  ‘time’,  but  the  event  or  the  world  point— that  is 
a  place  at  a  definite  date . 

The  graphic  picture  of  a  moving  point  is  a  world-line .  Rectilinear  uniform 
motion  corresponds  then  to  a  straight  world-line;  accelerated  motion,  to  one 
that  is  curved. 

ON  THE  'WORLD'  OF  MINKOWSKI 

The  event  is  the  most  elementary  notion.  We  shall  use  it  from  now  on  in 
this  work  in  the  sense  of  a  four-dimensional  volume  of  space-time  which  is 
small  in  all  four  dimensions.  We  do  not  posit  whether  events  themselves  have 
structure  or  not,  but  it  is  preferable  to  assume  that  they  have  no  space-time 
structure,  which  means  that  the  event  has  no  parts  which  are  external  to  each 
other  in  space-time.  The  order  of  events  is  fourfold,  as  previously  shown. 

The  aggregate  or  manifold  of  all  point-events  is  then  called  the  world. 
The  point-events  are  given  by  four  numbers  representing  the  co-ordinates, 
three  giving  the  ‘space’  co-ordinates,  and  the  fourth  the  ‘time’  co-ordinate. 

The  term  ‘space-time  continuum’  or  ‘space-time  manifold’  is  used  often 
and  implies  that  the  numbers  x ,  y,  3,  /,  are  to  vary  continuously. 

In  such  a  space-time  continuum  all  happenings  are  structurally  the  inter¬ 
sections  of  world-lines,  and  if  we  could  describe  the  world-lines  of  all  points 
of  the  universe  we  would  have  a  full  account  of  the  universe,  ‘past’  and  ‘future*. 
We  see  that  all  physics,  with  the  rest  of  our  problems,  must  then  be  considered 
as  a  chapter  of  the  general  structural  and  semantic  study  of  continuous  mani¬ 
folds  of  four  dimensions. 

But  we  are  already  acquainted  with  such  theories.  For  instance,  the 
internal  theory  of  surfaces  may  be  considered  as  a  part  of  the  subject  in  two 
and  three  dimensions.  We  have  seen  that  different  surfaces  are  characterized 
by  the  expression  for  the  line  element  d$2  -=gi\dxi  +2gi2dxidx2+g<z2dx227  or  by 
that  group  of  transformations  which  leaves  the  line  element  invariant.  We 
know  already  that  in  the  E  as  well  as  riemannian  geometries  we  have  similar 
expressions  and  characteristic  transformations. 

If  physics  is  to  be  considered  a  branch  of  the  theory  of  four-dimensional 
manifolds,  we  should  naturally  look  for  some  such  transformations.  The  mani¬ 
fold  represents  the  world,  the  generalized *  theory  of  relativity  gives  the  desired 
answer.  Minkowski  proposed  a  postulate,  which  he  calls  the  postulate  of  an 
absolute  world ,  or  the  world-postulate  which  asserts  the  invariance  of  all  the  laws 
of  nature  in  relation  to  linear  transformations,  for  which  the  function 
3C2+y2+32  —cH2  is  invariant. 

The  reader  is  already  familiar  with  the  expression  x2  +  y2*  which  gives 
the  invariant  length  in  E  geometry  in  two  dimensions,  and  x2  -by2  +s2  which 
gives  it  in  three  dimensions.  It  would  be  natural  to  expect  that  in  four  dimen¬ 
sions  we  should  have  an  expression  of  the  type  x2+y2-\-z2+t2  but  in  this  case 
our  expression  is  x2  -by2  +22  —c2t2.  It  should  be  noticed  that  the  above  different 
types  of  expressions  haye  different  origins.  The  first  two  arise  in  pure  geometry, 
and  the  last  has  its  roots  in  physics.  The  problem  was  to  bring  an  experimental 
expression  into  harmony  with  a  familiar  geometrical  expression.  Minkowski 
introduced  the  expression  ict^u* ,  where  i  is  as  usual  the  square  root  of  minus 
one,  (t=V- 1).  Then  of  course  ~cH2  becomes  {id)2  =u?. 

*1  use  the  term  ‘generalized’  to  embrace  the  unified  field  theory  and  eventually 
the  quantum  theory,  although,  for  our  purpose,  I  utilize  only  the  special  and  gen¬ 
eral  theory. 

668  IX.  ON  EMPIRICAL  AND  VERBAL  STRUCTURES 

If  we  change  the  lettering,  and  denote  x~ui ;  y-w,;  then  our 

expression  x*+y*+z*-cH*  becomes  +«*■+««»  W,  a  simple  formula  for 
distance  in  four-dimensional  geometry.  It  would  not  be  profitable  for  us  to 
speculate  upon  this  substitution;  it  was  introduced  merely  for  the  sake  of 
mathematical,  verbal  treatment  and  can  be  easily  translated  back  into  the 
usual  terms  of  c  and  t. 

We  have  already  seen  that  the  expression  x 2  -f-y2  -\-z2  —  cH2  =  x'2  -j-y'2  -{-s'2  —  c2t'2 
is  invariant  under  the  L-orentz-Einstein  transformation.  This  fact  of  invariance 
is  fundamental,  and  it  is  well  to  convince  ourselves  that  it  is  so.  The  Lorentz- 
'  see  page  xii  Einstein  transformation  was  x’=0(x-vt),  f-y,  s'-*,  ,'=£(, -vx/cy  where 

P  =  1/V1  -*/<*.  As  the  co-ordinates  y  and  z  are  equal  in  both  systems,  we 
can  disregard  them,  and  verify  that  cH’2 -x’2  -cH2 -x2.  Let  us  substitute  for  f 
and  xf  the  values  given  by  the  Lorentz-Einstein  transformation.  We  have  then : 

<?t’2 ~c2fP{t -vx/c2)2 -fP{x -vt)2  =c2t2f}2  +yji_2^te  _gW 

c 4  c2 

+2(Pxvt’*C2(2(i2(l  -V>/c2)  -**02(1  -v*/c2)  ^  -*/<?  =cHi 

1  —v2/c2  1  —v2/c2  1 

since  =  — Similarly  it  is  easy  to  show,  if  we  take  an  event-particle, 

as,  for  instance,  a  momentary  spark,  which  has  the  co-ordinates  xi,  y\,  zlt  th  in 
one  system  of  co-ordinates,  say  5,  and  let  another  event-particle  occur  in  that 
system  at  x2,  y2,  z2,  t2,  that  the  formulae  remain  invariant.  If  we  designate 
the  distance  between  the  two  events  by  r,  its  value  would  be  given  bv 
r2  -  (x2 5 +  (y2 -yi)2 + -  Zl)\ 

In  a  different  system,  S',  moving  uniformly  relatively  to  S,  r'2  would  in 
generai  not  be  equal  to  r2,  but  the  expression  r2-c2{h-h)2  would  be  equal 

to  r,2-c2{ti -t{)2,  r2-c2(t2-t1)2  =  r'2-c2(t2'-t1')2. 

The  above  expression  is  called  the  interval  and  expresses  a  most  funda¬ 
mental  structural  characteristic;  namely,  that  the  interval  is  invariant  for  all 
systems  in  uniform  relative  motion.  This  result  is  quite  general  and  independent 
of  the  relative  orientation  .of  the  axes,  or  of  the  angle  the  velocity  has  to  the 
axes.  The  interval  plays  in  the  theory  of  Einstein  a  similar  role  which  the 
Pythagorean  rule  played  in  the  E  geometry. 

Because  of  the  finite  velocity  of  our  measuring  signals,  our  formulae  must 
involve  finite  velocity.  Therefore  the  interval  is  the  only  actual  measurement 

which  we  can  ever 
make  in  practice. 
Hence  its  funda¬ 
mental  semantic 
importance. 

Fig.  1  Eddington 

j.  .  ...  gives  a  very  fine 

diagram  in  explaining  how  intervals  are  measured.  I  reproduce  it  here¬ 
with  (Fig.  1). 

ON  THE  'WORLD'  OF  MINKOWSKI 

The  expression  ci ,  where  c  is  the  velocity  of  light,  300,000  kilometres  per 
second,  gives  us  the  distance  travelled  by  light  in  the  ‘time’  U  It  is  natural  to 
regard  the  velocity  of  light,  which  is  a  constant  and  translates  easily  into  the 
language  of  length,  as  a  unit  of  ‘time’.  In  the  Minkowski  world  it  is  customary, 
because  of  its  convenience,  to  regard  1  second  as  the  equivalent  of  300,000 
kilometres  and  measure  lengths  or  ‘times’  in  seconds  or  kilometres  indis¬ 
criminately. 

Let  us  imagine  a  scale  graduated  in  kilometres,  and  clocks  whose  faces 
are  also  graduated  in  kilometres  (1/300,000  of  a  second).  If  the  clocks  are 
set  correctly  and  we  look  at  them  from  A  the  sum  of  the  reading  of  any  clock 
and  the  scale  division  beside  it  is  one  for  all  because  the  scale  reading  gives 
the  correction  for  the  ‘time’  taken  by  light,  travelling  with  unit  velocity,  to 
reach  A. 

If  we  lay  the  scale  in  line  with  the  two  events  and  note  the  clock  and  scale 
readings,  h  and  *i,  of  the  first  event,  and  the  corresponding  readings,  t%  and  x2t 
of  the  second  event,  then  s2  —  (h—h)2  —  (*a  —#i)2  where  5  represents  the  interval 
mentioned  above. 

If  we  set  the  scale  moving  in  the  direction  AB  then  the  divisions  would 
have  advanced  to  meet  the  second  event  and  the  difference  (x2  “*i)  would  be 
smaller.  But  this  is  compensatedy  because  (t2  —h)  also  becomes  altered.  When  A 
is  advancing  to  meet  the  light  coming  from  any  of  the  clocks  on  the  scale  the 
light  arrives  too  quickly,  and  the  reading  of  the  clock  appears  smaller. 

The  net  result  is,  roughly,  that  it  does  not  matter  what  uniform  motion 
is  given  to  the  scale,  the  final  results  for  the  interval  5  are  always  equal.3 

We  can  now  understand  the  vital  importance  of  the  minus  sign  with  the 
‘time’  co-ordinate.  In  fact,  if  in  our  equations  all  the  signs  were  plus,  using 
the  ‘space’  and  ‘time’  of  one  observer,  one  value  of  5  would  be  obtained;  but 
using  the  ‘space*  and  ‘time’  of  another  observer,  a  different  value  would  be 
obtained.  With  the  minus  sign  for  the  ‘time’  co-ordinate,  we  see  that  we  can 
have  values  of  s  which  are  equal  for  all  observers.  If  the  distances  increase, 
the  ‘time*  element  increases  also,  and  so  the  difference  may  not  be  changed, 
but  with  the  positive  sign  this  would  not  be  the  case. 

We  see  that  the  interval  5  represents  something  which  concerns  only  the 
events  under  consideration.  The  corresponding  entity  in  ordinary  geometry 
is  distance ,  which  is  independent  of  the  accidental  choice  of  co-ordinates.  The 
minus  sign  makes  the  geometry  of  space-time  non-euclidean. 

To  familiarize  ourselves  with  what  has  been  already  explained  about 
simultaneity  and  the  geometry  of  space-time,  we  will  work  it  out  once  more, 
but  now  by  the  Minkowski  method. 

It  will  be  enough  to  use  two  dimensions,  one  represented  on  the  X  axis, 
the  other  on  the  T  axis.  Let  us  consider  three  points  A,  B,  C,  at  rest  in  our 
system  O  on  the  X  axis  (Fig.  2).  In  our  space-time  they  will  be  represented 
by  three  parallels  to  the  T  axis.  Let  C  be  midway  between  A  and  B  so  that 
AC  =  CB.  Let  us  assume  that  light  signals  are  sent  in  both  directions  from  C 
at  the  moment  t  =0.  We  assume  that  the  system  is  ‘at  rest’,  which  means  that 

670  IX.  ON  EMPIRICAL  AND  VERBAL  STRUCTURES 

the  light  signals  propagate  themselves  to  the  right  and  to  the  left  with  equal 
velocities.  Hence  we  can  represent  them  by  straight  lines  equally  inclined 
t°  the  X  axis.  These  lines  are  called  light-lines’. 

T 

Fig.  2 

The  points  A',  B'  which  are  the  inter¬ 
section  of  the  ‘world-lines'  of  the  points  A 
and  B  with  the  light-lines-give  us  the  ‘times’ 
at  which  the  signals  arrive.  It  follows  from 
the  drawing  that  A*Bf  is  parallel  to  the  X 
axis,  which  means  that  A'  and  B'  are  ‘simul¬ 
taneous’  (equal  ‘times’). 

Let  us  now  take  another  case  in  which 
our  points  A ,  B,  C,  move  uniformly  with  an 

...  ,  .  eQual  velocity  (Fig.  3).  Their  world-lines 

will  also  be  parallel  to  each  other  but  inclined  to  the  axis.  In  the  drawing  the 
light-lines  will  be  represented  by  similar  lines  but  their  intersections  with  the 
world-lines  of  A  and  B  will  not  be  on  a  parallel  to  the  X  axis,  and  so  they  will 
not  be  simultaneous. 

We  should  notice  that  an  observer 
who  moved  with  the  system  in  the  direc¬ 
tion  OX*  would  be  perfectly  entitled  to 
claim  that  A'  and  B'  are  simultaneous  to 
him.  His  co-ordinate  system  would  be 
OXfT't  in  which  the  points  A'  and  W 
are  on  a  parallel  to  his  X '  axis  as  he  is  at 
test  in  his  system  OXfT* .  The  world¬ 
lines  A,  B,  C,  are  parallel  to  the  V  axis 
because  the  points  are  supposed  to  be  at 
rest  in  this  system  and  hence  the  x’s 

have  equal  values  for  all  *’s. 

An  important  point  should  be  noticed;  namely,  that  we  have  only  one 
space-time  and  that  the  indefinitely  numerous  ways  different  observers  par- 
fabon  their  ‘space’  and  ‘time’  represent  merely  the  indefinitely  many  ways  in 
which  it  can  be  partitioned.  If  we  keep  the  whole  of  it  under  consideration  we 
see  that  we  cannot  divide  it  into  ‘space’  and  ‘time’,  as  any  subdivision  has  both 
aspects.4 

The  Minkowski  method  of  representation  makes  the  change  in  our  measure¬ 
ments  of  length,  as  given  by  the  Lorentz-Einstein  transformation,  very  obvious. 

A  measuring  rod  is  not  purely  a  ‘spatial’  configuration,  as  in  the  actual 
world  such  a  thing  does  not  exist,  but  it  is  a  space-time  configuration. 

Every  point  of  the  rod  exists  at  each  moment  of  ‘time’.  We  see  that  in 
space-time  we  cannot  represent  our  rod  as  a  segment  on  the  X  axis  but  must 
represent  it  structurally  as  a  strip  in  the  XT  plane.  We  assume  here  for  sim- 
plicity  that  the  rod  is  one-dimensional  (Fig.  4). 

_  ^  r<^|  is  at  rest  in  a  system  is  represented  by  a  strip  parallel  to  the 

T  axis.  If  it  is  moving,  its  strip  is  inclined  to  the  Taxis.  The  ‘contraction’  does 

ON  THE  ‘WORLD’  OF  MINKOWSKI 

not  affect  the  strip  at  all  but  it  is  rather  a  section  cut  out  of  the  X  axis.  In 
actual  experience,  it  is  only  the  strip  as  a  manifold  of  world  points  which  has 
physical  reality,  and  not  the  cross  sections,  which,  as  we  see,  are  not  equal  on 
different  axes.  The  ‘contraction’  is  not  a 
change  in  ‘physical  reality’  but  merely  a  con¬ 
sequence  of  our  way  of  regarding  things.  We 
see  that  the  notorious  argument  as  to  whether 
the  ‘contraction’  is  ‘real’  or  ‘apparent  is 
based  on  a  misunderstanding.  Born  gives  an 
excellent  example.  If  we  slice  a  cucumber  in 
