different  directions  it  is  fallacious  to  argue 
that  the  smallest  slice  which  is  perpendicular 
to  the  axis  is  the  ‘real’  one  and  the  larger 
oblique  slices  only  ‘apparent’.  Similarly  in 
the  Einstein  theory,  a  rod  has  various  lengths 

according  to  the  motion  of  the  observer.  ( 

One  of  these  lengths,  the  static  length,  is  the  greatest,  but  it  is  no  more  real 
than  any  other.  Similar  remarks  can  be  made  about  ‘time’. 

Attention  should  be  given  to  one  extremely  important  semantic  point 
concerning  the  Minkowski  four-dimensional  world.  We  already  know  that  for 
our  nervous  systems  the  passing  from  dynamic  to  static,  and  vice  versa,  is  a 
most  vital  structural  problem.  The  first  step  of  this  translation  has  already 
been  given  in  the  notion  of  the  ‘variable’.  The  calculus  earned  it  a  step  further. 
In  the  Minkowski  world  we  reach  the  complete  solution  of  the  problem. 

As  Keyser  points  out  in  his  Mathematical  Philosophy ,  we  had  two  verbal 
methods  of  dealing  with  ‘time’.  One  was  the  method  of  Newton,  the  method 
of  the  structural  importation  of  ‘time’.  From  the  objective  dynamic  world  of 
the  lower  order  abstractions,  ‘time’  is  imported  into  the  static  world  of  the 
higher  order  abstractions.  We  import  it  with  ‘motion’,  we  say  things  ‘move  . 
Such  language  is  structurally  unsatisfactory,  even  on  the  earlier  level  of  our 
development.  It  hampers  analysis,  and  is  contrary  to  the  structure  and  function 
of  the  human  nervous  system.  It  breeds  tremendous  metaphysical  impasses, 
and  is  ultimately  based  on  semantic  disturbances  due  to  identification. 

If  we  introduce  dynamic,  shifting  entities  into  static  higher  order  abstrac¬ 
tions,  rationality  is  impossible  and  we  drift  toward  mysticism.  . 

A  very  real  semantic  problem  appears  here.  We  want  to  give  the  best 
possible  account  of  the  structurally  dynamic  world  around  us;  yet  our  higher 
order  abstractions  are  structurally  static ,  and  for  their  proper  working  they 
must  use  static  means.  Here  seemed  to  be  an  impasse  which  for  milleniums 
had  defied  solution.  ‘Philosophers’  of  different  schools  were  preaching  and 
teaching  that  we  should  never  be  able  to  be  ‘rational’  and  understand  this 
world  and  ourselves.  Anti-intellectual  schools  began  to  flourish,  to  the  be¬ 
wilderment  of  all.  , 

The  issue,  after  all,  was  simple,  the  moment  some  one  discovered  and 
stated  it.  We  did  not  need  to  change  either  the  world  around  us  or  ourselves; 

672  IX.  ON  EMPIRICAL  AND  VERBAL  STRUCTURES 

we  simply  had  to  discover  a  structurally  new  method  of  dealing  with  the  old 
problems  without  changing  them. 

The  new  method  is  given  by  Einstein  and  Minkowski.  Instead  of  making 
the  static  world  of  higher  order  abstractions  dynamic,  which  cannot  be  done 
at  all  without  producing  semantic  disturbances,  they  invented  structural 
methods  for  dealing  with  the  dynamic  world  by  static  means.  The  key  was 
found  in  the  handling  of  the  troublesome  factor,  ‘time’.  Minkowski  decided  to 
put  ‘time’  in  its  proper  place  by  introducing  the  structurally  new  four-dimen¬ 
sional  world. 

In  the  case  of  particle  P,  we  habitually  used  to  say  that  the  point  P  at 
an  instant  t  was  at  a  ‘space’  point  ( x ,  y,  s).  At  the  instant  t*  it  was  at  the  point 
(*',  y',  s')  , .  We  always  needed  four  numbers,  which  gave  us  the  where  and 
when  in  respect  to  some  frame  of  reference. 

As  we  have  seen,  Minkowski  decided  to  look  structurally  at  this  tetrad 
of  four  numbers  (x,  y,  z,  t)  ‘as-a-whole’.  In  other  words,  he  placed  himself  on 
a  higher  level  of  abstraction.  He  took  under  consideration  the  older  results, 
combined  them,  and  called  the  combination  by  one  single  name,  the  ‘world 
point’.  Such  a  world  point  has  also  four  numbers  (not  3  plus  1,  but  just  4). 
A  world  made  up  of  such  points  is  a  four-dimensional  world  in  which  all  the 
points  co-exist.  The  flux  of  the  lower  order  abstractions  and  ‘time’  is  abolished. 
There  is  no  more  ‘motion’  in  a  ‘flow  of  time’.  In  such  a  world  the  term  ‘where’ 
has  completer  structural  meanings,  it  has  absorbed  the  when.  If  we  ask,  where 
in  such  a  world  the  particle  P  is,  we  answer,  at  the  point  (x,  y,  zf  /).  Where  h 
the  particle  P'?  At  the  point  (*',  y',  /,  *'). 

We  see  that  the  particles  of  such  a  world  are  never  'the  same ’ ;  they  do  not 
‘change*  or  ‘pass’;  they  co-exist,  and  all  is  static .  In  this  way  the  three-dimen¬ 
sional  dynamics  become  four-dimensional  statics. 

It  should  be  noticed  that  we  are  now  dealing  with  a  language  of  new  struc¬ 
ture,  uniquely  befitting  the  structure  and  function  of  our  nervous  system.  Of 
course  we  have  altered  nothing  in  the  world  around  us.  The  example  of  the 
moving  picture  and  the  static  film  as  given  before  is  an  excellent  example 
of  this  structural  innovation. 

The  fact  that  in  this  new  world  nothing  repeats  itself  because  it  has  a 
different  date,  unless  the  time-lines  are  closed,  has  very  far-reaching  conse¬ 
quences,  of  which  we  have  already  spoken  and  which  we  will  analyse  in  more 
detail  later  on. 

CHAPTER  XXXIX 

GENERAL  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE  EINSTEIN  THEORY 

For,  beyond  the  bounds  of  science,  too,  objective  and  relative  reflection 
is  a  gain,  a  release  from  prejudice,  a  liberation  of  the  spint  from  standards 
whose  claim  to  absolute  validity  melts  away  before  the  critical  judgment 
of  the  relativist.  (45)  MAX  B0RN 

It  is  extremely  instructive  to  follow  the  elements  of  identification  as  they 
appear  in  the  evolution  of  the  Einstein  theory. 

We  know  that  the  results  of  the  Michelson  experiment  which  disclosed  that 
light  is  propagated  in  all  directions  with  equal  velocities  for  all  observers, 
irrespective  of  their  relative  velocities,  could  not  be  reconciled  with  the  older 
mechanics.  These  results  disturbed  the  physicists  profoundly  and  attempts 
were  made  to  solve  this  apparent  impasse.  In  what  follows  we  shall  have  to 
analyse  incidentally  the  activities  of  some  of  our  great  scientists,  men  who 
have  added  enormously  to  our  knowledge,  and  this  fact  should  be  appreciated. 
What  we  have  to  say  is  not  intended  as  criticism— far  from  it— but  simply  as  a 
structural  and  a  semantic  analysis. 

The  feeling  that  we  objectify  unduly  and  that  we  should  not  use  a  language 
of  ‘is*  of  identity,  but  that  we  should  use  an  actional,  behaviouristic,  functional, 
operational  language  and  methods,  is  not  new  in  science,  although  the  need 
was  not  formulated  structurally,  it  is  true,  and  therefore  it  never  became  a 
workable  foundation.  The  main  successes  in  these  fields  were  rather  accidental, 
and  were  the  personal  prerogatives  of  those  few  men  whose  psycho-logical 
make-up  urged  them  to  achieve.  Objectification,  which  as  we  know,  is  a  se¬ 
mantic  ascribing  of  objective  existence  and  values  to  terms,  was  bound  to  make 
its  appearance  somewhere. 

This  struggle  against  identification  is  apparent  in  all  science,  but  it  will 
suffice  to  point  out  the  most  striking  example  in  the  relation  of  the  works  of 
Lorentz  and  Einstein.  Lorentz  objectified,  Einstein  did  not.  We  here  come 
across  a  tremendous  semantic  fact  which  has  to  do  with  the  interpretation  of 
mathematical  formulae.  Lorentz  on  elaborate  and  difficult  grounds,  connected 
with  Maxwell’s  field  equations,  produced  what  is  usually  called  the  Lorentz 
transformation.  He  gave  it  an  objectified  interpretation.  Einstein  introduced 
an  entirely  different  fundamental  interpretation  of  the  structural  principle  in¬ 
volved.  The  formulae  look  alike  but  they  now  have  different  and  very  simple 
meanings. 

Hertz,  whose  epoch-making  discoveries  made  wireless  possible,  advocated 
long  ago  what  is  termed  the  phenomenological  point  of  view,  which  in  our 
language  is  approximately  the  actional,  behaviouristic,  operational,  functional 
language  and  method.  In  his  writings  he  implicitly  refused  to  use  the  vicious 

674  IX.  ON  EMPIRICAL  AND  VERBAL  STRUCTURES 

term  ‘is’  of  ‘identity’,  and  so  to  objectify  his  terms,  which  refusal  in  picturesque 
language  he  expressed  as  a  refusal  to  legislate  about  ‘essences’. 

The  old  E  and  N  language  of  ‘absolute  space’  and  ‘absolute  emptiness’ 
were  for  a  long  while  structurally  unsatisfactory.  Physicists  felt  that  somehow 
they  could  not  deal  with  it,  but  it  never  occurred  to  them  that  this  ‘absolute 
nothingness’  is  objectively  meaningless,  and  that  therefore  no  one  can  possibly 
deal  with  it.  Not  knowing  that,  they  politely  called  this  non-sense  a  ‘meta¬ 
physical  question’  and  evaded  issues  by  leaving  the  solution  in  the  hands  of 
‘philosophers’,  never  to  be  solved. 

By  now  I  hope  that  the  reader  is  quite  aware  that  meaningless  problems 
cannot  be  solved  by  any  one,  and  that  there  are  no  such  things  as  meto-physical 
questions.  There  may,  however,  be  a  question  about  enlarging  the  domain  of 
physics. 

Being  forced  to  abandon  this  ‘absolute  emptiness’,  physicists  went  to  the 
other  extreme  and  postulated  some  kind  of  ‘material’  ether.  Let  us  note  that 
such  a  postulate  involves  structurally  the  ‘is’  of  identity  and  objectification. 
Lorentz  in  opposition  to  Hertz  postulated  an  ‘ether’  which  was  ‘motionless’  in 
‘absolute  space’.  Note  that  here  we  have  a  perfect  example  of  structural  ob¬ 
jectification  of  terms.  ‘Absolute  space’  is  for  him  semantically  some  kind  of 
‘absolute  emptiness’,  which,  not  being  satisfactory  for  the  physicist,  is  filled 
with  some  ‘material’,  ‘motionless’  ether.  ‘Motionless’  is  itself  an  objectification 
of  language,  as  such  a  term  has  here  no  physical  or  objective  meanings  at  all. 

In  pursuing  the  speculations  on  objectified  terms  (semantic  disturbances) 
it  was  natural  to  expect,  as  the  earth  is  not  at  rest  with  respect  to  the  sun,  the 
other  planets  .  ,  that  some  ‘ether  wind’  or  ‘ether  drift’  should  appear  which 
would  make  the  constant  velocity  of  light  impossible  for  observers  moving 
with  different  relative  velocities.  But  these  structural  expectations  were  not 
fulfilled.  The  velocity  of  light,  as  shown  by  many  experiments,  was  a  constant 
for  all  observers.  The  ‘motionless  material  ether’  also  became  structurally 
impossible,  as  might  be  expected,  if  we  stop  objectifying  terms. 

In  1892  FitzGerald  suggested  an  objectified  theory,  assuming  ‘absolute’ 
‘length’  and  ‘time’  superior  to  measurement ,  which  involve  identification  and 
do  not  allow  the  use  of  the  actional,  behaviouristic,  operational,  functional 
attitudes,  language,  and  methods.  FitzGerald  assumed  that  every  body  ‘moving’ 
with  the  velocity  v  in  the  ‘ether’  is  shortened  in  the  direction  of  motion.  It 
should  be  noted  that  every  mention  of  ‘shortening’  or  ‘contraction’,  presupposes 
some  ‘ absolute '  standards  of  ‘rest’  or  ‘motion’  or  ‘length’,  which  do  not,  and 
cannot,  exist  outside  of  our  skin,  but  are  only  semantic  disturbances,  inside 
our  skin,  which  occur  when  we  identify  and  ascribe  objective  existence  and  value 
to  terms. 

How  deeply  and  completely  these  objectifications  permeate  our  daily  and 
scientific  lives  is  best  shown  again  in  the  case  of  Lorentz.  Even  in  1917,  in  his 
Haarlem  lectures,  he  expressed  structural  hopes  that  a  ‘material’,  ‘substantial’ 
ether  can  be  preserved,  that  ‘space’  and  ‘time’  can  be  sharply  separated,  and 
that  ‘simultaneity’  can  have  an  absolute  meaning. 

REFLECTIONS  ON  THE  EINSTEIN  THEORY  675 

In  the  Theory  of  Relativity  of  Whitehead,  and  in  Borne  others  writers  who 
deal  with  the  theory  of  Einstein,  and  particularly  in  all  critics  of  Einstein,  we 

find  a  similar  objectification  of  terms. 

They  still  feel  the  older  E  and  JV  ‘absolute  emptiness’,  ‘absolute  space , 
‘absolute  time’,  to  which  terms  they  ascribe  structural  objectivity.  In  such  works 
the  term  ‘contraction'  is  used  frequently. 

Let  me  recall  the  mechanism  of  objectification.  If  we  do  not  reject  ex- 
plicitly  and  implicitly  the  ‘is’  of  identity,  we  automatically  identify  different 
orders  of  abstractions  and  ascribe  objective  characteristics  to  terms.  Thus  the 
term  ‘time’  which  represents  a  label  for  a  feeling  inside  our  skin,  is  given  an 
objective  evaluation.  If  ‘objective’  it  must  have  a  ‘property’  of  ‘simultaneity’, 
a  semantic  process  taken  over  from  comparing  two  objective  sticks  when  the 
two  ends  are  made  to  coincide.  On  the  objective  external  level,  we  never  deal 
with  ‘time’  but  we  simply  compare  processes.  When  we  select  an  arbitrary  unit- 
process  on  the  objective  level,  whatever  we  might  say  that  it  ‘is’,  well,  it ts  not, 
and  the  difficulty  is  found  exclusively  in  the  use  of  the  ‘is’  of  identity. 

If  we  abandon  entirely  the  ‘is’  of  identity,  we  stop  objectification,  we  do 
not  ascribe  objective  existence  and  values  outside  our  skin,  to  terms  and  semantic 
reactions  inside  our  skin.  But  then  of  course  we  have  to  change  the  structure  of 
our  language;  as  otherwise  the  old  s.r  will  continue  to  play  tricks  on  us.  An 
actional,  operational,  functional  language  of  order  is  the  structural  solution  of 

our  semantic  difficulty.  .  t  u 

If  we  objectify  ‘space*  into  ‘absolute  space',  we  must  objectify  it  as  ab¬ 
solute  emptiness'  for  only  such  an  ‘absolute  space’  can  be  at  ‘absolute  rest , 
that  is,  static  in  the  E  or  JV  sense.  Similarly  only  objectified  ‘time’  can  have 
the  ‘property’  of  ‘absolute  simultaneity’.  .  . 

If  we  realize  that  these  ‘absolutes’  are  only  the  semantic  objectifications  of 
terms,  (where  the  activities  of  the  lower  nerve  centres  are  structurally  ascribed 
to  the  activities  of  the  higher  nerve  centres  and  vice  versa),  we  begin  to  dif¬ 
ferentiate  between  different  order  abstractions,  and  to  keep  them  differentiated. 
In  terms  of  our  structurally  new  language  we  become  ‘conscious  of  abstracting  , 
and  then  habitually  and  unconsciously  use  the  behaviouristic  language  and 

methods  of  order.  ,  ,  , 

If  we  picture  this  ‘absolute  emptiness’  or  ‘absolute  nothingness  (which 
cannot  be  done  successfully,  as  it  has  no  meaning),  and  try  to  compare  it  with 
a  plenum,  or  ‘fulness’  (a  cloud  of  smoke,  for  instance),  we  see  at  once  that  only 
this  ‘absolute  emptiness’  can  be  static,  homogeneous .  ,  a  condition  that  is 

impossible  with  a  dynamic  fulness.  ....  , 

Perhaps  we  can  now  appreciate  the  tremendous  semantic  significance  of 
the  Einstein  theory,  which  introduces  structurally  a  non-objectified ,  human, 
sane  attitude  of  proper  evaluation  toward  this  world.  We  should  not  be  sur- 
prised  to  find  that  a  A -system  which  is  an  inevitable  general  structural  con¬ 
comitant  of  the  E  and  N  systems  of  geometry  and  physics  should  formulate  as 
a  general  structural  and  semantic  issue  what  the  E  and  N  systems  have  done  in 
their  special  fields,  without  such  general  formulation. 

676  IX.  ON  EMPIRICAL  AND  VERBAL  STRUCTURES 

From  our  structural  point  of  view  there  is  no  retreat;  the  Einstein  work  is 
irreversible.  In  the  younger  scientists  of  today  the  non-objectified  attitude 
toward  terms  of  ‘space’  and  ‘time’  is  already  an  accomplished  semantic  fact, 
entirely  independent  of  what  future  experiments  may  show.  For  experiments 
can  never  justify  identification,  and  so  can  have  no  detrimental  effect  upon 
this  fundamental  and  most  beneficial  structural,  linguistic,  and  semantic  revo¬ 
lution.  Our  A  task  was  to  formulate  these  issues  in  general  so  as  to  make  us 
conscious  of  them;  and  I  assume  that  it  is  at  this  semantic  point  that  the  tre¬ 
mendous  value  of  Einstein’s  work  will  manifest  itself  in  life.  Indeed  we  shall 
see  later  on  in  this  volume  that  the  newer  quantum  mechanics,  which  have 
begun  to  spring  up  rather  rapidly,  is  made  possible  only  by  the  semantic  back¬ 
ground  imparted  unconsciously  (as  yet)  to  younger  physicists  by  the  Einstein 
theory.  It  is  my  hope  that  the  present  work  may  make  the  above  issues  con - 
scions ,  and  so  enable  us  not  only  to  impart  this  semantic  attitude  more  easily 
and  with  less  labour  but  also  to  benefit  by  them  more  universally  in  our  daily 
life .  The  problems  of  science  and  life  do  not  differ  in  this  respect.  In  both  we 
are  equally  hampered  by  semantic  disturbances,  ‘emotional  stupors',  identifi¬ 
cation,  and  similar  difficulties,  the  elimination  of  which  means  better  adjust¬ 
ment  for  all  of  us,  as  well  as  swifter  progress  in  science. 

A  study  of  the  history  of  science  shows  how  slow  and  painful  scientific 
progress  has  been.  Now  we  begin  to  see  why.  ‘Geniuses’,  as  history  shows,  are 
men  who  at  least  in  some  fields  are  freer  from  identification  and  false  evaluation 
than  others.  They  are  not  hampered  to  a  similar  extent  by  ‘emotional  stupor' j 
hence  they  can  evaluate  the  old  anew.  Lorentz,  for  instance,  produced  the 
formulae,  but  his  objectifications  prevented  him  from  evaluating  properly  the 
new  formulae.  As  a  fact  of  history  the  formulae  of  Lorentz  were  discovered  by 
Voigt  a  number  of  years  before,  but  identification  made  impossible  the  evalu¬ 
ation  of  these  formulae,  and  so  delayed  the  discovery  of  the  Einstein  theory. 
This  factor  of  identification  can  be  found  all  through  recorded  history  as  a 
retarding  semantic  blockage. 

If  we  could  find  methods  of  eliminating  these  semantic  disturbances,  an 
extremely  hampering,  paralysing  psycho-logical  factor  would  be  eliminated, 
and  ‘geniuses'  could  be  made  the  rule  rather  than  the  exception.  Let  me  say 
again:  in  the  old  days  morons  were  made  and  geniuses  were  born;  in  the  new 
days,  perhaps,  this  can  be  reversed,  and  morons  will  be  born  but  geniuses  made. 
We  witness  something  of  this  kind  among  the  younger  post-einsteinian  physicists, 
where  the  number  of  ‘geniuses’  is  growing  rapidly,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  the 
above  structural  issues  are  not  as  yet  consciously  applied  in  general  education. 
The  secret  of  creative  work  is  freedom  from  structural  bondage,  and  particu¬ 
larly  the  structural  semantic  bondage  of  words. 

The  reader  should  not  assume  that  the  few  simple  structural  explanations 
given  in  this  book  exhaust  the  Einstein  theory.  I  have  not  even  attempted  to 
summarize  the  theory;  I  have  only  given  a  few  semantic  facts,  which  belong  to 
general  semantics  and  to  the  theory  of  knowledge.  The  Einstein  theory  is 

REFLECTIONS  ON  THE  EINSTEIN  THEORY  677 

indeed  such  a  tremendous  structural  linguistic  achievement  that  quite  probably 
its  full  semantic  significance  and  meanings  will  not  be  worked  out  for  many 
years  to  come.  We  have  given  here  only  the  minimum  of  explanation  necessary 
for  our  special  purpose. 

The  historical  development  of  a  theory  has  usually  little  to  do  with  the 
semantic  importance  of  the  theory  or  its  deeper  meanings.  The  constancy  of 
the  velocity  of  light  for  all  observers,  which  started  the  ball  rolling,  was  an  his- 
torical  beginning  and  it  served  its  purpose  well,  though  the  objectified  contrac¬ 
tions’  and  formulae  of  FitzGerald  and  Lorentz  also  did  their  share,  as  they 
helped  Einstein  and  Minkowski  to  produce  their  epoch-making  structural 
challenge  to  old  prejudices  such  as  'absolute  space’  and  'absolute  time’,  which 
were  semantic  remains  of  a  primitive,  perhaps  pre-human,  remote  past.  Once 
this  is  accomplished,  no  matter  how,  there  is  no  return  possible.  Of  physical 
structural  facts,  all  that  we  need  is  the  finite  velocity  of  the  propagation  of 
events,*  which  as  we  already  know  involves  far-reaching  structural  and  semantic 
issues.  Of  the  psycho-logical  issues  involved,  we  need  only  to  eliminate  semantic 
disturbances  which  still  occur  when  we  copy  animals  in  our  nervous  processes 
and  do  not  discriminate  between  different  orders  of  abstractions— which  animals 
do  not  recognize.  This  elimination  can  be  done  by  training  in  the  A  methods 
explained  before,  with  the  net  result  that  we  become  'conscious  of  abstracting’ 
on  different  levels  and  so  can  instinctively  and  by  feeling  discriminate  habitually 
between  orders  of  abstractions,  which  structurally  and  semantically  could  not 
be  done  by  the  old  disciplines. 

The  theory  of  Einstein  has  manifold  applications  but  we  need  only  mention 
a  few,  which  we  shall  utilize  later  on. 

First,  and  above  all,  there  are  no  possible  ‘absolute’  meanings  to  'space 
and  'time’,  beyond  the  relations  established  by  measurements.  The  structure 
of  our  language  involving  ‘space’  and  ‘time’  should  be  similar  to  the  structure 
of  experimental  facts,  which  ultimately  show  the  impossibility  of  sharply 

dividing  them.  .  .  . 

If  any  one  challenges  this  statement,  he  could  not  a  priori  be  criticized. 
Such  criticism  would  be  entirely  against  the  whole  tendency  of  the  present 
work.  But  such  a  person  might  be  approached  with  no  little  curiosity  and 
expectation.  He  could  be  asked:  ‘You  claim  that  you  can  absolutely  divide 

♦‘But,’  some  reader  may  ask,  ‘though  you  assume  a  finite  velocity  of  Pr°Pa£a' 
tion,  may  it  not  happen  that  some  day  an  “infinite  velocity  will  be  discovered. 

Such  a  question  would  show  that  the  reader  has  missed  the  point  m  the  pres¬ 
ent  work.  We  are  confident  in  saying  that  an  ‘infinite  velocity  has  no  meaning,  and 
that  no  matter  what  we  discover,  this  will  never  be  discovered.  This  becomes  still 
clearer  if  we  use  the  differential  definition  of  'velocity.  Velocity  is  defined  as  the 
‘time’  derivative  of  ‘space’  travelled.  If  W  is  taken  as  zero,  or  if  we  have  no 
time’,  there  can  be  no  ‘time  derivative  by  our  very  assumption,  and,  ther«°^> 
‘velocity’.  There  is,  therefore,  no  danger  that  we  shall  ever  discover  m  the  actual 
world  an  ‘infinite’  velocity. 

678  IX.  ON  EMPIRICAL  AND  VERBAL  STRUCTURES 

space  and  time  on  the  objective  level.  That  would  be  an  epoch-making 
structural  discovery.  Please  demonstrate  How  to  do  it' 

The  fact  is,  of  course,  that  he  cannot  demonstrate  the  process,  because  he 
refers  to  identifications  inside  his  skin;  yet  he  is  claiming  to  be  able  to  show  it 
objectively  outside  his  skin.  That  ends  this  problem. 

While  speaking  of  Einstein’s  Theory,  it  will  be  well  to  mention  a  few  of  the 
many  structural  differences  between  the  older  newtonian  and  the  new  einsteinian 
mechanics. 

In  the  iV-system,  relative  velocities  were  simply  added  WN=v+v\  In  the 
einsteinian  system  which  we  will  denote  by  N,  it  is  not  so  structurally  simple. 
We  must  introduce  the  finite  velocity  of  propagation  of  our  signals,  which  alone 
give  us  the  data,  and  so 

v+v’ 

1  H-w'/c2 

The  above  formula  involves  the  remarkable  constant,  c,  the  velocity  of 
light.  If  we  assume  in  the  above  formula  that  our  velocity  vf  is  equal  to  the 
velocity  of  light,  c,  we  would  have 

W--  r+c  _  **+£ 

N  1+vc/c2  1+v/c 

This  means  that  the  addition  of  some  velocity  to  the  velocity  of  light  does  not 
alter  the  velocity  of  light,  which  thus  appears  as  a  limiting  velocity. 

This  applies  to  the  difference  of  velocities  where 

Wi 

v—v 

1  —w'/c2 

Let  us  here  give  an  example  of  Eddington’s.  Let  us  assume  two  relative  veloci¬ 
ties  each  differing  by  only  1  km./sec.  from  the  velocity  of  light.  Let  us  say  that 
one  is  299,999  km./sec.  and  the  other  300,001  km. /sec.  Now  let  us  calculate  the 
relative  velocity.  This  relative  velocity  will  be  found  to  be  180,000,000,000 
km./sec.  For  in  our  formula  v—  r'  =  (c+l)  —  (c  —  1)  —2,  and 

(1  -  w'/c*)  - 1  - (- +1)  /~1}  =  1  - 1  - 1  +  l/e*  =  \/c\ 

whence  W$  -  —  =  2c2  =  2  X  300, 000  X  300,000  =  180,000,000,000. 

We  see  that  a  particle  which  might  try  to  overtake  light  by  having  a  velocity 
of  one  km./ sec.  greater  than  the  velocity  of  light  could  never  succeed.  When  the 
velocity  299,000,  for  example,  was  reached,  the  particle  would  find  itself  further 
away  from  its  goal  than  when  it  started.1 

Similar  general  considerations  apply  to  mass.  If  we  designate  the  mass  of 
a  particle  at  rest  by  wq  its  mass  in  motion 

ge  jcii 

mjj 

1  -i ?/c2 

As  the  denominator  is  smaller  than  unity  the  mass  in  motion,  m&  is  larger 
than  wo,  the  mass  at  rest.  In  the  limiting  case,  when  the  velocity  would  become 
equal  to  c  the  denominator  would  become  zero  and  our  mass  would  tend 

REFLECTIONS  ON  THE  EINSTEIN  THEORY  679 

toward  infinite  values,  which  is  another  way  of  saying  that  it  is  physically 

impossible.  „  ,  . 

In  the  iV-system  we  had  two  kinds  of  energy;  one  was  called  ms  viva,  or 
kinetic  energy,  and  was  represented  by  T  =mv2/2 ;  the  other  was  called  potential 
energy,  or  capacity  for  work,  and  was  denoted  by  Z7.  The  law  of  conservation 
of  energy  in  the  N- system  was  expressed  by  the  statement  that  the  sum, 
T+U =E,  or  the  total  mechanical  energy  of  a  system  remains  constant  (zero 

variation)  during  the  motion  of  the  body. 

We  see  that  as  the  above  formula  involves  the  terms  m  and  v,  the  older 
formulae  for  energy  must  be  altered,  especially  since  they  do  not  survive  a 
Lorentz-Einstein  transformation.  It  is  found  that 

2>-c8  or  w=Wo  +  7>/c2, 

which  formula  appears  rigorous  as  a  definition  of  kinetic  energy  even  if  members 
of  order  higher  than  the  second  are  taken  into  account.  In  words,  the  mass  in 
motion  differs  from  mass  at  rest  by  the  kinetic  energy  divided  by  the  square 

of  the  velocity  of  light.  *••11 

This  expression  suggests  immediately  that  the  static  mass,  m,  is  similarly 
related  to  the  energy  content  in  the  body  at  rest.  Generalizing  our  results  we 
would  have  nt  =E/ct,  an  equation  which  holds  generally  between  mass  and 
energy.  This  fact  has  been  called  by  Einstein  the  law  of  the  inertia  of  energy. 
It  has  been  verified  repeatedly  by  experiments,  and  is  one  of  the  most  striking 
structural  results  of  Einstein’s  theory.  The  above  statement  means  that  the 
two  fundamental  notions  of  ‘mass’  and  ‘energy’  are  equivalent  and  thus  we 
have  a  clearer  vision  of  the  structure  of  ‘matter’.  The  two  older  structural  laws 
of  ‘conservation  of  matter’  and  of  ‘conservation  of  energy’  become  fused  into 
one.  Mass  becomes  structurally  and  verbally  nothing  else  than  energy  con¬ 
centrated  at  a  point,  and  it  appears  as  a  form  of  energy  manifestation. 

The  above  considerations  have  also  led  to  a  revision  of  our  structural 
notions  about  ‘energy’  which  we  do  not  need  to  explain  here.  Suffice  it  to  say 
that  the  old  ‘potential’  energy  is  not  associated  structurally  any  longer  with 
any  features  of  this  world.  It  can  be  made  to  vanish  by  a  proper  selection  of 
co-ordinates,  hence  it  is  no  longer  considered  as  energy  of  any  kind. 

With  the  Minkowski  world  we  became  acquainted  with  a  new  language 
which  represents  structurally  more  nearly  the  facts  of  experience  (lower  or  er 
abstractions)  and  shares  the  structure  of  our  higher  order  of  abstractions,  bo 
we  have  the  language  of  ‘space-time’.  How  about  ’matter’?  The  bumping 
against  something  hard  is  not  to  be  disregarded.  True,  we  need,  a  language  of 
new  structure,  but  that  is  all.  In  the  Einstein  theory,  ‘matter’  of  course  is  not 
treated  separately  as  such.  It  is  an  offspring  of  the  field,  and  is  connected  wit 
the  curvature  of  the  world.  The  reader  should  not  be  surprised  to  find  that  the 
Minkowski  world,  which  has  accelerations,  must  be  curved  in  this  structural  y 

new  form  of  representation.  .  .  ,  .  T 

We  have  already  defined  a  most  fundamental  entity  called  action  .  Natur- 
ally  in  a  space-time  manifold,  energy  multiplied  by  ‘time’  should  be  a  more 
fundamental  entity  than  energy,  and  we  call  it  ‘action’.  When  we  speak  about 

680  IX.  ON  EMPIRICAL  AND  VERBAL  STRUCTURES 

some  continuous  material  present  in  ‘space’  and  ‘time’  we  speak  in  terms  of 
density.  Density  multiplied  by  a  three-dimensional  volume  of  ‘space’  gives  us 
mass,  or  what  appears  as  its  equivalent— energy.  From  a  four-dimensional,  or 
space-time  point  of  view,  density  multiplied  by  a  four-dimensional  volume  of 
space-time  gives  us  action.  We  see  that  the  multiplication  of  density  by  the 
three  dimensions  of  ‘space’  gives  us  mass  or  energy.  A  fourth  multiplication  by 
the  dimension  of  ‘time’  gives  us  mass  or  energy  multiplied  by  ‘time’  which 
becomes  action  by  definition.  It  is  obvious  that,  structurally,  action  must  be 
more  fundamental  than  the  older  quantities. 

In  terms  of  curvature,  action  represents  the  curvature  of  the  world,  because 
where  we  find  ‘action’,  we  also  find  ‘matter’,  acceleration,  gravitation  ,  * 

‘Acton’  is  fundamental,  because  structurally  in  a  four-dimensional  metrical 
manifold  it  takes  the  form  of  the  simplest  integral  invariant  that  can  exist  at 
a  .  On  this  form  of  action  Maxwell’s  electromagnetic  theory  is  built  The 
