quantity  action  appears  as  a  pure  number,*  a  unique,  specific  relation  which 
conditions  structure. 

We  should  expect  that  the  action  represented  by  the  number  1  would  be 
most  interesting  and  would  eventually  represent  the  indivisible  atom  of  action. 

1  he  modern  quantum  theory  seems  to  favour  such  a  point  of  view. 

When  we  encounter  a  pure  number  having  such  crucial  significance  in  this 
world  we  should  not  wonder  that  such  a  number  intrigues  us.  As  yet  it  is  im¬ 
possible  to  state  that  action  cannot  have  fractional  numbers.  What,  then 
would  the  action  represent?  *  ' 

Eddington  suggests  that  the  number  may  represent  a  probability  or  some 
function  of  a  probability. 

We  combine  probabilities  by  multiplication,  but  we  combine  actions  in 
two  regions  by  addition.  We  see,  therefore,  that  the  logarithm  of  a  probability 
gives  the  function  indicated  and  Eddington  suggests  the  provisional  equivalence 
of  action  with  the  negative  of  the  logarithm  of  the  statistical  probability  of  the 
state  of  the  world  around  us.  Such  a  suggestion  is  extremely  appealing  and 
important  because  the  principle  of  Least  Action  can  be  stated  as  the  principle 
of  greatest  probability.  The  laws  of  nature  appear  to  be  such  that  the  actual 
state  of  the  world  is  represented  by  that  which  is  statistically  the  most  probable!8 

That  such  structural  conclusion  can  be  drawn  at  all  is  of  tremendous 
semantic  importance  for  us  because,  as  we  are  abstracting  in  different  orders  all 
through,  the  only  appropriate  language  in  which  we  can  eventually  hope  to 
speak  correctly,  is  the  language  of  probabilities,  statistical  averages 

Action  is  one  of  the  terms  of  pre-einsteinian  physics  which  hJs  survived 
unmodified,  the  only  other  one  being  entropy.  The  law  of  gravitation,  the  laws 
of  mechanics,  and  the  laws  of  electromagnetism,  can  all  be,  not  only  summed 
up,  but  also  deduced,  from  a  single  principle  of  least  action.  This  important 
structural  unification  was  accomplished  even  before  the  advent  of  the  einsteinian 
theory,  and  only  the  addition  of  gravitation  to  this  list  is  new.7 

REFLECTIONS  ON  THE  EINSTEIN  THEORY  681 

In  this  brief  structural  and  semantic  survey  we  have  had  neither  the  op¬ 
portunity  nor  the  necessity  of  analysing  the  general  theory  of  Einstein,  which 
embodies  and  unifies  most  of  the  laws  of  mechanics,  that  of  gravitation  included.* 
In  this  unification  lies  the  unrivalled  grandeur  of  the  theory.  As  we  shall  see 
later,  the  newer  quantum  theories  have  been  already  very  much  influenced  by 
the  Einstein  theory.  As  all  possible  theories  are  dependent  on  human  ingenuity 
and  never  can  be  the  events  themselves,  we  can  rest  assured  that  once  freed 
from  ‘emotional  stupors*  and  semantic  disturbances,  the  world  will  not  be  long 
in  producing  a  whole  structurally  unified  system  of  science. 

In  our  discussions  we  deal  with  ‘apparent’,  ‘real’,  ‘actual’,  and  similar  m.o 
terms.  We  should  recall  that  mathematics  is  exclusive  in  one  respect;  namely, 
that  it  has  no  content.  It  is  entirely  a  product  of  higher  abstractions  created 
by  definition  from  undefined  terms.  We  have  seen  that  mathematics  must  be 
considered  as  a  language  of  special  structure  which  is,  however,  similar  to  the 
structure  of  the  world  around  us. 

Our  daily  A  language,  among  others,  being  based  on  the  ‘is’  of  ‘identity’, 
can  never  give  a  structurally  satisfactory  picture  of  this  world  or  ourselves,  but 
actually  prevents  such  an  achievement.  Having  abandoned  a  language  which 
leads  to  identification,  we  shall  be  able  to  apply  a  new  language,  with  new 
structure,  by  which  we  achieve  better  means  for  representing  the  events  around 
us.  From  this  point  of  view,  mathematics  and  our  daily  language  do  not  differ. 
Terms,  being  not  the  things  they  represent,  must  by  necessity  be  creatures  of 
definitions  and  undefined  terms.  The  solution  of  many  baffling  semantic  prob¬ 
lems  is  found  in  the  structure  of  a  language  which  involves  different  semantic 
and  unconscious  attitudes. 

♦In  fact,  a  few  months  ago,  Einstein  and  Mayer  succeeded  in  reducing  the 
laws  of  gravitational  and  electromagnetic  fields  to  a  single  basis.  This  was 
accomplished  by  the  aid  of  a  very  revolutionary  mathematical  discovery  that  it  is 
possible  to  introduce  into  a  ‘space’  of  n  dimensions,  vectors  with  m  components. 
Although  at  present  the  results  of  the  quantum  theory  are  not  included  in  this 
theory,  there  is  no  doubt  that  shortly,  because  of  this  mathematical  discovery, 
these  will  be  included  in  a  generalized  theory  of  relativity. 

PART  X 

ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  ‘MATTER’ 

Rather  against  my  better  judgment  I  will  try  to  give  a  ro“*k  'mpression 
of  the  theory  It  would  probably  be  wiser  to  nail  up  over  the  door  of  t 
new  quantum  theory  a  notice,  “Structural  alterations  in  progress— No 
admittance  except  on  business”,  and  particularly  to  warn  the  <to°rk«*per 
to  keep  out  prying  philosophers.  u«>  A.  s.  eddinotow 

CHAPTER  XL 

THE  OLDER  ‘MATTER* 

And  yet  when  I  hear  to-day  protests  against  the  Bolshevism  of  modern 
science  and  regrets  for  the  old-established  order,  I  am  inclined  to  think 
that  Rutherford  not  Einstein,  is  the  real  villain  of  the  piece.  (149) 

A.  S.  EDDINGTON 

Micro-mechanics  appears  as  a  refinement  of  macro-mechanics,  which  is 
necessitated  by  the  geometrical  and  mechanical  smallness  of  the  objects, 
and  the  transition  is  of  the  same  nature  as  that  from  geometrical  to  physi¬ 
cal  Optics.  (466)  E.  SCHR6DINGER 

From  the  dawn  of  history,  man  has  had  to  deal  with  different  bits  of 
materials,  some  hard  and  solid  like  stones,  some  soft  like  fruit  or  flesh,  some 
liquid.  In  remote  antiquity  air  and  gases  were  not  considered  as  ‘matter*. 

In  those  days  ‘matter’  was  structurally  only  what  could  be  seen,  or  felt, 
or  touched  .  :  anything  else  was  some  kind  of  ‘spirit’,  and  everything  ‘existed’ 
in  an  ‘absolute  void*.  But  even  in  remote  antiquity  our  primitive  ancestry 
could  not  miss  the  fact  that  the  bits  of  materials  they  dealt  with  could  be 
divided  into  smaller  bits.  Naturally,  if  we  can  subdivide  bits  into  smaller 
bits,  an  interesting  question  arises:  How  far  can  this  division  be  carried  on? 
It  seems  that  Democritus  (about  460-360  B.c.)  was  the  first  man  on  record  to 
formulate  an  atomistic  theory.  He  already  postulated  structurally  a  subjective 
world  picture,  to  be  contrasted  with  an  ‘absolute*  or  objective  world  in  which 
‘motion*  was  all  important.  This  theory  started  us  on  the  mechanistic  road 
formulated  for  macroscopic  events,  and  also  on  the  road  of  individualization, 
the  study  of  smaller  and  smaller  bits  of  materials  and  the  search  for  some  unit 
bricks  out  of  which  this  world  appeared  to  be  built;  all  of  which  was  already  a 
search  for  m.o  structure. 

With  the  advent  of  chemistry  some  further  fundamental  structural  light 
was  thrown  on  the  problem  of  individualization.  It  was  found  that  certain 
materials,  as,  for  instance,  iron,  copper .  ,  remain  one  material,  no  matter 
how  far  we  carry  our  subdivision.  These  were  called  ‘elements’.  At  present 
we  recognize  92  elements,  a  number  which  is  supposed  to  represent  all  possible 
elements.  Out  of  these  a  remaining  few  were  at  first  predicted  theoretically, 
and  just  the  other  day  discovered  experimentally.  All  other  materials  do  not 
stand  division  so  well.  At  some  stage  they  decompose  into  their  elements. 
The  smallest  bit  of  one  of  these  last  materials  which  still  has  the  characteristics 
as  the  bulk,  is  called  a  molecule.  The  molecule  is  found  to  be  built  up  from 
atoms  of  the  elements.  For  instance,  the  molecule  of  water  still  has  the  charac¬ 
teristics  of  water,  and  consists  of  two  atoms  of  hydrogen  and  one  atom  of  oxygen, 
which  are  no  longer  water  but  elements  of  entirely  different  characteristics.* 
Electrochemistry  taught  us  in  the  meanwhile  an  important  structural 
lesson;  namely,  that  definite  electrical  charges  are  combined  with  the  atoms. 
Such  electrified  atoms  are  called  ‘ions’  (Greek  for  traveller).  For  instance,  a 

♦The  above  statements  are  over-simplified,  but  satisfactory  for  my  purpose. 

X.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  ‘MATTER’ 

molecule  of  water  is  broken  up  into  a  positively  charged  hydrogen  ion  con¬ 
sisting  of  two  hydrogen  atoms,  and  a  negatively  charged  oxygen  ion  consisting 
of  one  oxygen  atom. 

But  electricity  had  more  structural  surprises  in  store  for  us.  About  1880 
new  facts  were  discovered.  One  of  them  was  that  a  moving  electrical  charge 
has  the  effect  of  an  electrical  current;  namely,  it  can  deflect  a  magnet  just  as 
a  current  does.  Such  moving  electrical  charges  were  called  convection  currents, 
and  the  fact  that  they  produce  effects  similar  to  an  electric  current  led  J.  J. 
Thomson  to  a  surprising  conclusion.  According  to  the  Maxwell  theory  of 
electromagnetism  a  certain  amount  of  energy  must  be  associated  with  every 
electric  or  magnetic  field.  If  an  electrical  charge  in  motion  can  produce  mag¬ 
netic  effects,  hence  energy,  it  was  concluded,  and  verified  by  experiment,  that 
energy  was  required  to  set  an  electrical  charge  in  motion.  From  which  it 
follows  structurally  that  an  electrical  charge  possesses  a  characteristic  in  common 
with  other  materials;  namely,  inertia,  which  can  be  overcome  only  by  the 
application  of  energy.  This  inertial  mass  of  the  electric  charge  was  called 
electromagnetic  mass. 

Here  we  see  two  fundamental  structural  issues  involved.  One  is  that 
electricity  seemingly  has  an  inertial  mass  similar  to  that  of  ‘matter’.  The 
other  is,  that  in  convection  currents,  we  find  means  to  study  electromechanical 
parallelism,  and  so  discover  the  relationship  between  electrical  and  mechanical 
theories. 

In  the  year  1895  Loren tz  proposed  the  electron  theory.  He  assumed 
structurally  that  moving  molecules  contain  electrical  charges  and  so  produce 
convection  currents.  These  charges  are  further  assumed  to  be  one  electrical 
quantum  and  were  called  electrons.  The  electron  theory  proved  to  be  enor¬ 
mously  fruitful  and  all  further  advance  in  our  structural  knowledge  is  inti¬ 
mately  connected  with  it. 

As  knowledge  advanced,  the  more  convincing  became  the  structural 
evidence  for  some  electronic  theory.  As  already  noted,  a  moving  electrical 
charge  produces  magnetic  effects.  So  also  should  a  moving  electron,  whence 
we  succeeded  in  accounting  for  magnetic  effects  in  terms  of  moving  electrons 
which  in  this  case  represent  molecular  convection  currents. 

Granting  this,  a  revolving  electron  should  represent  also  a  small  magnet 
and  a  mechanical  gyroscope  as  well.  Einstein  in  1915  verified  this  assumption 
by  an  experiment.  If  these  structural  assumptions  were  true,  then,  by  a  quick 
reversal  of  magnetism,  a  soft  iron  rod  should  turn  by  a  slight  but  definite 
amount.  The  reverse  effect  has  also  been  verified ;  namely,  a  soft  iron  rod  when 
rotated  rapidly  around  its  axis  becomes  magnetized. 

The  discovery  of  radioactive  materials  was  also  of  enormous  structural 
importance,  as  it  gave  us  a  means  of  studying  directly  the  rays  emitted  from 
these  materials.  The  rays  were  found  to  be  of  three  kinds  and  were  called 
by  the  first  letters  of  the  Greek  alphabet.  The  a-rays  have  been  found  to  be 
similar  to  positive  rays,  the  /3-rays  similar  to  cathode  rays,  and  finally  the  7-rays 
to  Rontgen-rays.  Further  investigation  revealed  that  the  a-rays  were  atoms 

THE  OLDER  ‘MATTER' 

of  helium  charged  with  a  double  positive  charge  of  electricity,  and  that  the 
j9-rays  were  negatively  charged  particles  with  the  charge  of  an  electron. 

These  few  remarks  already  make  apparent  the  structural  fact  that  electro¬ 
magnetic  phenomena  exhibit  characteristics  quite  similar  to  those  of  ‘matter’, 
some  of  their  processes  are  atomic,  they  have  inertia  ,  . 

In  the  older  days  we  tried  to  apply  macroscopic  mechanical  structural 
laws  to  electromagnetic  phenomena,  but  were  not  very  successful.  The  laws 
which  applied  to  those  sub-microscopic  levels  were  seemingly  different  from 
those  which  applied  to  gross  macroscopic  levels,  just  as  the  psycho-logics  of 
the  individual  differ  from  the  psycho-logics  of  the  mob. 

An  epoch-making  semantic  step  was  taken  by  Rutherford  when  he  formu¬ 
lated  the  electromagnetic  theory  of  the  structure  of  ‘matter’.  In  this  theory 
the  atoms  represent  complex  structures  built  up  of  positive  and  negative 
electrons,  and  their  number  and  arrangements  (structure)  determine  the 
chemical  and  physical  characteristics  of  the  atom  in  question.  The  old  struc¬ 
tural  dogma  of  the  immutability  of  the  elements  became  untenable;  and  today, 
theoretically,  and  in  a  few  instances  experimentally,  it  has  been  established 
that  a  transmutation  of  elements  is  not  only  a  possibility  but  a  rather  well- 
established  structural  fact  of  1933. 

It  should  be  noticed  that  once  more  one  of  the  fanciful  linguistic,  structural, 
‘infinities’  has  been  abolished.  The  elements  appear  as  transitory  processes 
with  a  ‘life’  of  a  limited  span  of  years.  The  experimental  structural  evidence 
which  physicists  and  chemists  have  gathered  is  overwhelming  and,  though  the 
positive  theories  (verbal  structures)  may  not  always  be  satisfactory,  the  negative 
results  leading  to  the  rejection  of  the  older  theories  are  conclusive.  This  point 

is  of  supreme  structural  importance  to  us. 

A  short  description  of  the  different  atomic  models  comes  later  in  this 
chapter,  but  first  something  must  be  said  about  the  old  quantum  theory,  which 
represents  at  present  the  central  problem  in  science  and  out  of  the  solution 
of  which  the  most  revolutionary  consequences  are  bound  to  follow. 

The  main  problems  of  the  quantum  theory  may  be  described  and  con¬ 
trasted  somehow  as  follows.  If  we  take  a  line  X'X  and  select  a  point  O  as  the 
origin,  we  may  fix  the  position  of  a  point  P  on  this  line  by  the  co-ordinate  x . 
In  practice  we  find  the  values  of  x  by 

measurement.  If  we  assume  that  x  ^ _ , _ *  ,  ^ 

varies  continuously  we  can  expect  that  0  P 

by  refined  measurements  we  can  find  Fig.  1 

values  of  x  as  close  together  as  we  please. 

Experiments  show  that  for  the  processes  going  on  ‘inside  of  the  atom’  the 
structural  conditions  are  somehow  radically  different.  In  comparing  them  with 

the  above  example,  we  should  have  to  give  our  point  only  the  freedom  of  occu¬ 
pying  certain  discrete  points,  let  us  say  1,  2,  3  .  ,  but  all  fractional  values,  such 
as  1  /2  or  2 /3,  would  be  impossible.  If  the  only  possible  values  of  x  are  whole 
numbers,  then  the  possibility  of  finding  values  of  x  as  close  together  as  we 
choose  in  order  to  make  more  precise  measurements  is  excluded.  If  we  find, 

X.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  ‘MATTER’ 

for  instance,  that  our  x  is  neither  1  nor  2  nor  4,  and  cannot  be  larger  than  4, 
the  only  solution  is  that  our  x  must  be  3. 

These  conditions,  which  are  actually  found  in  the  atomic  mechanics,  rep¬ 
resent  an  entirely  new  and  unexpected  structural  state  of  affairs.  The  whole  of 
the  older  quantum  mechanics  can  be  summarized  in  the  statement,  that  its 
peculiarity  consists  in  the  fact  that  structurally  characteristic  discrete  numbers 
make  their  appearance,  and  that  the  processes  'inside  the  atom’  are  to  be 
described  by  discrete  numbers. 

The  usual  classical  quantum  mechanics  demands  that  x  be  allowed  to  take 
all  possible  continuous  values,  but  that  the  integral  values  of  x  represent  the 
so-called  stationary  states  through  the  quantum  conditions.  Under  such  con¬ 
ditions  the  intermediate  fractional  values  had  no  meanings. 

It  is  safe  to  say  that,  when  in  1900  Planck  formulated  his  quantum  theory 
along  the  structural  lines  sketched  here,  it  meant  a  complete  and  revolutionary 
structural  and  semantic  departure  from  all  accepted  standards  in  life  and 
science,  for  studying  this  world. 

Planck  has  shown  that  it  is  impossible  to  explain  the  spectral  distribution 
of  the  energy  radiated  by  a  black  body  under  the  older  assumptions  that  energy 
can  be  divided  indefinitely  into  smaller  and  smaller  parts,  but  that  it  may  be 
explained  on  the  structural  assumption  that  the  energy  exists  in  quanta  of 
finite  size  hv ,  where  v  is  the  frequency  of  the  radiation  and  A  is  a  constant 
(^=6.54x10  27  erg  sec.). 

These  observations  lead  to  the  revolutionary  structural  conclusion  that 
the  emission  of  radiation  occurs  discontinuously ,  and  so  the  characteristic  dis¬ 
crete  numbers  make  their  appearance. 

^  H  seems  natural  that  because  of  this  peculiar  appearance  of  whole  numbers, 
periodic  processes  such  as  rotations  or  oscillations  should  be  closely  related 
structurally  with  the  quantum  theory.  As  a  matter  of  fact  the  most  important 
structural  and  semantic  reconciliation  of  continuous  differential  equations  of 
the  older  mechanics  with  the  appearance  of  discontinuous  whole  numbers  has 
been  solved  by  the  newer  quantum  mechanics  on  this  basis  as  explained  in 
the  following  chapter. 

The  kinetic  theory  of  heat  and  the  atomistic  theory  of  electricity  have 
shown  an  enormous  productivity.  It  is  quite  natural  that  these  theories  (verbal 
structures)  should  be  highly  workable,  considering  the  structure  of  our  nervous 
systems,  as  explained  in  the  foregoing  chapters.  It  was  this  principle  of  indi¬ 
vidualization  which  helped  so  greatly.  The  quantum  theory  is  a  structural 
attempt  to  extend  this  method  of  individualization,  or  the  atomistic  principle, 
to  processes  themselves. 

As  in  the  older  days  we  introduced  units  or  elementary  quanta  of  mass, 
and  later,  an  elementary  quantum  of  electric  charge,  so  in  our  newer  knowledge 
we  have  need  for  an  elementary  quantum  of  action.  Action  is  defined  as  energy 
multiplied  by  ‘time’,  or  A  =Et. 

Naturally  such  a  product  as  energy  multiplied  by  'time’  must  play  an 
extremely  important  structural  and  semantic  role  in  this  world  of  space-time, 

THE  OLDER  'MATTER' 

where  nothing  happens  ‘instantaneously',  but  all  action  requires  'time'.  If  we 
could  discover  some  unit  of  action,  we  could  change  from  the  language  of 
‘energy’  and  ‘time’  to  the  language  of  ‘action’  and  ‘times’.  This  language,  by 
the  way,  is  much  more  satisfactory  and  structurally  closer  to  experience  than 
the  old  languages.  ‘Action’  as  structurally  defined  (product  of  ‘energy’  by 
‘time’)  is  one  of  the  two  fundamental  entities  of  pre-relativity  physics  which 
have  survived  the  Einstein  revolution.  It  is  really  a  universal  term  which  we 
can  apply  without  danger  of  degrading  science  into  private  gossip.  From  the 
neurological  standpoint,  as  it  deals  with  definite  units  and  times,  such  a  term 
has  all  the  structural  earmarks  of  an  abstraction  of  highest  order  and  of  being 
really  semantically  important.  Energy  in  space-time  must  by  necessity  be 
reformulated  as  ‘action’.  The  quantum  theory  posits  structurally  that  the 
action  of  physical  processes  is  built  up  of  a  number  of  elementary  quanta  of 
action. 

From  the  fact  that  electromagnetic  waves  and  light-waves  have  one  ve¬ 
locity,  Maxwell  concluded  that  light-waves  are  of  an  electromagnetic  character, 
a  conclusion  which  further  experiments  have  fully  justified.  Einstein,  in  1905, 
successfully  applied  the  quantum  structural  principle  to  the  theory  of  light, 
and  in  1907  to  the  theory  of  heat  of  solid  bodies. 

The  evolution  of  our  theories  concerning  the  internal  structure  of  atoms 
has,  until  lately,  closely  followed  our  astronomical  theories,  but  with  the  newest 
quantum  mechanics  this  structural  analogy  seems  less  useful.  The  first  atomic 
model  on  an  electrical  basis  was  proposed  by  J.  J.  Thomson.  He  assumed  the 
atom  to  consist  of  a  uniformly  dense  spherical  volume 
charge  of  positive  electricity,  within  which  electrons 
described  circular  orbits.  But  the  discovery  of  radio¬ 
activity  and  the  fact  that  the  alpha-rays  could  pass 
through  several  centimetres  of  atoms  (which  means  pene¬ 
trating  through  many  thousands  of  atoms),  without  their 
direction  being  altered  made  these  assumptions  struc¬ 
turally  untenable. 

The  Wilson  photographs  (Fig.  2)  show  clearly  that  a 
single  atom  can  deflect  the  alpha-particle  by  a  large  angle 
which  makes  it  clear  that  the  nucleus  of  an  atom  must  be 
considered  as  a  very  small  part  of  the  volume  of  the  atom. 

The  large  deflections  of  the  alpha-particles  show  also  that 
the  mass  of  the  nucleus  must  be  much  larger  than  the 
mass  of  the  deflected  particles.  Observations  show  also 
that  thfe  deflections  increase  with  the  atomic  weight  of  the 
deflecting  materials.  These  and  similar  facts  led  to  the 
structural  assumption  that  the  mass  of  the  atom  is  prin¬ 
cipally  concentrated  in  the  nucleus  and  that  the  mass  of 
the  electrons  must  be  very  small  in  comparison  with  that  of  the  nucleus. 

As  the  atoms  are  in  general  electrically  neutral,  we  had  to  assume  that  the 
positive  charges  of  the  nucleus  are  compensated  by  the  negative  charges  of  the 

X.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  ‘MATTER* 

electrons.  These  and  other  structural  considerations  led  Rutherford  to  propose 
a  different  atomic  model,  which  was  much  more  successful  for  a  while. 

The  Rutherford  atom  is  supposed  to  be  composed  of  a  nucleus  of  positive 
electricity  surrounded  by  negative  electrons.  The  simplest  atom  is  that  of 
hydrogen,  and  was  assumed  to  consist  of  one  electron  revolving  around  the 
simplest  positive  nucleus  or  proton,  each  having  a  charge,  e  -4.77  x  1CT10  e.s.u., 
and  different  masses,  the  mass  of  the  nucleus  or  proton  being  1845  times  the 
mass  of  the  electron.  The  other  atoms  represent  more  complex  structures  built 
up  of  protons  and  electrons,  into  the  details  of  which  we  need  not  enter  here. 
But  this  theory  encountered  difficulties  of  theoretical  as  well  as  of  experimental 
character.  Niels  Bohr  eliminated  most  of  them  by  the  application  of  the 
quantum  theory  to  the  atom. 

For  simplicity  of  writing  in  that  which  follows,  I  will  use  a  descriptive 
language  omitting  in  each  statement  ‘we  assume’  .  ,  but  the  reader  should  be 
continuously  aware,  that  when  we  deal  with  the  sub-microscopic  levels  we  deal 
only  with  inferential  units  the  representation  of  which  involves  a  great  many 
assumptions.  For  my  purpose  it  is  enough  to  stress:  (1)  the  negative  fact,  that 
the  structure  of  materials  is  definitely  different  from  that  which  was  assumed 
before  the  advent  of  the  quantum  theories,  (2)  that  in  science ,  inferential  units 
represent  abstractions  of  higher  order  and  are  as  reliable  as  the  lower  order 
abstractions  which  we  gather  on  the  macroscopic  levels,  if  they  are  treated 
semantically  as  hypothetical  units.  The  layman  should  realize  that  his  ‘world- 
outlook*  appears  as  full  of  assumptions  as  any  scientific  one,  except  that  his 
assumptions  are  not  conscious  and  cannot  be  verified,  whereas  most  of  the 
scientific  assumptions  are  conscious  and  are  continually  verified . 

In  the  older  theory  the  orbits  of  the  electrons  were  supposed  to  be  arbi¬ 
trary;  in  the  Bohr  theory  the  orbits  have  precedence,  for  which  a  definite  mag¬ 
nitude,  a  whole  number  multiple  of  the  elementary  quantum  of  action  is  specified. 
We  posit  one-quantum  orbits,  two-quantum  orbits  .  ,  to  which  definite  values 
of  the  orbits,  the  velocity,  the  number  of  revolutions,  and  the  energy  correspond. 
In  a  one-quantum  orbit,  for  instance,  the  velocity  is  supposed  to  be  equal  to 

c/140,  that  is  one  140th  of  the  velocity 
of  light,  and  the  number  of  revolutions 
equal  to  6000  billions  a  second. 

Bohr  later  modified  his  atomic 
model  structurally  by  taking  into  ac¬ 
count  the  movement  of  the  nucleus.  The 
-€  electron  was  not  supposed  to  revolve  any 
longer  around  the  proton,  but  both  pro¬ 
ton  and  electron  were  assumed  to  revolve 
around  their  common  centre  of  gravity. 
In  the  simplest  form  the  Bohr  atomic 
model  is  shown  in  Fig,  3,  representing 
the  atom  of  hydrogen,  which  we  assume 
to  consist  of  a  nucleus  with  one  positive 

THE  OLDER  ‘MATTER' 

Helium** 
(ot  particle} 

Fig.  7 
P  -  proton 

charge  and  of  an  electron  that  revolves  about  this  nucleus.  The  nucleus  is 
designated  by  a  star,  the  three  circles  represent  the  possible  orbits  for  the 
electron.  The  orbit  of  radius  a '  is  the  most  stable,  and  usually  the  hydrogen 
electron  is  supposed  to  be  found  there,  but  through  the  action  of  heat  or  electric 
fields  or  collisions .  ,  the  electron  may  be  removed  to  one  of  the  outer  orbits 
a"  or  a'".  Such  a  condition  is  not  so  stable,  and  sooner  or  later  the  electron  is 
assumed  to  return  to  the  orbit  a' .  During  these  transitions  of  the  electron,  energy 
is  radiated.  This  structural  model  is  similar  to  the  copernican  planetary  system, 
the  planet-electrons  revolving  around  the  sun-nucleus.1 

The  above  diagrams  show 
schematically  the  supposed 
structure  of  some  of  the  simpler 
atoms.  Fig.  4  represents  the 
hydrogen  atom,  consisting  of 
one  proton  and  one  electron 
revolving  around  the  proton. 

The  mass  of  the  proton  is  about 
1845  times  the  mass  of  the  elec¬ 
tron,  and  we  assume  that  the 
proton  effectively  gives  us  the 
mass  of  the  atom. 

Fig.  5  represents  the  neu¬ 
tral  atom  of  helium.  Its  nucleus 
consists  of  four  protons  and  two 
electrons,  and  it  has  two  re¬ 
volving  electrons;  in  all,  four 
protons  with  four  positive 
charges  and  four  electrons  with 
four  negative  charges,  the  eight 
charges  just  neutralizing  each 
other. 

Fig.  6  represents  a  helium 
atom  which  has  lost  one  elec¬ 
tron.  It  has,  therefore,  four 
positive  charges  and  only  three 
negative  charges.  Such  an 
atom  has  a  resultant  positive 
charge,  and  is  denoted  by  He+ . 

If  the  helium  atom  loses  two 
electrons  it  is  doubly  charged 
with  a  positive  charge  (He++) . 

The  helium  nucleus  He++t  as  shown  in  Fig.  7,  represents  the  particle  emitted 
from  radio-active  materials. 

Lithium  consists  of  two  isotopes;  that  is,  two  elements  which  appear  ex¬ 
tremely  similar  to  each  other  in  physical  and  chemical  characteristics,  but 

£=  electron 

X.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  ‘MATTER’ 

differ  from  each  other  in  the  number  of  electrons  and  protons.  In  Fig.  8  is 
shown  Iithiumg,  with  6  protons  and  3  electrons  in  the  nucleus,  and  3  revolving 
electrons.  In  Fig.  9  is  shown  lithium?,  with  7  protons  and  4  electrons  in  the 
nucleus  and  3  revolving  electrons.2 

In  general  terms,  Bohr  tried  to  account  for  all  other  atoms  on  the  base  of 
the  structure  of  the  hydrogen  atom.  The  next  important  generalization  and 
extension  of  the  Bohr  theory  was  accomplished  by  Sommerfeld  about  1915. 
The  achievement  of  Sommerfeld  can  be  compared  with  the  advance  which 
Kepler  made  over  the  copernican  theory  of  planetary  motions.  Copernicus 
considered  the  planetary  orbits  as  circular.  Kepler*  considered  them  as  ellip¬ 
tical,  and  thus  introduced  a  tremendous  structural  advance  in  astronomy. 
Sommerfeld  replaced  the  circular  orbits  of  Bohr  by  elliptical  ones.  The  theory 
became  much  more  complicated,  because  a  circle  is  given  by  one  magnitude; 
namely,  its  radius,  while  an  ellipse  needs  two  data,  its  major  and  minor  axes, 
and  so  two  quantum  numbers  for  the  specification  of  an  orbit.  Sommerfeld  also 
introduced  some  of  the  results  of  the  Einstein  theory;  for  example,  that  the 
mass  of  a  body  also  depends  on  its  velocity.  Since  the  velocity  of  the  negative 
electrons  in  the  atom  is  supposedly  very  large  it  was  quite  probable  that  the 
