relativity  considerations  should  be  appreciable.  According  to  the  Einstein 

theory,  the  faster  a  body  is  moving 
the  greater  is  its  mass.  In  an  ellip¬ 
tical  orbit  the  electron  should  have 
a  larger  mass  at  the  perihelion  than 
at  the  aphelion,  and  so  the  orbit 
would  not  be  exactly  an  ellipse  but 
the  perihelion  would  advance  slightly 
at  every  revolution. 

Fig.  10  gives  us  the  relativis¬ 
tic  Kepler  orbit  as  introduced  by 
Sommerfeld.  0  is  the  fixed  focus  in 
which  the  nucleus  is  situated  and 
P  is  the  initial  position  of  the  peri¬ 
helion.  The  motion  of  the  perihelion 
occurs  in  one  sense  with  that  of  the 
orbit.3 

The  last  analogy  in  the  structure 
of  the  atom  taken  over  from  astron¬ 
omy  was  introduced  in  1925,  when  Goudsmit  and  Uhlenbeck  proposed  their  theory 
of  the  spinning  electron.  The  electron  was  supposed  to  be  spinning  about  its 
axis  like  a  planet  or  a  top.  A  similar  notion  was  used  by  Compton  in  1921,  in 
connection  with  the  magneton,  but  the  notion  of  using  the  spinning  electron  for 

Fig.  10 

™h,vwi?  first  law  states:  The  planet  moves  in  an  ellipse,  at  one  focus  of 
.1  1S  Slt!la[e'?:  p.enhell0n  .is  that  point  of  a  planet’s  orbit  at  which  it 
is  nearest  the  sun.  Aphelion  is  that  point  of  a  planet’s  orbit  at  which  it  is  farthest 
irom  the  sun. 

THE  OLDER  'MATTER* 

the  solution  of  a  structural  difficulty  in  the  quantum  theory,  and  thus  assigning 
a  fourth  degree  of  freedom  to  the  electrons,  originated  with  Goudsmit  and 
Uhlenbeck  independently  of  the  work  of  Compton.4  It  is  not  necessary  for  our 
purpose  to  follow  all  the  further  refinements  of  the  classical  theories.  Suffice  it 
to  say  that  scientists  work  under  uniquely  severe  mutual  supervision,  and  that 
any  theories  advanced  in  science  are  taken  under  consideration  only  when  the 
new  theories  agree  better  with  experiments,  and  when  they  also  prove  struc¬ 
turally  fruitful  in  predicting  new  experimental  facts,  which  again  must  stand 
the  test  of  experiment. 

The  Sommerfeld  orbits  have  proved  to  be  an  advance  over  the  older  Bohr 
orbits,  but  they  had  also  to  be  refined  to  take  into  account  that  the  electron 
does  not  seem  to  revolve  around  a  simple  nucleus  but  around  a  core  consisting 
of  the  nucleus  and  one  or  more  electrons;  and  so  again  we  had  more  complex 
orbits. 

For  our  semantic  purpose  it  is  enough  to  say  that  to  the  best  of  our  knowl¬ 
edge  (1933),  this  world  appears  entirely  different  from  what  our  primitive  an¬ 
cestors  knew  thousands  of  years  ago,  and  perhaps  from  what  the  average  layman 
knows  today.  As  the  problems  of  ‘sanity’  represent  problems  of  semantic 
adjustment ,  and  adjustment  means  adjustment  to  something — in  this  case  to 
the  structures  of  the  world  around  and  in  us — it  appears  imperative  that  we 
should  take  into  account  the  best  knowledge  we  have  of  these  structures. 

The  few  remarks  given  above  about  the  structure  of  ‘matter’  already  show 
unmistakably  that  the  old  ‘matter’  is  not  so  very  ‘material’,  so  very  ‘solid’, 
so  very  definite,  as  we  once  assumed  it  was;  but  it  represents  a  process .  We  see 
that  our  nervous  system,  because  of  its  gradual  growth  and  evolution,  has 
developed  different  levels  or  strata;  our  ‘knowledge’  also  has  different  levels  or 
strata,  operative  as-a-whole,  although  different  aspects  of  it  can  be  analysed  in 
terms  of  order.  The  reader  should  realize  that  because  of  the  old  s.r  we  still 
‘need’  some  ‘bits’  of  something  to  speak  about.  It  is  a  linguistic  semantic  con¬ 
sequence  of  our  pre-scientific,  el  language,  which  posits  absolute  ‘matter’,  ‘space’, 
and  ‘time’.  Thus,  through  a  process  of  identification,  we  ascribe  to  these  terms 
objective  existence.  In  the  old  manner  of  speaking  the  term  ‘is’  of  identity 
played  the  main  semantic  havoc. 

In  the  older  days  electrons  were  often  taken  as  ‘bits’  of  something  or  other. 
For  the  layman  a  ‘bit’  was  identified  with  ‘matter’;  and  here  a  great  deal  of 
confusion  comes  to  light.  Even  a  ‘bit’  of  something  i?  not  necessarily  material. 
Materials,  by  definition ,  are  supposed  to  exhibit  colour,  temperature,  hardness  ,  . 
A  ‘bit’  which  did  not  have  these  characteristics  would  not  be  material  by 
definition. 

Although  the  ‘electron’  is  defined  as  an  electrical  charge,  in  the  older  days 
we  had  the  habit  of  considering  the  electrons  as  some  definite  ‘bits’  of  something, 
some  kind  of  ‘matter’.  Through  a  process  of  objectification  we  made  them 
revolve  in  definite  ‘orbits’,  with  definite  ‘velocities’.  ,  which  implies  the  definite 
application  of  terms  such  as  ‘space’  and  ‘time’,  derived  from  macroscopic  gross 
experiencet  but  not  necessarily  applicable  to  the  sub-atomic  levels. 

X.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  ‘MATTER* 

What  has  been  said  here  about  the  structure  of  ‘matter'  is  quite  sufficient 
for  our  purpose.  Here,  as  always,  the  negative — the  ‘is  not' — results  count.  We 
are  in  a  position  to  realize  by  now  that  the  overwhelming  evidence  which  science 
gives  and  which  would  be  impossible  to  repeat  here,  shows  us  a  structural 
picture  of  the  world  of  tremendous  complexity,  beauty,  and  mystery  of  a  struc¬ 
ture  undreamed  of  by  our  primitive  ancestors  who  formulated  the  current 
mythological  structures  which  moulded  our  older  s.r  and  languages. 

We  can  sum  up,  for  our  purpose,  what  we  know  about  the  structure  of 
matter  somewhat  as  follows.  The  bits  of  materials  visible  and  invisible  to  the 
unaided  eye  seem  to  be  less  simple  than  we  assume  them  to  be  and  to  the  best 
of  our  knowledge  (1933)  represent  extremely  complex  processes  of  a  dynamic 
structure.  It  appears  also  that  our  usual  forms  of  verbal  representation  which 
were  built  by  our  primitive  ancestors  are  not  similar  in  structure  to  the  world 
and  so  are  not  fit  to  represent  the  happenings  going  on  on  the  un-speakable 
levels.  As  all  our  knowledge  is  due  to  the  structure  and  function  of  our  nervous 
system,  which  represents  an  abstracting  mechanism,  all  our  knowledge  there¬ 
fore,  appears  as  some  kind  of  abstractions  of  different  orders,  on  different  levels, 
of  different  character,  and  of  varying  precision  and  intensity,  resulting  in 
various  definite  general  or  individual  s.r. 

To  bring  what  is  said  here  to  the  lower  level  of  abstracting;  namely,  to  the 
level  of  structural  visualization  and  feeling,  we  may  use  the  rough  analogue  of 
an  electric  or  mechanical  fan.  When  such  a  fan  rotates  we  see  a  disk,  simply 
because  our  nervous  system  was  evolved  under  natural  conditions  necessitating 
integration,  and  so  does  not  discriminate  between  the  rotating  blades.  The 
separate  rotating  blades  are  visually  abstracted  by  us  as  a  single  solid  disk, 
although  there  is  no  disk  present. 

To  the  best  of  our  knowledge  atoms  represent  very  minute  energetic  con¬ 
figurations  or  dynamic  structures  where  extremely  rapid  processes  are  going  on, 
which  our  nervous  system  abstracts  as  ‘solid’.  Judging  by  our  present  standards 
in  science  and  the  amount  of  knowledge  we  have  we  may  consider  that  science 
in  the  days  of  Newton  (1643-1727)  was  in  its  infancy.  During  that  period 
we  knew  a  little  about  the  shining  specks  we  see  in  the  skies,  and  more  about 
the  rough  macroscopic  facts  of  our  daily  experience.  The  genius  of  Newton  not 
only  advanced  the  detailed  knowledge  of  his  day  in  many  branches  of  science, 
but  also  formulated  two  general  theories.  One  was  the  differential  and  integral 
calculus,  which  he  discovered  independently  of  his  contemporary  Leibnitz,  the 
other  was  what  we  call  mechanics. 

In  Newton's  era  the  problems  of  macroscopic,  microscopic,  and  sub- 
microscopic  levels  of  investigation  had  not  yet  arisen  in  the  modern  sense, 
although  in  formulating  the  differential  and  integral  calculus  a  theoretical 
structural  step  was  taken  toward  the  analysis  of  the  processes  on  the  subtler 
levels.  Quite  naturally  we  applied  the  wisdom  we  derived  from  Newton  to  all 
phases  of  life  and  knowledge.  With  the  advent  of  more  detailed  structural 
knowledge  of  electromagnetic  phenomena  which  occur  on  sub-microscopic,  as 
well  as  macroscopic  levels,  difficulties  began  to  appear.  It  seemed  as  if  the 

THE  OLDER  ‘MATTER’ 

newtonian  mechanics  were  not  entirely  applicable  to  these  new  and  smaller 
scale  phenomena.  Finally  Maxwell  (1831-1879)  produced  his  famous  theory 
of  electromagnetism.  This  theory  appears  structurally  at  variance  with  the 
classical  mechanics.  Attempts  were  made  to  reconcile  both  kinds  of  phenomena 
in  one  theory.  The  problems  of  macroscopic,  microscopic,  and  sub-microscopic 
structure  and  levels  came  to  the  foreground. 

With  the  advent  of  the  quantum  theory  further  difficulties  made  their 
appearance.  It  became  quite  obvious  that  neither  the  classical  ‘continuous 
mechanics,  nor  the  classical  electromagnetic  theory  could  fully  account  for  the 
‘discontinuous'  quantum  facts.  The  situation  became  acute  and  bewildering. 
The  Einstein  theory  with  its  profound  structural  semantic  and  methodological 
revolution  liberated  us  from  our  semantic  delusions  of  the  uniqueness,  absolute¬ 
ness,  and  ‘objectivity'  of  ‘matter’,  ‘space’,  and  ‘time’.  It  built  up  a  new  semantic 
attitude  in  the  younger  generation  of  scientists  already  educated  on  this  new 
structure,  and  therefore  unhampered  by  the  old  prejudices.  New  theories  are 
now  being  formulated  along  increasingly  more  constructive  and  creative  lines. 

It  is  true  that  as  yet  neither  ‘psychologists’  nor  ‘philosophers'  have  paid 
enough  attention  to  the  subjects  discussed  here,  and  so  have  not  made  us  con¬ 
scious  of  the  structural  and  semantic  problems  involved.  However,  the  Einstein 
theory  has  had  a  profound  structural  influence  on  the  semantic  attitudes  of  the 
younger  scientists,  though  in  the  main  they  are  unconscious  of  this  fact. 

The  main  issues  at  hand  are  twofold.  One  is  semantic;  namely,  to  inculcate 
the  permanent  structural  feeling  that  words  are  not  the  things  they  stand  for. 
If  applied  habitually,  this  leads  to  the  rejection  of  the  term  ‘is’  of  identity. 
The  other  is  to  replace  old  languages  and  methods  by  structurally  new  languages 
and  new  methods,  in  which  when  we  describe  ordered  happenings,  we  describe 
the  functioning,  the  behaviour .  ,  by  speaking  more  in  a  language  of  what 
something  ‘does’  than  in  the  old  language  of  what  something  ‘is’,  which  as  we 
have  seen  must  be  always  structurally  fallacious  and  semantically  dangerous. 

The  reader  should  not  take  lightly  these  most  general  structural  and 
semantic  issues.  They  are  unusually  important  for  sanity.  When  they  are 
formulated  we  can  pass  them  on,  and  train  children  in  the  new  s.r  quite  easily. 
It  is  much  more  difficult,  after  training  a  child  thoroughly  in  the  old  vicious 
structural  semantic  habits  of  identification,  eventually  to  have  to  appoint  a 
guardian  angel  to  watch  him  day  and  night  to  remind  him  that  a  word  is  not 
an  object ,  .  Such  a  procedure  would  lay  a  terrific  strain  on  us  and  on  the 
guardian  angel.  It  would  probably  be  also  very  expensive,  judging  by  our 
present  earthly  substitutes  for  the  ‘heavenly  powers'. 

Once  this  is  realized  and  applied,  the  second  issue  becomes  a  purely  struc¬ 
tural  linguistic  one.  There  is  no  a  priori  reason  why  a  language  which  applies 
to  one  level  should  apply  to  another. 

With  these  two  main  issues  in  view,  it  is  readily  understood  why  modern 
science  tries  so  hard  to  develop  functional  languages  and  methods  in  order  to 
be  able  to  describe  in  terms  of  order  happenings  and  processes  which  are  ob- 

69  6 

X.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  ‘MATTER’ 

served.  Something  similar  could  be  said  about  all  theories  which  postulate  too 
much  of  a  definite  mechanism,  usually  involving  some  identification  somewhere. 

The  slightest  discrepancy  between  such  a  theory  and  observation  elim¬ 
inates  the  theory  as  structurally  unsatisfactory;  while  theories  which  succeed 
in  not  postulating  mechanisms,  and  so  are  formulated  in  a  functional  language, 
last  much  better.  One  of  the  enormous  advantages  of  the  Maxwell  electro¬ 
magnetic  theory  is  the  fact  that  it  describes  the  behaviour  of  electricity  and 
magnetism  while  hardly  positing  any  mechanism  at  all.  A  similar  statement 
applies  also  to  the  Einstein  theory. 

The  above  general  remarks  are  extremely  well  illustrated  by  the  newer 
quantum  mechanics. 

The  classical  theories,  as  usual  with  scientific  theories,  were  very  satis¬ 
factory  in  many  respects,  but  not  in  all;  which  is  an  unattainable  ideal  always 
demanded  from  a  good  scientific  theory.  They  also  postulated  too  much  of  a 
definite  mechanism,  which  was  the  result  of,  and  led  to,  the  semantic  dis¬ 
turbance  called  identification.  Indeed,  I  have  read  an  address  by  a  prominent 
physicist  in  which  he  claims  to  have  'seen*,  and  invites  everybody  else  to  ‘see’, 
an  'electron'.  He  challenges  his  critics,  and  seems  to  feel  like  fighting — a  quite 
usual  result  of  identification.  Electrons  represent  inferential  entities ,  and  as 
such  cannot  be  ‘seen’,  but  only  inferred,  which  does  not  detract  at  all  from  the 
importance  of  the  ‘electrons’.  The  ‘seeing’  business  was  good  enough  in  the 
infancy  of  science,  but  not  in  1933.  We  ‘see’  the  stick  broken  in  water,  the 
camera  records  it  as  broken,  an,d  yet  it  is  not  broken.  We  ‘see’  the  fan  as  a  disk, 
the  camera*  records  it  so,  but  there  is  no  disk.  We  ‘see’  a  ‘solid’  piece  of  wood  or 
stone,  which  under  the  microscope  proves  to  have  a  very  different  structure  ,  . 

In  the  older  days  the  electrodynamics  of  moving  bodies  presented  difficul¬ 
ties  quite  similar  to  the  difficulties  encountered  in  the  quantum  mechanics. 
Einstein  by  an  epoch-making  stroke  of  genius  solved  the  problem  by  observing 
that,  in  the  languages  in  question,  we  operated  with  a  notion  of  ‘simultaneity’ 
which  did  not  correspond  to  any  observable  structural  phenomenon  in  the 
physical  world.  He  discovered  that  it  is  impossible  to  establish  the  simultaneity 
of  two  events  occurring  at  different  places,  and  that  a  thorough  revision  of  our 
old  theories  is  necessary  in  this  connection.  Einstein  formulated  a  procedure, 
a  method  for  measurements,  taking  into  account  the  known  laws  of  the  propa¬ 
gation  of  light  and  electromagnetic  phenomena.  He  once  more  established  the 
most  important  semantic  thesis  that  the  laws  of  nature  are  relations  which  are 
discovered  between  events  which  are  actually  observed,  or  which  are  funda¬ 
mentally  observable . 

It  appears  that  in  the  older  quantum  mechanics  there  were  introduced 
some  objectified  entities  which  were  never  observed,  as,  for  instance,  the  posi¬ 
tions,  velocities,  and  periods  of  ‘electrons’  inside  the  atom.  How  indeed  could 
we  find  lengths  and  ‘times’  inside  the  atom?  Such  a  procedure  requires  the  intro¬ 
duction  of  rods  and  clocks,  which  themselves  consist  of  atoms;  so  that  inside 
the  atom  such  a  procedure  cannot  be  applied.  We  see  clearly  that  all  such 
conclusions  are  of  an  indirect  character;  but  of  course  such  conclusions  should 

THE  OLDER  'MATTER1 

be  based  on  some  observable  facts,  and  not  only  on  our  freedom  to  use  words 
in  any  manner  whatsoever.  It  follows  that  we  must  give  up  a  language  that 
speaks  in  terms  of  the  'position’  of  an  electron  at  a  given  'time*.  ,  and  use 
instead  a  language  that  describes  observable  characteristics,  as,  for  instance, 
energy  levels  which  are  directly  measurable  by  electron  impacts  and  the  fre¬ 
quencies  which  are  derivable  from  them,  the  intensity  and  polarization  of  the 
emitted  waves  .  ;  instead  of  electronic  'motions’  inside  the  atom,  which  never 
are  and  never  can  be  actually  observed.  It  is  structurally  indispensable  to  look 
for  such  data  which  are  actual  or  at  least  can  be  observed. 

As  words  are  not  the  things  we  speak  about,  and  structure  is  the  only  link 
between  them,  structure  becomes  the  only  content  of  knowledge.  If  we  gamble 
on  verbal  structures  that  have  no  observable  empirical  structures,  such  gam¬ 
bling  can  never  give  us  any  structural  information  about  the  world.  Therefore 
such  verbal  structures  are  structurally  obsolete,  and  if  we  believe  in  them, 
they  induce  delusions  or  other  semantic  disturbances. 

CHAPTER  XLI 

THE  NEWER  ‘MATTER’ 

,  ”^le  twof°y  nature  of  light  as  a  light- wave  and  as  a  light-quantum  is 
thus  extended  to  electrons  and,  further,  to  atoms:  their  wave-Sture  U 
asserting  itself  more  and  more,  theoretically  and  experimentally  as  con 
current  with  their  corpuscular  nature.  <«„  Y  **  “oL“rfeld 

“ncepts  of  wave  amplitude,  electric  and  magnetic  field  strengths 
nf  nfil  p?SI^'  ?c’  were  originally  derived  from  primitive  experiences 
elastic  bidSs.S«is>  “  h<!  observatlon  of  water  waves  or  the  vibrations  of 

niiTnre  °f  <>ua,?tum  theory  centers  on  the  fact  that  th^particle 

"*  ■ mm,y  — mm  “ir* »'  «* “ 

H  3  coiiLy.  uia)  w  HEISENBERG 

extraordinarily  difficult  to  tackle  problems  of  the  above 
kind,  as  long  as  we  feel  obliged  on  epistemological  grounds  to  repress  in- 

as*transition0OTohfh-r>!niCS’  and  *1°  °?erate  on|y  with  such  abstract  ideas 
as  transition  probabilities,  energy  levels,  etc.  <466,  E.  schrodinger 

'  •  ;  for  visualization,  however,  we  must  content  ourselves  with  two  in¬ 
complete  analogies— the  wave  picture  and  the  corpuscular  picture.  <2is> 

W.  HEISENBERG 

Not  every  physicist  is  an  epistemologist,  and  not 
be  one  Special  investigation  claims  a  whole  man, 
knowledge.  (326) 

everyone  must  or  can 
so  does  the  theory  of 
E.  MACH 

The  following  chapter  was  written  in  1928  and  since  then  the  newer  quantum 
mechanics  has  been  developed  much  further,  proved  enormously  fruitful,  and 
has  been  repeatedly  supported  by  experiments.  The  literature  on  this  subject 
is  steadily  accumulating,  the  most  important  classical  memoirs  by  the  origina¬ 
tors  of  this  new  scientific  trend  have  been  collected  into  book  form  and  are  now 
easily  accessible.  There  is  also  a  large  number  of  excellent  technical,  as  well 
as  non-technical  presentations.  On  reading  in  December  1932  what  I  had 
written  in  1928,  I  find  that  although  from  some  aspects  the  presentation  may 
be  considered  unsatisfactory  and  antiquated,  yet  the  epistemological  side  of 
the  older  presentation  remains  valid.  So  it  seems  advisable  to  retain  this  chapter 
and  add  only  a  few  further  A  suggestions. 

It  is  known  that  practically  all  creative  and  constructive  physicists,  who 
have  produced  revolutionary  and  lasting  works,  were  interested  in  epistemology. 
Ihere  are  many  physicists  who  know  as  much  physics  as  an  Einstein,  for  in- 
stance,  yet  Einstein  remains  quite  unique  and  his  work  is  to  a  large  extent 
responsible  for  the  present  revolutionary  developments  of  physics.  The  reason 
is  simple.  Einstein  has  corrected  a  long  established  epistemological  fallacy, 
which  can  be  expressed  in  my  language  as  the  rejection  of  the  structural  fallacy 
of  elementalism  in  a  limited  yet  very  important  field  of  physics.  He  also  estab¬ 
lished  and  applied  new  fundamental  epistemological  principles,  which  is  another 

THE  NEWER  ‘MATTER* 

way  of  saying  that  he  established  new  standards  of  evaluation  in  physics,  as 
for  instance,  that  we  should  never  postulate  entities  which  cannot  possibly  be 
observed,  that  the  ‘laws  of  nature’  should  be  formulated  in  terms  of  generally 
invariant  relations  expressed  in  tensor  equations  ,  . 

The  weakness  of  the  system  of  Einstein,  resulting  in  many  futile  criticisms, 
lies  in  the  fact  that  he  eliminated  elementalism  in  one  vital  region  of  physics, 
but  he  did  not  formulate  the  general  epistemological  principle  of  non-elementalism, 
which  should  be  applied  everywhere,  daily  life  included.  This  he  could  not 
have  accomplished  without  a  still  deeper  enquiry  into  the  mechanism  of  time¬ 
binding,  which  produces  all  science,  and  which  leads  to  the  discovery  of  the 
fundamental  fallacy  in  the  use  of  the  'is*  of  identity.  Only  after  the  elimination 
of  this  remainder  in  us  of  the  primitive  man,  does  structure  become  the  only 
possible  link  between  the  objective  and  verbal  worlds,  and  becomes  also  the 
only  possible  content  of  ‘knowledge’.  ‘Similarity  of  structure’  then  demands 
the  complete  and  general  elimination  from  science  and  life  of  any  elementalism. 

The  strength  of  the  newer  quantum  mechanics  lies  in  the  fact  that  the 
younger  physicists  have  accepted  the  new  epoch-making  einsteiman  standards 
of  evaluation  or  epistemological  principles;  the  weakness  lies  in  the  fact  that 
the  scientists  do  not  realize  that  the  fallacy  of  elementalism  is  entirely  general 
and  vitiates  all  scientific  outlooks.  No  one  can  produce  satisfactory  theories, 
nor  evaluate,  nor  interpret  them  properly  as  long  as  he  continues  to  use  the 
few-valued  and  elementalistic  ‘logics’  and  ‘psychologies’,  which  are  at  present 
always  found  at  the  bottom  of  any  'evaluation  or  interpretation  .  ^  _ 

The  latest  work  of  Dirac  goes  very  far  in  the  direction  of  building  A 
physics  by  establishing  his  language  of  transformations,  states,  observables  .  , 
ascribing  structure  to  protons,  magnetic  poles  .  ,  but  even  Dirac  does  not  seem 
to  realize  the  general  fundamental  A  issues  involved.  Dirac  says:  ‘The  descrip¬ 
tion  which  quantum  mechanics  allows  us  to  give  is  merely  a  manner  of  speaking 
which  is  of  value  in  helping  us  to  deduce  and  to  remember  the  results  of  ex¬ 
periments  and  which  never  leads  to  wrong  conclusions.  One  should  not  try  to 
give  too  much  meaning  to  it.' 1  (Italics  are  mine.)  The  italicized  words  show  that 
even  Dirac  does  not  realize  fully  the  mechanism  of  identification,  as  otherwise 
he  would  not  have  used  these  words  in  this  form.  If  we  entirely  abandon  identi¬ 
fication,  then  a  theory  or  a  book,  being  verbal,  represents  nothing  else  but 
special  language;  there  is  no  ‘merely’  about  that  either,  structure  being  the  only 
possible  link  between  the  non-verbal  and  verbal  worlds.  Instead  of  warning 
the  reader  ‘that  one  should  not  try  to  give  too  much  meaning  to  it ,  we  must 
simply  insist  that  the  only  ‘meaning’  should  be  looked  for  in  structure  .  ,  the 
‘too  much  meaning’  always  indicating  inappropriate  evaluation  and  ultimately 

semantic  disturbances.  ,  f 

Current  physical  literature  shows  that  the  main  problems  of  ‘interpretation 
depend  on  the  solution  of  the  m.o  problems  of  ‘observation’,  ‘reality’,  ‘fact’.  , 
and  border  on  the  scientific  solution  of  the  problems  of  pathological  ‘delusions’, 
‘illusions’,  and  ‘hallucinations’,  all  of  which  involve  the  fundamental  issues  of 
the  elimination  of  identification .  But  once  the  A  issues  are  structurally  formu- 

X.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  ‘MATTER’ 

lated  and  applied  in  practice,  they  result  in  a  A,  non-el,  oo-valued  orientation 
which  involves  the  recognition  of  the  mulliordinaUty  of  terms .  ,  which  also 
solves  the  problems  of  quantum  ‘interpretations’,  the  details  of  which  I  cannot 
enter  into  here. 

Originally  the  quantum  writers  had  an  inclination  to  ascribe  ‘physical 
meaning  to  waves.  The  present  tendency  of  specialists  is  to  regard  the  waves 
as  ‘purely  symbolic’,  forgetting  that  experimentally  something  else  besides  the 
symbols  ‘bends  around  the  corners’.  From  a  A  point  of  view,  when  the  prob¬ 
lems  of  the  multiordinality  of  such  terms  as  ‘observation’,  ‘fact’,  ‘reality’. , 
are  understood  we  will  have  to  ascribe  ‘physical  reality’  to  the  waves,  ascribe 
finer  structure  to  the  ‘electron’,  .  We  would  also  have  to  abandon  the  A 
particle -orientation  and  treat  the  ‘electron’,  ‘proton’.,  in  a  A,  oo-valued 
way  as  minute  fields,  which  under  the  present  experimental  conditions  behave 
as  ‘particles’.  This  A  field-orientation  suggests  a  great  many  possible  inter- 
pretations,  impossible  in  the  A  'particle’-orientation. 

Mathematically,  the  geometry  of  'space  filling’  curves  would  have  to  be 
elaborated  further  so  that  we  would  better  understand  the  structure  of  plenums, 
and  this  knowledge  should  be  applied  to  physics. 

We  should  also  perform  a  direct  series  of  experiments  with  a  more  elaborate 
Faraday  box.  A  small  wooden  laboratory  should  be  isolated  from  the  rest  of 
the  world  by  every  available  energetic  screen  and  physical  experiments  repeated 
under  such  new  dynamic  conditions.  Technically  the  winding  of,  say,  a  foot 
thickness  of  insulated  wires  for  different  currents  would  not  present  any  dif¬ 
ficulties  except  for  the  door  which  should  be  also  in  the  circuit.  The  eventual 
probable  results  of  experiments  in  such  a  laboratory  under  different  conditions 
could  be  calculated  in  advance,  and  it  may  be  fairly  well  anticipated  that  at 
least  significant  discrepancies  between  the  calculations  and  actual  experiments 
would  appear,  throwing  new  light  on  the  structure  of  the  space-time  plenum, 
the  eventual  connection  between  gravitation  and  electromagnetism  ,  .  Argu¬ 
ments  alone  will  not  help  in  this  field  and  only  experiments  will  point  the 
pathway. 

Because  of  the  extensive  literature  dealing  with  the  new  quantum  mech¬ 
anics  it  seems  unnecessary  to  dwell  upon  it  any  further,  except  by  expressing 
the  hope  that  some  mathematicians  and  physicists  will  master  the  A  oo-valued 
orientation  and  will  revise  the  theories  now  existing. 

Section  A .  Introductory . 

The  new  researches  in  the  structure  of  the  materials  of  the  universe  pro¬ 
ceeded  under  unique  conditions.  On  the  one  hand,  since  Planck  in  1900  origi¬ 
nated  the  quantum  theory,  which  earlier  elaboration  we  now  call  the  classical 
quantum  theory,  the  amount  of  experimental  facts  pointing  in  the  direction  of 
some  quantum  theory  had  become  very  convincing,  yet,  on  the  other  hand,  the 
lack  of  a  structurally  satisfactory  theory  to  co-ordinate  these  new  experimental 
facts  was  becoming  distressing. 

THE  NEWER  'MATTER* 

It  appeared  as  though  there  were  either  a  lack  of  ‘geniuses’  able  to  produce 
the  required  new  theories,  or  the  geniuses  existed,  but  were  unable  to  function 
properly.  They  seemed  to  suffer  from  a  semantic  blockage  due  to  some  identi¬ 
fication  which  successfully  prevented  broader  and  unhampered  vision. 

Presently  the  co-ordinating  theories  were  produced.  In  the  production  of 
the  new  quantum  mechanics  we  see  at  work  the  unconscious  semantic  liberating 
influence  of  the  E  and  N  systems  which  had  been  developed  and  which  we 
have  already  analysed.  The  classical  theories  had  come  to  a  structural  impasse, 
but  with  the  advent  of  younger  scientists,  who  were  educated  in  the  theoretical 
semantic  freedom  of  these  new  systems,  the  semantic  blockage  due  to  ascribing 
‘objectivity’  to  ‘matter’,  ‘space’,  and  ‘time’  was  removed,  creative  forces  were 
released,  and  these  young  scientists  proceeded  to  construct  the  structural  for¬ 
mulations  needed.  They  are  now  rightly  hailed  as  geniuses. . 

It  is  astonishing  how  these  young  post-einsteinian  scientists  of  various 
lands  and  different  inclinations  produced,  independently  and  practically  simul¬ 
taneously,  various  new  quantum  theories,  using  different  methods  and  different 
mathematical,  as  well  as  national,  languages.  When  these  different  theories 
were  studied  and  compared  they  were  found  to  amount  practically  to  one  theory, 
but  expressed  by  different  mathematical  languages.  Now  the  use  of  different 
mathematical  languages  to  express  one  group  of  experimental  facts  brings  an 
additional  benefit  in  that  it  gives  diversified  verbal  structural  information  about 
the  problems  at  hand.  Since  these  developments  are  very  recent  and  progress 
has  been  extremely  rapid  it  is  hard  to  keep  track  of  the  status  of  the  problem. 

In  this  account  of  the  newer  quantum  mechanics  I  will  emphasize  only  the 
structural  and  semantic  side,  treating  the  different  theories  as  behaviour  of 
their  respective  authors,  and  as  illustrating  the  issues  above  mentioned.  From 
this  point  of  view,  we  are  not  interested  in  discussing  to  what  extent  the  given 
theories  are  ‘true’  or  ‘false’,  which  means  no  more  than  similar  or  dissimilar  to 
the  world  in  structure.  We  are  interested  directly  in  those  semantic  aspects  of 
human  behaviour  which  have  been  neglected.  When  ‘Smith’  puts  a  black  mark 
on  white  paper,  it  is  to  be  called  human  behaviour ,  and  behaviour  unique  for 
man.  Our  analysis  does  not  involve  the  question  of  the  validity  of  his  doings. 
But  since  he  did  it,  let  us  analyse  his  doings. 

In  speaking  about  theories  as  complex  and  technical  as  the  newer  quantum 
mechanics,  it  is  practically  impossible  to  give  a  satisfactory  account  in  a  non¬ 
technical  way.  Such  theories  have  not  yet  been  worked  out  thoroughly  enough, 
many  points  are  still  not  clear,  and  no  proper  evaluation  is  possible  at  present. 
These  difficulties  are  really  immaterial  to  our  present  purpose,  because  these 
theories  are  empirical  facts  on  record ,  and  they  throw  significant  light  on  human 
behaviour.  It  is  not  here  proposed  to  make  reflections  on  the  world  around  us, 
but  to  analyse  a  certain  linguistic,  structural  form  of  human  behaviour. 

From  the  point  of  view  of  structure  and  s.rt  the  classical  quantum  mechanics 
would  be  quite  enough  for  sanity  and  adjustment;  it  is  enough  to  realize  that 
the  still  older  theories  of  ‘matter’,  ‘space’,  and  ‘time’  ar  eel,  structurally  fallacious 
and  represent  only  primitive  identifications. 

X.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  ‘MATTER’ 

•  of  SUch  a  crop  of  Seniuses  and  of  several  theories  expressed 

quite  differently  yet  nearly  equivalent,  is  an  event  of  deep  human  semantic 
significance.  It  helps  to  understand  the  working  of  the  human  nervous  system, 
and  is  in  accord  with  the  present  general  theory. 

From  the  point  of  view  of 
\\  /'  the  physicist,  these  new  theor- 

\  \  /  ies  are  a  marked  structural  im- 

Q  7S  t  \  \  Classical  /  provement  over  the  classical 

»\  \  Theory  /  theory,  a  fact  which  can  best 
