a  definition  which  is  entirely  satisfactory  theoretically,  and  also  practically,  as 
can  be  verified  from  our  example. 

From  this  point  of  view  we  may  consider  a  matrix  as  a  complex  quantity 
with  mn  or  m2  components.  A  matrix  would  then  represent  a  complex  quantity, 
as  a  special  case  under  the  general  method  sketched  above. 

We  could  then  define  our  further  operations.  A  matrix  would  be  said  to 
be  zero  when  all  elements  are  equal  to  zero.  Two  matrices  would  be  said  to  be 
equal  when  they  have  equal  numbers  of  rows  and  columns  and  every  element 
of  one  is  equal  to  the  corresponding  element  of  the  other. 

By  setting  up  some  such  rules  we  could  develop  a  calculus  of  matrices,  and 
matrices  would  be  considered  as  complex  numbers.  In  general,  the  algebraic 
rules  would  be  found  to  be  applicable  to  matrices,  which  would  further  justify 
us  in  treating  matrices  as  complex  numbers. 

One  of  the  notable  exceptions  in  our  operations  would  be  found  in  the 
application  of  the  classical  operation  of  multiplication  and  its  dependencies. 
In  ordinary  algebra  and  arithmetic,  multiplication  is  what  is  called  commu¬ 
tative’  which  means  that  2  X3  =  3x2=6,  or  axb-b  Xa* 

In  defining  the  multiplication  of  matrices  we  have  no  a  priori  grounds  for 
determining  why  one  definition  or  restriction  should  be  preferable  to  another. 

X.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  ‘MATTER* 

Only  practice  can  show  which  definition  is  more  workable  or  more  fruitful  in 
results.  In  the  matrix  calculus  the  definition  of  Cayley  is  generally  accepted, 
as  it  has  led  to  the  most  workable  results.  It  was  based  on  considerations  of 
the  composition  of  linear  tranformations. 

The  definition  is  approximately  as  follows:  The  product  ab  of  two  square 
matrices  of  the  n- th  order  gives  a  square  matrix  of  the  n-th  order  in  which  the 
element  which  lies  in  the  i~ th  row  andj-th  column  is  obtained  by  multiplying 
each  element  of  the  f-th  row  of  a  by  the  corresponding  element  of  the  j-th 
column  of  b  and  adding  the  results. 

If  we  denote  by  a and  b a  the  elements  in  the  V-th  row  and  j-th  column  of 
a  and  b  respectively,  then  by  definition  the  element  (ij)  of  our  product  ab 
would  give, 

+Gt2&2j  +  *  *  *  (5) 

and  the  (ij)  element  in  the  matrix  ba  would  be 

aijbn  +<Hj^*2  +  *  •  *  +flB /&<»•  (6) 

In  general,  the  quantities  (5)  and  (6)  are  not  equal  and  therefore  we  see 
that  the  multiplication  of  matrices  is,  in  general,  not  commutative.  The  order  in 
which  we  perform  our  multiplication  is  of  importance  and  ab  is  not  generally 
equal  to  ba,  (ab^  ba).5 

It  should  be  noticed  that  the  vector  calculus  has  made  us  familiar  with 
new  operations  which  differ  from  arithmetical  operations.  For  instance,  the 
sum  of  two  vectors  differs  in  general  from  the  arithmetical  sum  and  is  defined 
by  the  law  of  the  parallelogram  (see  Chapter  XXXIII).  This  definition  is 
more  general,  and  the  arithmetical  definition  expresses  only  the  particular  case 
in  which  the  vectors  have  one  direction.  Similarly,  the  non-commutative  law 
of  multiplication  corresponds  more  closely  to  vector  multiplication  than  to 
arithmetical  multiplication. 

We  will  not  go  further  into  the  details  of  the  matrix  calculus,  which  is  a 
well-developed  mathematical  discipline  with  a  large  literature,  but  will  empha¬ 
size  some  methodological  points  of  importance. 

One  of  the  main  applications  of  the  theory  of  matrices  is  found  in  the 
subject  of  linear  transformations . 

In  mathematics,  instead  of  using  the  given  variables,  we  very  often  intro¬ 
duce  new  variables  which  are  functions  of  the  old.  Such  transformations,  or 
change  of  variables,  are  particularly  simple  and  important  when  the  functions 
in  question  are  homogeneous  and  linear. 

If  xu  xz,  .  .  .  ,  xn  represent  the  original  variables,  and  xi,  .  .  .  ,  xnf  the 
new  variables,  we  have,  by  definition,  the  formulae  of  transformations: 

- \-alnxn 

Xn=aniXi-i - bannXn- 

The  square  matrix  made  up  of  the  coefficients  is  called  the  matrix  of  the  trans¬ 
formation  and  the  determinant  is  called  the  determinant  of  the  transformation 
and  is  completely  determined  by  the  matrix.  We  have  already  seen  the  import¬ 
ance  of  linear  equations  and  linear  transformations  in  physics  and  therefore  in 

THE  NEWER  ‘MATTER1 

the  investigation  of  the  world  around  us.  The  theory  of  matrices  is  connected 
with  such  transformations,  hence  the  importance  of  the  theory  of  matrices  for 
physics. 

For  our  purpose  another  characteristic  of  the  matrix  calculus  is  of  interest 
and  that  is  the  fact  that  in  physics  we  usually  have  a  large  number  of  empirical 
numerical  data  which  enter  as  coefficients  in  equations  and  which  can  always 
be  put  in  the  form  of  a  two-dimensional  array  of  numbers,  or  a  table,  which 
we  have  just  called  a  matrix. 

It  appears  that  every  physical  quantity,  however  complicated,  can  be 
represented  by  such  a  table  giving  the  values  of  the  parameters  which  determine 
its  character.  From  the  definition  of  the  term  ‘variable'  as  any  value  out  of 
a  possible  range  of  values,  we  might  treat  our  variables  in  two  distinct  ways, 
one  from  the  point  of  view  of  function  or  operations,  the  other  from  the 
extensional  point  of  view,  when  the  function  or  operations  are  unknown,  although 
the  particular  values  of  the  variable  are  given.  The  matrix  calculus  takes  this 
last  point  of  view. 

In  physical  research  work  we  deal  for  the  most  part  with  arrays  of  numbers 
or  unique  and  specific,  mostly  asymmetrical,  relations  which  the  experiments 
give  us.  Our  usual  problem  is  to  find  the  structure,  the  function,  and  the 
operations  which  are  satisfied  by  the  given  experimental  relations. 

We  see  that  the  dual  approach  to  our  solutions  is  due  entirely  to  the  defini¬ 
tion  which  we  have  accepted  for  the  variable.  We  have  two  issues:  Either  to 
find  the  values  of  the  variable  which  satisfy  the  given  function  and  operations 
or,  having  particular  values  of  the  variable  (experimental),  to  find  the  function 
and  operations. 

Obviously  every  physical  quantity  can  be  represented  by  a  matrix,  which 
may  be  a  sequence,  and  every  mathematical  theorem  can  be  reduced  to  a 
property  of  matrices.  Once  the  proper  mathematical  theories  are  worked  out 
it  will  be  always  possible  to  pass  from  one  form  of  representation  to  the  other.6 

In  the  older  mechanics  the  functions  were  rather  obvious  and  so  the  use 
of  the  matrix  calculus  was  not  so  imperative.  In  the  newer  mechanics,  the 
opposite  is  the  case.  We  have  a  large  amount  of  numerical  experimental 
relations,  but  the  functions  and  operations  connecting  these  variables  are 
unknown  and  the  problem  is  to  find  them.  From  this  point  of  view  the  matrix 
calculus  represents  an  extensional  calculus,  a  calculus  of  observation .  In  using 
the  descriptive  term  ‘observation’  we  must  add  that  some  objections  have 
been  advanced  to  such  a  use  of  the  term.  The  answer  is  that  the  term  ‘observa¬ 
tion’,  like  most  of  our  most  important  terms,  must  be  considered  a  multiordinal 
term .  Once  this  is  understood  the  objections  to  the  use  of  the  term  do  not  hold. 

There  is  no  limitation  as  to  what  the  elements  of  a  matrix  may  represent; 
they  may  be  functions,  functions  of  functions  ,  . 

Section  D .  The  operator  calculus. 

The  use  of  the  operator  calculus  is  interesting,  structurally  and  psycho¬ 
logically,  in  that  attention  is  concentrated,  not  on  the  numerical  quantities, 

X.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  ‘MATTER’ 

but  on  the  semantic  operations  of  combining  them.  The  calculi  used  in  the 
newer  quantum  mechanics  are  peculiar,  because,  while  they  retain  the  numerical 
data  and  as  far  as  possible,  the  classical  equations,  they  alter  the  operations 
by  which  these  quantities  are  combined,  or  the  interpretation  of  the  equations. 

As  an  illustration  of  such  a  procedure  we  can  take  two  different  formulae 
for  the  addition  of  velocities!  one  from  the  classical  mechanics,  where 

^13  =  ^12  +  ^23,  (1) 

and  the  other,  the  formula  for  velocity  as  given  by  the  Einstein  theory;  namely, 

yn-Y*  +  V»  . 

(2) 

c2 

In  these  formulae  Vlt  represents  the  velocity  of  body  1  relative  to  body  2 
!n  formuk  (1)  the  sign  '+’  symbolizes  the  ordinary  arithmetical  operation  of 
addition.  As  we  already  know,  this  formula  has  proven  too  simple  to  represent 
accurately  the  experimental  data,  and  Einstein  has  replaced  it  by  the  more 
elaborate  formula  (2). 

The  above  statement  is  the  usual  way  of  speaking  about  the  modification 
m  formulation  which  has  taken  place  in  physics  since  Einstein.  But  we  could 
equally  well  say  that  the  formula  has  not  been  altered  except  that  the  '  +’  has 
no  longer  the  old  meaning  and  does  not  now  represent  the  arithmetical  operation 
of  addition.  Both  points  of  view  lead  ultimately  to  one  value,  F18,  and  the 
computations  are  similar  in  both  cases. 

We  should  notice  especially  the  great  freedom  with  which  we  can  treat 
mathematical  entities.  Our  voluntary  selection  of  the  point  of  view  becomes 
important.  A  similar  freedom  of  selection  of  interpretation  appears  to  a  still 
larger  extent  in  all  verbal  problems,  a  fact  of  considerable  structural  and  semantic 
importance  m  any  theory  of  sanity,  as  we  have  already  seen. 

Further  illustration  of  this  freedom  can  be  seen  in  the  way  in  which  the 
ordinary  notion  of  multiplication  is  re-interpreted  in  the  operator  calculus 
Let  us  denote  by  g  and/,  two  numerical  quantities,  and  g/as  their  product. 
But  we  could  view  this  problem  differently.  We  could  say  that  qf  results  from 
a  semantic  operation  q  performed  on  /,  or  a  semantic  operator  (g  x)  acting 
upon  /  which  transformed  /  into  qf.  We  could  denote  the  operation  of  multi¬ 
plying  by  g  or  the  operator  (g  x)  by  a  single  symbol  Q.  Quite  obviously  the 
operator  Q  is  not  the  number  g;  in  other  words,  the  semantic  operation  of 
multiplying,  say  by  two,  is  not  the  number  2. 

The  operation  of  multiplying  integer  1  by  integer  2  gives  the  result  2. 
Similarly,  the  operation  of  multiplying  1  by  q,  or,  in  our  new  language,  the 
application  of  the  operator  Q  to  the  integer  1,  gives  q.  In  symbols,  01  =g. 
If  we  take  any  arbitrary  function/,  the  result  of  the  operation  of  Q  upon  /  is 

THE  NEWER  ‘MATTER’ 

written  Qf-qf.  If  we  were  to  follow  the  operation  Q  by  the  differential  operation 
i/dx  the  result  would  be*: 

But  as  /  is  arbitrary,  it  jnay  be  omitted  from  the  equations  and  the  result 
written  in  the  operator  form  as 

The  symbol 

dQ 

dX' 

defined  by  this  equation,  should  be  read  as  'the  operation  of 

multiplying  by  dq/dx\  Similarly, 

d(QF)_dQp  dP 
dX  dX  VdX  * 

In  translating  the  ordinary  equations  into  the  language  of  operators  nothing 
new  is  introduced.  This  translation  involves  only  a  change  of  lmentaV  focus. 
Instead  of  concentrating  our  attention  on  the  numerical  values  we  concentrate 
on  the  operations  of  combining  them.  Since  the  great  problems  of  the  quantum 
mechanics  consist  in  finding  new  methods  of  computation,  or  of  combining 
numerical  values,  such  a  change  of  attitude  may  prove  to  be  structurally  useful. 

It  should  be  noticed  here  that  once  matrices  are  considered,  and  treated, 
as  quantities,  or  unique  and  specific  relations,  by  similar  reasoning  they  can 
be  treated  as  operators.  This  problem  is  of  fundamental  structural  and  semantic 
importance  because  in  the  quantum  theory  we  deal  with  matrices  which  have 
infinite  numbers  of  terms  and  since  this  complexity  presents  great  technical 
difficulties  it  is  of  enormous  advantage  to  be  able  to  pass  to  some  more 
developed  methods  of  calculation. 

At  the  preliminary  stage  in  the  operator  calculus  we  have  assumed  that 
multiplication  was  commutative,  that  QP=PQ;  but  in  the  further  and  more 
general  development  of  the  theory,  this  does  not  hold. 

In  general  we  must  assume  in  the  operator  calculus  that  multiplication  is 
not  commutative,  that  QP 9^  PQ .  For  instance,  if  ()  =  (?X)  and  P  =d/dq,  the 
two  operations  are  certainly  not  commutative.  Naturally,  the  validity  of 
2X2  -  4  is  not  doubted,  but  generalized  non-commutative  multiplication  has  a 
definite  asymmetrical  and  so  structural  geometrical  interpretation,  to  be  found 
in  the  vector  calculus.  When  we  associate  with  each  numerical  quantity  its 
own  operation  of  multiplication  we  thus  obtain  a  more  general  calculus. 
Operators  may  be  regarded  as  compound,  or  built  up  from  the  elementary 
arithmetical  operations  of  addition  and  multiplication.  They  represent,  so  to 
say,  functions  of  these  operations.7 

♦The  operator  Dxt  also  written  d/dxy  is  called  a  differential  operator.  If  applied 
to  a  product  (mp)  the  results  are  given  by  the  formula  Dx(uv)  =  uDxv+vDxu . 

X.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  ‘MATTER* 

Section  E.  The  new  quantum  mechanics . 

The  mam  problem  of  the  quantum  theory  is  to  determine  these  functions 
o  the  operations,  so  that  the  solution  of  certain  equations  (hamiltonian)  may 
represent  the  experimental  facts.  The  original  equations  of  the  new  mechanics 
o  Heisenberg,  Born,  and  Jordan  were  frankly  founded  on  an  empirical  basis. 
As  Dirac  puts  it,  m  seeking  for  the  new  equations,  the  classical  equations  were 
to  be  retained  as  far  as  possible  and  only  the  operations  by  which  these  quantities 
are  combined  were  to  be  altered. 

To  gain  this  freedom  to  alter  multiplication  the  data  were  first  interpreted 
as  matrices.  Then  it  was  found,  by  Born  and  Wiener,  that  the  matrices  could 
be  interpreted  as  a  special  kind  of  operator,  which  furnished  means  to  calculate 
the  matrices.  Carl  Eckart  independently  developed  a  simple  operator  calculus 
or  the  solution  of  the  quantum  problems.  In  this  present  work  I  follow  closely 
the  paper  of  Eckart.7 

The°r.!gin°f  thC  ”eW  t»uantum  mechanics  was  an  epoch-making  paper  by 
Werner  Heisenberg,  in  July,  1925.  The  older  quantum  theory  had  postulated 
the  existence  of  stationary  states  of  the  atom,  which  were  calculated  with  the 
aid  of  the  older  mechanics.  In  the  new  mechanics  the  equations  have  similar 
form  as  in  the  classical  theory,  but  the  variables  no  longer  obey  the  commutative 
aw  of  multiplication.  In  general  pq  is  not  equal  to  qp,  (pq  =gp  and  pq  -qp  =0 

in  the  classical  theory)  but  =  where  h  represents  the  Planck  co„. 

slant,  q  the  generalized  co-ordinate,  p  the  momentum,  1  stands  for  the  unit 
matrix,  and  n  and  t  have  the  usual  meaning.  The  fact  that  multiplication  is 
not  commutative  m  our  calculus  allows  us  to  give  a  definite  value  to  the  above 
difference  and  by  introducing  the  Planck  constant  h,  we  are  enabled  to  intro¬ 
duce  the  quantum  conditions  in  our  calculations. 

The  quantum  conditions  of  the  older  theory  led  to  an  algebraic  equation, 
y  using  the  classical  equation  with  a  non-commutative  multiplication  law  for 
the  variables  it  is  possible  to  perform  calculations  in  the.  new  and  wider  scheme 
of  dynamics.  The  difference  between  pq  and  qp  is  expressed  in  terms  of  the 
Planck  constant  h  When  h  is  made  to  approach  zero,  pq  approaches  qp,  and 
so  we  pass  to  the  classical  mechanics.  Thus  we  see  that  the  classical  mechanics 
appear  only  as  a  particular  case  of  this  more  general  theory. 

In  introducing  his  theory,  Heisenberg  pointed  out  that  the  older  mechanics 
uses  quantities  which  are  never  observable,  and  can  never  be  observed,  such  as,  for 
instance,  orbital  frequencies  and  amplitudes,  or  the  position  and  ‘time’  of 
revolution  of  an  ‘electron’.  ,  which,  as  such,  have  no  physical  meaning.  He 
proposes  to  use  observable  data,  such  as  the  frequencies  and  intensities  of  the 
radiations  ,  .  Now  these  frequencies  are  always  differences  between  two  terms 
pven  by  integers.  If  Tn  and  Tm  are  two  such  terms,  the  observable  frequency 
is  eoretica  y  represented  by  vnm  =  Tn  —  Tm.  Such  numbers  as  v„m  characterize 
riie  atom  as  far  as  it  is  observable.  It  was  natural  that  such  a  collection  (‘sum’ 
m  this  case  has  no  longer  any  physical  meaning)  of  terms  could  best  be 
represented  by  a  matrix.  In  the  classical  theory  a  dynamical  quantity  was 

THE  NEWER  'MATTER* 

represented  structurally  by  a  trigonometrical  Fourier  series;  in  the  new,  it 
is  represented  by  a  two-dimensional  table  of  values;  that  is,  by  a  matrix  giving 
the  frequencies  and  the  intensities  of  radiations. 

An  important  and  interesting  structural  issue  now  appears.  It  is  that  the 
Heisenberg  theory  gives  a  new  formulation  for  the  hamiltonian  equations  of 
motion,  whereby  their  form  is  preserved,  yet  they  are  made  applicable  both  to 
periodic  and  to  non-periodic  motion.  It  becomes  possible  to  fuse  the  classical 
mechanics  with  the  quantum  mechanics.  The  distinction  between  ‘quantised’ 
and  ‘unquantised’  motion  loses  all  meaning,  and  a  fundamental  equation, 
h 

pq~~qp  — —  1,  is  formulated  which  is  valid  for  all  motion . 

2  wi 

The  Heisenberg  theory  is  also  characterized  by  its  thoroughly  behaviour- 
istic,  actional,  functional,  and  operational  character.  The  number  of  unjusti¬ 
fiable  assumptions  is  the  lowest  in  existence  and  most  of  the  identifications  are 
eliminated.  According  to  Heisenberg,  electrons  and  atoms  do  not  have  the 
‘same’  kind  of  ‘reality’  as  ordinary  objects  of  lower  order  abstractions.  This  con¬ 
clusion,  which  underlies  his  whole  work,  is  of  particular  importance  structurally. 
As  we  know,  differences  in  character  separate  different  orders  of  abstraction 
and  since  the  quantum  phenomena  belong  to  a  higher  order  of  abstraction  they 
must  differ  from  objects  which  belong  to  a  lower  order  of  abstraction.  In  this 
theory  the  feelings  of  ‘space’  and  ‘time’  are  no  longer  applicable  to  the  ‘inside’ 
of  the  atom — as  might  be  expected. 

The  distinction  between  ‘inner’  and  ‘outer’  electrons  in  an  atom  becomes 
meaningless,  since  it  is  impossible  to  recognize  a  particular  entity  among  a 
series  of  similar  entities.  In  accordance  with  the  new  ‘space- time’  outlook  we 
gain  a  physical  basis  for  the  absolute  individuality  of  some  eventual  unit. 

Because  of  its  structure,  the  Heisenberg  theory  is  a  very  fundamental  one 
and  there  is  little  doubt  that  the  Heisenberg  methods  will  be  elaborated  further 
and  will  be  kept  as  a  permanent  checking  method  in  physics.  A  theory  which  is 
thoroughly  behaviouristic,  with  a  minimum  of  assumptions,  will  probably  re¬ 
main  both  a  most  important  instrument  of  research  and  an  inspiration  to 
physicists  and  mathematicians. 

The  Heisenberg  theory,  again,  because  of  its  structure  and  method,  does 
not  lend  itself  easily  to  visualization.  This  is  not  against  the  theory.  The 
pictorial  representations  of  lower  order  abstractions  are  not  to  be  relied  upon. 
Besides,  visualization  depends  on  the  lower  centres  and  therefore  must  be  rep¬ 
resented  by  a  macroscopic  representation  of  a  continuous  (rather  than  a  discrete) 
character,  such  as  waves  ,  . 

^f  we  were  to  try  to  describe  the  Heisenberg  theory  pictorially,  which  is 
obviously  difficult  to  do,  we  would  have  to  give  a  negative  description.  We 
should  have  to  say  that  what  we  observe  must  be  considered  only  as  radiations 
from  the  location  which  the  atom  was  supposed  to  occupy.8 

There  remains  but  to  mention  some  more  characteristics  of  the  Heisenberg 
theory  which  seem  to  have  very  far-reaching  structural  and  semantic  bearings 

X.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  ‘MATTER* 

This  theory  appears  frankly  statistical  and  introduces  fundamental  probability 
assumptions.  The  moment  we  realize  that  the  human  organism  is  essentially 
an  abstracting  affair  and  that  the  abstracting  is  performed  on  different  levels, 
or  in  different  orders,  it  becomes  obvious  that  statistical  methods  and  proba¬ 
bility  notions  become  fundamental. 

In  the  earlier  days  we  used  to  assume  that  statistical  laws  were  laws  with 
exceptions.  Such  an  outlook  was  conditioned  by  our  dealings  with  macroscopic 
events.  Now,  we  analyse  such  macroscopic  events  in  terms  of  microscopic  and 
sub -microscopic  events,  the  statistical  laws  become  accurate  laws,  not  for  in¬ 
dividuals  but  for  groups  of  individuals.  Because  we  abstract  in  different  orders, 
we  deal  only  with  statistical  data,  mass  effects  of  different  ‘packets’  of  nervous 
excitement,  as  is  best  illustrated  by  different  thresholds  in  different  nervous 
tissues. 

The  processes  in  the  higher  centres,  more  remote  from  the  external  world , 
deal  with  a  special  material,  no  more  with  statistical  data  of  ‘packets'  and 
averages,  but  with  what  we  used  to  call  ‘inferences’,  ‘inductions’.  ,  which  give 
only  the  probability  of  happenings.  But  as  we  have  already  seen,  probability 
has  become  a  well-developed  structural  mathematical  discipline,  which  has  not 
yet  made  much  effect  upon  our  primitive-made  macroscopic  metaphysics  and 
language.  It  should  be  noticed  that  the  highest  activities  of  the  nervous  centres 
are  based  on  statistical  data  furnished  by  the  lower  centres.  So  we  see  that,  to 
the  best  of  our  knowledge  about  ourselves  and  the  world  around  us,  a  modern 
structural  and  semantic  outlook,  in  science  or  in  life,  must  be  based  on  statistical 
and  probability  methods. 

In  space-time  every  point  has  a  date,  and  therefore  in  the  language  of 
space- time  all  points  are  different  and  do  not  repeat  themselves.  Such  structural 
outlook  is,  of  course,  again  conditioned,  and  leads  toward  the  statistical  and 
probability  methods.  The  main  psycho-logical  importance  of  the  new  methods 
is  to  diminish  affective  tension,  which  is  always  wasteful  and  harmful.  In¬ 
ferences  may  involve  belief.  When  belief  is  too  strongs  although  this  is  never 
justified  according  to  the  best  modern  knowledge,  we  very  easily  fall  into 
identification,  delusions,  illusions,  and  the  like.  It  should  be  emphasized  that 
the  last-mentioned  pathological  states  are  always  compound.  They  involve  at 
least  two  components.  One  of  these  consists  of  some  ignorance  somewhere;  the 
other  of  strong  affective  belief  in  the  ‘truth’  of  our  mistaken  notions.  The 
stronger  the  affective  tension  is,  the  more  dangerous  the  semantic  disturbance 
becomes. 

The  Heisenberg  theory  has  succeeded  in  formulating  (verbal)  structural 
methods  which  are  best  suited  to  represent  the  experimental  facts  which  underlie 
physics,  as  well  as  being  structurally  in  accord  with  the  working  of  the  human 
nervous  system.  That  is  why  I  venture  to  assert  that  this  theory  will  never 
be  abandoned  as  a  checking  and  research  instrument. 

In  an  hypothetical  experiment  in  the  quantum  field,  we  may  assume  what 
may  be  called  a  gamma-ray  microscope.  If  we  were  to  illuminate  an  ‘electron’ 

THE  NEWER  ‘MATTER’ 

by  gamma-rays,  the  rays  would  disturb  the  experiment,  and  in  our  fundamental 

equation,  pq  —gp - — ,  1,  by  which  the  ‘position’  was  to  be  determined,  the 
2m 

'momentum’  would  thereby  be  disturbed.  This  change  of  ‘momentum’  would 
be  greater  the  shorter  the  wave-length  of  the  rays  used;  and  the  shorter  the 
wave-length  of  the  ray,  the  more  accurate  the  determination  of  ‘position  would 
be.  Hence,  the  more  exactly  a  co-ordinate  q  could  be  found,  the  less  exactly 
could  its  momentum  p  be  found,  and  vice  versa. 

So  we  have  to  introduce  corrections  for  errors,  and  have  to  introduce 
'mean  values’  and  ‘probability  functions’,  which  we  can  develop  and  compute. 
Lately,  Bohr  has  further  developed  the  probability  aspects  of  the  newer  quantum 
mechanics  but  I  have  not  seen  this  work.  Heisenberg  introduces  ‘probability 
packets’  which  correspond  to  the  ‘wave  packets’  of  Schrodinger. 

It  is  difficult  to  speak  briefly,  and  yet  in  a  satisfactory  way,  about  these 
new  developments,  and  particularly  difficult  to  give  credit  properly  to  different 
authors.  All  their  works  are  interwoven  and  at  present  they  all  really  work 
together  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  historically  some  of  these  theories  have  been 
developed  independently. 

What  we  call  today,  for  the  sake  of  brevity,  the  Heisenberg  theory,  because 

of  its  originator,  has  been  further  developed  by  Heisenberg,  Born,  Jordan,  and 
others.  Later,  when  the  wave-mechanics  appeared,  all  the  new  theories  were 
finally  fused  into  a  very  elaborate  and  impressive  structure. 

Historically,  P.  A.  M.  Dirac  worked  at  the  theory  from  a  different  mathe¬ 
matical  point  of  view,  utilizing  what  is  called  the  ‘Poisson  bracket  method. 
In  this  treatment  the  difficulties  of  the  matrix  calculus  were  avoided.  He 
introduced  dynamical  variables  which  he  called  the  q  numbers.  These  do  not 
obey  the  commutative  law  of  multiplication  although  the  c  numbers  (classical) 
do.  He  also  considered  the  difference  of  the  non-commutative  products  xy -yx, 
where  x  and  y  are  functions,  respectively,  of  the  co-ordinates  q\  ...  q 8,  and  of 
the  momenta  pi .  .  .  pa  of  a  multiple  periodic  system  with  5  degrees  of  freedom. 

Dirac  has  generalized  the  matrix  theory  and  the  Schrodinger  equations. 
His  work  seems  to  be  most  important,  in  physics  and  mathematics,  but  it  is 
not  possible  for  us  to  consider  it  here  in  any  detail.9 

Let  us  recall  once  more  that  there  are  fundamental  differences  between 
the  different  orders  of  abstraction,  and  that  we  all  have  to  abstract  in  different 
orders.  From  this  point  of  view  it  is  natural  that  every  theory,  even  if  expressed 
at  present  in  a  form  which  cannot  be  visualized ,  like  the  Heisenberg  theory  or 
the  original  Dirac  theory,  has  sooner  or  later  to  be  expressed  in  a  structural 
form  which  can  be  visualized.  These  problems  have  really  nothing,  or  at  most 
very  little,  to  do  with  the  world  around  us.  They  are  concerned  with  the 
neurological  structure  which  produces  all  theories. 

Theories  of  a  structure  such  as  that  of  the  Heisenberg  theory  are  extremely 
important,  as  already  explained,  but  in  them  we  lose  the  help  of  ‘intuition’. 
Now  ‘intuition’  (lower  centres)  has  two  quite  different  effects — sometimes  it 
leads  us  astray,  but  on  other  occasions  it  helps  greatly. 

X.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  ‘MATTER* 

An  ‘intuitive1  theory  has  a  creative  aspect,  but  always  ought  later  to  be 
revised  and  scrutinized  by  non-intuitive  means.  In  fact,  because  of  our  nervous 
structure,  we  should  always  strive  to  produce  both  aspects  of  theories — strive 
consciously — for  thus  we  facilitate  progress.  Historically,  we  can  never  com¬ 
pletely  avoid  producing  both  types  of  theories,  as  they  are  inherent  in  our 
nervous  structure  and  in  the  different  orders  of  abstractions  we  produce. 

It  is  precisely  in  the  newer  quantum  mechanics  that  a  typical  example  of 
this  simple  neurological  fact  is  found.  The  non-intuitive  handling  of  data  was 
introduced  by  Heisenberg:  the  translation  of  the  matrix  calculus  into  opera¬ 
tional  and  ‘Poisson  brackets’  methods;  and,  finally,  the  new  ‘wave  mechanics’ 
of  de  Broglie,  Schrodinger,  and  others,  gives  us  a  perfect  translation  into 
intuitive  methods. 

It  should  be  noticed  that  according  to  the  old  notions  such  two  methods, 
the  intuitive  and  the  non-intuitive,  were  not  supposed  to  be  a  neurological 
necessity .  We  still  assumed  that  they  were  separated  ‘absolutely’,  and  even 
today  in  many  quarters  we  argue  as  if  they  were  absolutely  separable.  If  we 
accept  the  principle  of  non-elementalism,  we  realize  that  this  distinction  is 
verbal  only  and  that  the  invention  of  verbal  means  has  little  or  nothing  to  do 
with  the  world  around  us,  but  that  it  depends  on  human  structural  ingenuity. 

Investigation  of  the  ordered  cyclic  nerve  currents  shows  unmistakably 
that  such  sharp  differentiation  is  unjustifiable;  and  we  must  conclude,  in  accord¬ 
ance  with  historical  experience,  that  translation  from  one  method  to  the  other 
must  be  a  necessity,  and  so  will  be  accomplished  some  day  in  every  field.  It  is 
true  that  at  present  the  Einstein  theory  has  not  been  translated  with  entire 
