success  into  terms  of  lower  order  abstractions.  This  is  a  task  which  is  facilitated 
by  this  present  work.  The  newer  quantum  mechanics  gives  us  an  unparalleled 
example  of  such  translation,  and  hence  our  main  interest  should  be  concentrated 
on  this  structural  aspect. 

On  neurological  grounds  it  seems  certain  that  visualization  involves  in 
some  way  the  lower  nerve  centres,  which  again,  by  evolutionary  necessity, 
involve  macroscopic  forms  of  representation.  Our  macroscopic  experience  led 
us  to  geometrical  intuitions .  These  were  framed  three-dimensionally  in  ‘ absolute 
emptiness and  were  impossible  in  higher  dimensions.  The  old  structure 
represented  a  static  empty  ‘space’  in  which  nothing  could  happen  and  which 
was  thus  unfit  to  represent  this  world  around  us  where  something  is  going 
on  everywhere. 

The  new  structure  represents  ‘ fulness ’  or  a  plenum.  We  can  visualize  it  as 
a  network  of  intervals  or  world-lines  and  then,  by  the  notions  of  the  differential 
calculus,  as  already  explained,  we  pass  easily  to  the  visualization  of  the  many¬ 
dimensional  space-time  world  of  Minkowski-Einstein.  Now,  in  such  a  world, 
the  curves  are  represented  by  functions,  and,  vice  versa,  functions  represent 
curves.  Thus  it  is  obvious  that  analytical  ‘non-intuitive’  methods  have  ‘in¬ 
tuitive’  structural  geometrical  counterparts.  From  this  point  of  view  the 
method  of  operators  represents  a  passing  step  from  the  non-intuitive  to  intuitive 

THE  NEWER  ‘MATTER’ 

methods.  As  soon  as  we  have  functions,  we  can  represent  a  functional  calculus 
as  an  operational  calculus.  This  involves  a  more  behaviouristic  semantic  attitude 
and  so  leads  to  the  possibility  of  translation  of  either  method  into  the  other. 
Ultimately  these  are  psycho-logical  transformations  and  translations. 

We  should  not  be  surprised  to  find  that  in  the  development  of  the  newer 
quantum  mechanics  the  operational  calculus  plays  just  such  a  role. 

Now  our  older  macroscopic  experience,  which  affected  our  lower  nerve 
centres,  gave  rise  to  the  elementary  geometrical  structural  notions  of  ‘lines', 
‘surfaces’,  ‘volumes’,  .  For  the  building  of  physics  we  had  to  introduce  ‘time’, 
‘motion’,  .  In  older  days  we  did  not  realize  that  these  give  us  forms  of  repre¬ 
sentation  and  that  it  is  optional  with  us  which  forms  we  will  accept  as  funda¬ 
mental  or  use  as  a  starting  point. 

The  old  descriptive  apparatus  posited  structurally  an  absolute  and 
immutable  ‘space’  (emptiness),  ‘time’,  ‘matter’  out  of  which  we  built  up  a 
verbal  definition  for  ‘motion’.  The  semantic  attitude  of  all  of  us,  scientists 
included,  depended  upon  identification.  We  ascribed  lower-centre  significance 
to  higher-centre  abstractions.  We  did  not  discriminate  enough  between  the 
macroscopic  and  small  scale  events.  So  we  had  ‘geometrical  optics'  in  which 
we  ‘perceived’  a  ray  of  light  (in  a  dusty  room,  let  us  say)  as  a  ‘straight  line’. 
Further  investigation  disclosed  that  the  ‘rays'  on  one  level  of  abstraction  were 
waves  on  another,  but  they  were  not  perceived  as  waves  by  the  lower  centres. 

But  through  our  lower  centres  we  had  acquaintance  with  some  waves, 
such  as  in  water;  so  representation  for  waves  was  developed.  A  wave- theory 
still  remained  intuitively  workable,  even  when  we  dealt  with  waves  which  we 
could  not  see.  Now  the  equations  of  waves  are  well  known.  It  is  then  possible 
to  translate  a  non-intuitive  matrix  mechanics,  when  we  treat  matrices  as 
operators,  into  a  functional  calculus  which  has  an  intuitive  geometrical  wave 
representation. 

This  is  precisely  what  has  happened  and  now,  perhaps  for  the  first  time 
in  human  history,  we  have  all  the  aspects  of  a  theory  being  worked  out  simul¬ 
taneously,  with  mutual  co-operation  of  all  workers  and  the  use  of  methods 
which  are  mutually  complementary  from  the  neurological  side.  There  seems 
little  risk  in  predicting  that  because  of  these  neurological  factors  the  newer 
quantum  mechanics  will  give  extremely  rapid  and  far-reaching  results.  When 
scientists  become  aware  of  the  structural  semantic  and  neurological  issues 
involved,  perhaps  such  achievements  will  be  multiplied  consciously ,  instead  of 
being  a  kind  of  coincidence. 

Personally,  I  am  convinced  that  these  new  achievements  are  not  simply 
coincident.  It  seems  that  the  abolishment  of  the  old,  el>  static  ‘absolute  space’ 
and  ‘absolute  time’  has  relieved  the  younger  scientists  front  a  semantic  blockage . 
This  release  was  due  to  the  bold  stroke  of  genius  of  Einstein  in  refusing  to  use 
the  vicious  aristotelian  ‘is’  of  identity.  As  soon  as  we  realize  that  words  are  not 
the  objective  levels,  we  gain  an  unconscious  semantic  freedom  in  handling  words, 
as  words.  At  once  this  freedom  is  bound  to  produce  many  different  forms  of 

X.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  ‘MATTER' 

representation  for  events,  according  to  the  personal  make-up  of  the  individual 
workers.  And  of  course  these  forms  can  be  translated  into  one  another. 

Section  F.  The  wave  mechanics . 

We  have  not  sufficient  space  at  our  disposal  to  discuss  more  fully  the  new 
wave  mechanics.  I  found  that  short  of  a  small  volume,  no  explanations,  readily 
intelligible,  could  be  made. 

In  mathematics  and  physics,  which  represent  the  most  developed  sciences, 
we  consciously  and  unconsciously  strive  for  more  and  more  general  formulations. 
The  work  of  Einstein,  showing  that  the  classical  mechanics  was  only  a  particular 
case  of  a  more  general  mechanics,  has  given  a  healthy  stimulation  to  such  a 
fruitful  line  of  work. 

As  the  quantum  phenomena  could  not  be  accounted  for  by  the  old  me¬ 
chanics,  it  was  natural  that  physicists  should  try  schemes  of  new  mechanics 
which  included  classical  mechanics  as  a  particular  case.  Thus,  Sommerfeld, 
through  his  methods  of  the  application  of  the  Einstein  theory  to  the  quantum 
mechanics  and  his  generalizations  of  phase-space,  and  his  treatment  of  the 
relation  of  wave-optics  to  ray-optics  and  of  the  relation  of  mechanics  to  ray- 
optics,  came  close  to  the  discovery  of  the  wave  mechanics.10 

The  new  wave  mechanics  originated  in  1924  in  Paris,  with  the  thesis  of 
Louis  de  Broglie,  published  in  1925,  and  republished  in  a  book  form  in  1926. 

The  controversy  between  the  corpuscular  light  theory  of  Newton  (emission 
theory)  and  the  wave  theory  of  Huygens  is  well  known.  The  emission  theory 
had  its  support  in  the  ‘rectilinear'  propagation  of  light,  which  followed  from 
the  inertia  of  light  particles.  Also,  it  explained  the  reflection  and  the  refrac¬ 
tion  .  ,  of  light,  but  failed  in  other  respects.  It  is  true  that  the  wave  theory 
also  had  its  weak  structural  spots.  In  it  the  ‘rectilinear'  propagation  of  light 
remained  a  complete  mystery  and  it  completely  failed  to  account  for  the  dis¬ 
persion  of  light,  until  this  was  explained  on  the  electron  theory. 

Both  theories  assumed  the  periodicity  of  light  phenomena,  but  the  ac¬ 
ceptance  of  one  theory  was  generally  held  to  mean  the  rejection  of  the  other. 
It  did  not  occur  to  many  that  both  theories  might  be  correct  but  only  partial 
structural  aspects  of  a  more  general  theory. 

With  the  advent  of  the  quantum  theory  of  Planck  (1900)  new  methods 
were  found.  In  1905  Einstein  propounded  his  theory  of  ‘light  quanta’  success¬ 
fully.  He  assumed  that  radiation  occurs  in  discrete  quanta  of  energy  hv ,  where 
v  represents  the  frequency.  From  this  point  of  view  the  quantum  had  the 
characteristic  discreteness  of  a  corpuscle,  and  yet  the  frequency  characteristic 
of  a  wave.  We  see  that  the  new  theory  involved  a  kind  of  a  blend  of  the  two 
older  theories. 

De  Broglie  generalized  still  further  the  above  notions.  His  theory  is  in  a 
way  the  result  of  the  theory  of  Einstein.  As  we  already  know,  Einstein  shows 
the  connection  of  mass  and  energy,  so  that  the  conservation  of  mass  becomes 
also  the  conservation  of  energy,  and  vice  versa.  Starting  with  these  premises 
de  Broglie  concluded  that  if  any  element,  in  the  most  general  sense,  be  it  an 

THE  NEWER  ‘MATTER* 

electron  or  proton  or  light  quantum  or  what  not,  has  energy  W,  there  must  be 
in  the  system  a  periodic  phenomenon  of  frequency  t>,  defined  by  W  ~hv.  From 
this  point  of  view  all  forms  of  energy,  radiation  included,  must  have  an  atomic 
structure  and  the  atoms  of  energy  must  be  grouped  around  certain  points, 
forming  what  we  call  ‘electrons’,  ‘light  quanta’, . 

Applying  the  Loren tz- Einstein  transformation,  he  finds  a  rather  startling 
fact — that  the  frequency  associated  with  any  assumed  mass  mo;  namely, 

represents  no  more  and  no  less  than  a  periodic  phenomenon,  analogous 

to  a  stationary  wave,  which  spreads  around  the  point  of  which  the  mass  is  a 
singularity.11 

In  other  words,  a  ‘mass  particle'  at  rest  is  the  centre  of  a  pulsation  through¬ 
out  the  spread,  or  otherwise  it  is  a  singularity  of  the  pulsation.  The  quantity 
which  pulsates  is  called  and  is  interpreted  as  the  electric  density,  where  y£ 
is  the  conjugate  of  the  complex  quantity  \p. 

In  the  Minkowski  representation,  the  above 
astonishing  result  becomes  quite  simple,  and  we 
can  see  clearly  how  simultaneous  pulsations  be¬ 
come  travelling  waves.  In  Fig.  2,  we  give  a  two- 
dimensional  diagram  of  space- time.  OX o  is  the 
‘space*  co-ordinate,  OTq  the  ‘time*  (icto)  co-ordi¬ 
nate.  }pi,  >h,  represent  the  traces  of  the  sur¬ 
faces  of  constant  phase  which  are  perpendicular 
to  OTq.  The  Loren tz-Einstein  transformation  is 
equivalent  to  the  transformation  from  rectangular 
system  XqOTq  to  the  rectangular  system  XOTt 
forming  an  angle  6 .  In  the  new  system  the  lines 
fit  fa  fa  .  .  .  ,  are  no  longer  parallel  to  the  X 
axis  and  so  represent  a  moving  wavefront  In  this 
new  system  the  ^-lines  represent  the  moving  wave 
front  for  different  points,  P,  Pf .  ,  on  one  phase 

Fig.  2 

(From  Wave  Mechanics , 
by  H.  F.  Biggs) 

line  and  have  different  values  of  t  The  smaller  the  velocity  (v)  of  the 
particle,  the  smaller  the  angle  $  and  the  greater  the  distance  PQ  travelled  by 
the  phase  in  a  given  ‘time’,  P'Q  or  At,  which  means  the  greater  the  phase  velocity  u. 

The  frequency  of  these  pulsations  or  waves  is  the  ‘total  energy  of  the 
particle*  divided  by  Planck’s  constant,  h.  in  symbols,  hv-mc2- 1- potential 
energy,  where 

The  problem  before  us  is  to  connect  structurally,  the  waves  with  two  ob. 
servations,  one  of  the  radiations,  the  other  of  what  we  call  the  ‘material  particles’. 

Our  interest  at  present  lies  only  in  the  connection  with  the  latter.  Ac¬ 
cording  to  this  theory,  the  ‘region  occupied  by  the  particle*  is  only  a  region 

X.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  'MATTER' 

where  a  set  of  ^-waves,  which  vary  continuously  in  direction  and  in  frequency 
in  a  small  range,  reinforce  each  other  to  give  a  wave-group  travelling  with  what 
we  usually  call  ‘the  velocity  of  the  particle’. 

As  the  waves  have  different  frequencies,  they  travel  with  different  veloci¬ 
ties  and  so  we  have  to  face  the  problem  of  the  dispersing  medium,  where,  ac¬ 
cording  to  classical  theories,  the  region  of  reinforcement  has  a  velocity  different 
from  that  of  the  phase.  The  ordinary  expression  for  ‘group  velocity*  gives,  on 
the  wave  interpretation,  the  magnitude  of  the  ‘velocity  of  the  particle’.12 

That  which,  in  the  classical  theories,  we  called  the  ‘motion  of  the  particle’ 
is  represented  by  the  motion  of  the  region  of  reinforcement  of  V'-waves.  The 
direction  of  motion  is  represented  by  the  direction  of  a  ray-,  or  wave-normal. 
The  particular  ray  selected  as  the  position  of  the  ‘path  of  the  particle'  is  repre¬ 
sented  by  the  ray  cut  in  coinciding  phase  by  a  set  of  ^-waves  with  slightly 
varying  directions.  The  ‘position  of  the  particle'  is  given  by  the  small  region 
occupied  by  the  group  of  waves  of  slightly  different  frequencies  and  velocities. 

In  this  connection  we  should  notice  an  important  point  which  is  necessi¬ 
tated  by  the  methods  of  generalization  and  of  translation  from  macroscopic  to 
sub -microscopic  events  and  vice  versa.  Schrodinger,  by  formulating  the  dif¬ 
ferential  equations  for  the  ^-waves,  has  brought  out  clearly  the  important 
structural  point  that  wave  mechanics  bears  a  similar  relationship  to  classical 
mechanics  of  particles  as  wave-optics  bears  to  ray-optics. 

Here  again  we  have  the  macroscopic  phenomena  capable  of  being  treated  by 
mathematical  methods  different  from  those  used  for  the  small-scale  phenomena. 

In  classical  mechanics  the  state  of  a  system  whose  co-ordinates  were 
qi  .  .  .  q9  and  whose  momenta  were  pi  .  .  .  pt ,  was  represented  by  a  point  in  a 
2s-dimensionaI  ^-spread  and  the  changes  in  the  system  were  represented  by  the 
passage  of  the  point  along  some  curve,  a  ‘ray’,  so  to  say. 

Schrodinger  regards  the  classical  mechanics  as  only  an  approximation, 
while  rigorous  treatment  must  be  made  by  the  aid  of  wave  mechanics. 

The  large-scale,  or  macroscopic,  mechanical  processes  correspond  to  a 
wave  signal  in  the  5-spread  and  can  be  regarded  as  a  point  in  comparison  with 
the  geometrical  structure  of  the  path.  In  small-scale  phenomena,  such  as  the 
atomic  processes,  a  rigorous  wave  formulation  must  be  used. 

This  analysis  can  be  carried  further  and  Hamilton  knew  well  and  used  the 
analogy  between  mechanics  and  geometrical  optics.  The  Hamilton  variation 
principle,  bJ'Ldt  =  0,  is  Fermat’s  principle  for  a  wave  motion;  the  Hamilton- 
Jacobi  equation  expresses  Huygens’  principle  for  wave  motion;  and  the  new 
wave  mechanics  expresses  the  Kirchhoff  analysis  of  physical  optics.  As  Huygens* 
principle  could  deal  with  the  problems  of  physical  optics  up  to  a  certain  point, 
so  the  Hamilton-Jacobi  equations  could  deal  with  atomic  problems  up  to  a 
certain  point.  At  the  exact  wave  analysis  of  Kirchhoff  was  needed  to  clear  up 
the  finer  points  of  physical  optics,  so  the  new  wave  mechanics  is  required  for 
the  exact  solution  of  the  atomic  problems.13 

A  detailed  analysis  shows  that  classical  mechanics  was  associated  with 
geometrical  optics  (ray-optics).  Obviously,  a  more  exact  system  of  mechanics 

THE  NEWER  'MATTER' 

would  be  one  associated  with  wave-optics,  which  would  give  the  classical  results 
in  all  cases  where  the  wave-length  was  negligible  in  comparison  with  the  dimen¬ 
sions  of  the  path.  Schrodinger  suggests  that  a  correct  extension  of  the  analogy 
would  be  to  regard  the  wave  system  as  sine-waves.  In  this  connection  it  should 
be  recollected  that  Fourier  has  shown  that  any  given  form  of  waves  can  be 
represented  by  the  superposition  of  sine-waves ,  and  that  therefore  a  sine-wave 
(see  Chapter  XXXII)  may  be  considered  as  a  general  formulation. 

The  ray  methods  in  physics  worked  only  to  some  extent,  that  is  to  say,  in 
the  cases  where  the  radii  of  curvature  of  such  rays  and  the  dimensions  of  the 
spreads  were  large  in  comparison  with  the  wave-length.  When  this  is  not  the 
case  we  have  to  consider  waves  and  not  rays.  Naturally,  dealing  with  atomic 
dimensions,  which  are  very  small,  instead  of  using  the  paths  of  the  particles 
or  the  i/'-rays,  we  have  to  use  the  ^-waves.  It  appears  that  this  difference  was 
the  main,  rather  puzzling  distinction  between  the  classical  mechanics  and  the 
quantum  mechanics,  between  the  macroscopic  theories  and  the  sub-microscopic 
ones. 

The  above  realization,  and  its  formulation  into  a  mathematical  theory, 
seems  to  be  an  important  and  extremely  fruitful  generalization,  which  probably 
will  be  retained  as  a  method. 

One  of  the  puzzling  features  of  the  quantum  theory  was  the  structural 
appearance  of  the  whole-number  laws  of  the  ‘orbits’.  That  some  such  whole- 
number  relation  is  justified  seems  to  be  well  established,  yet  it  contradicted 
the  older  'continuous’  mechanics.  A  new  theory,  to  be  at  all  satisfactory, 
should  be  able  to  fit  these  whole-number  empirical  data.  The  first  test  of  the 
new  wave  mechanics,  and  also  its  first  success,  was  precisely  in  this  field. 

If  a  ray  of  the  t/'-wave  was  supposed  to  run  around  in  a  circle  for  a  stationary 
state,  the  circumference  must  be  a  whole  multiple  of  the  wave-length,  or 

„  ^  h  a  h 

2irr  =n\  -n — ,  and  mvr-n—~ 

mv 

where  n  is  an  integer.  We  see  that  the  quantum  condition  of  the  Bohr  theory, 
that  the  angular  momentum  must  be  a  whole  multiple  of  h/ is  only  the 
result  of  the  requirement  that  the  wave-function  \p  shall  be  single- valued, 
which  is  another  way  of  saying  that  the  circumference  (2irr)  must  contain  a 
whole  number  of  wave-lengths.  It  may  be  compared  perhaps  with  waves 
travelling  around  a  circular  loop  of  string.  If  they  travelled  both  ways  we 
would  have  stationary  waves. 

At  this  point  a  very  important  structural  feature  of  the  new  wave  mechanics 
makes  its  appearance.  In  the  above  interpretation  the  'velocity  of  the  electron* 
has  lost  its  physical  meaning,  it  becomes  simply  the  wave  length  of  the  ^-waves. 
In  the  wave  mechanics,  as  well  as  in  the  matrix  mechanics,  there  is  no  meaning 
to  the  older  'position  of  an  electron  on  its  orbit'.  So  the  wave  mechanics  again 
embodies  the  advantages  of  the  matrix  mechanics  by  not  postulating  entities 
which  can  never  be  observed.  The  whole  numbers,  as  Schrodinger  remarks, 
'appear  as  naturally  as  do  "integers”  in  the  theory  of  vibrating  strings’.  In 
the  theory  of  string  vibrations  these  whole  numbers  are  determined  by  certain 

X.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  'MATTER' 

boundary  conditions  which  have  to  be  satisfied  by  the  solution  of  a  differential 
equation*  In  the  new  wave  mechanics  there  is  also  a  differential  equation 
representing  the  Schrodinger  wave  equation.14 

Section  G.  Structural  aspects  of  the  new  theories . 

We  should  notice  the  important  distinction  between  the  two  structural 
types  of  these  theories.  The  extensional  matrix  theory  can  hardly  be  visualized, 
with  all  the  consequent  advantages  and  disadvantages.  The  wave  mechanics 
can  be  visualized.  From  what  we  already  know  of  the  structure  and  working 
of  the  nervous  system,  we  see  that  the  wave  mechanics  will  have  a  creative 
element  and  the  matrix  mechanics  will  remain  an  important  checking  method. 

At  present,  all  these  new  theories  seemingly  have  blended  or  perhaps  it 
would  be  better  to  say  that  they  have  been  translated  from  one  language  to 
another  and  all  the  workers  in  this  field  work  from  all  angles. 

It  should  be  mentioned  also,  that  Einstein,  Bose,  Jordan,  and  others,  work 
from  the  point  of  view  of  statistics ,  and  that  these  methods,  too,  are  being 
retranslated  and  connected  with  the  rest  of  the  new  theories. 

The  new  wave  mechanics  evades  the  difficulties  of  the  matrix  calculus  and 
brings  the  new  mechanics  within  the  scope  of  the  highly  developed  analysis 
of  the  theory  of  differential  equations.  It  also  enlists  the  creative  aspects  of 
'intuition',  ‘visualization’,  . 

Concluding  our  consideration  of  the  subject,  three  remarkable  aspects  of 
the  wave  mechanics  must  be  referred  to.  We  are  already  acquainted  with  the 
term  ‘action’.  It  appears  that  the  main  point  of  the  passing  from  the  old 
mechanics  to  the  new  was  the  stroke  of  genius  of  de  Broglie,  when  he  divided 
action  by  the  fundamental  constant  h  with  some  definite  numerical  factor 
which  then  gives  us  the  phase .  In  the  expression  for  }p,  the  energy  appears  as 
the  ‘time*  component  of  a  space-time  vector  whose  ‘space’  components  are 
those  of  the  momentum.  When  this  vector  is  divided  by  h,  its  components 
become  the  frequency ,  or  the  number  of  waves  which  each  axis  cuts  per 
centimetre. 

These  are  the  methods  by  which  we  can  use  differential  equations,  whereby 
the  older  discontinuities  disappear  and  the  particle  is  represented  as  a  group 
of  reinforcing  waves.16 

From  this  point  of  view  we  also  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the  ‘conserva¬ 
tion  of  energy’,  which  was  very  valuable  in  the  old  days,  is  perhaps  only  a 
gross  macroscopic  generalization  and  will  give  place  to  a  newer  and  more 
fundamental  notion  of  the  conservation  of  frequency  or  ‘times’.16 

It  has  been  already  mentioned  that  the  newer  mechanics  must  be  repre¬ 
sented  in  accordance  with  statistical  data,  probabilities ,  with  due  attention  paid 
to  the  theory  of  errors  ,  .  While  these  requirements  have  very  little  to  do  with 
the  world  around  us,  they  are  unconditionally  required  by  our  nervous  structure, 
which  is,  after  all,  the  general  author  of  all  our  ‘knowledge*  and  ‘theories’. 
Let  us  be  candid  about  it;  there  is  no  such  thing  as  ‘knowledge’  outside  of  a 
nervous  system,  and  therefore  the  neurological  requirements,  as  already 

THE  NEWER  'MATTER' 

mentioned,  become  paramount.  The  newer  theories  brilliantly  satisfy  this 
requirement. 

As  an  example,  we  may  perhaps  mention  an  aspect  of  the  wave  mechanics 
theory  which  is  not  at  present  settled,  but  which  remains  just  as  interesting. 

Schrodinger  shows  that  in  highly  excited  states  a  suitably  chosen  group 
of  waves  represents  a  ‘ wave  packet which  behaves  like  a  point-mass  of  the 
ordinary  mechanics.  It  oscillates  with  frequency  vo  in  a  rectilinear  path.  The 
number  and  breadth  of  the  waves  which  form  the  packet  vary  with  the  ‘time', 
but  the  width  of  the  packet  remains  constant.  The  remarkable  part  about  the 
shape  of  the  curve  is  that  it  represents  the  Gaiiss  error  curve. 

Heisenberg  has  shown 
that  this  result  is  only  acci¬ 
dentally  true,  but  for  our 
purpose  of  illustration  this 
is  quite  enough. 

The  newer  quantum 
mechanics  has  shown  once 
more  the  necessity  for  a 
re-analysis  of  our  funda¬ 
mental  notions.  From  a 
space-time  point  of  view,  which  seems  to  be  a  permanent  acquisition  of  science, 
since  it  is  a  language  and  method  of  structure  closer  related  to  the  external 
world  than  the  older  languages  and  methods,  it  seems  beyond  dispute  that 
even  macroscopic  phenomena  are  the  results  of  repeated  observation .  Now, 
such  a  point  of  view,  although  it  is  extremely  plausible,  and  close  to  neurological 
and  physical  data,  necessitates  a  complete  reconstruction  of  our  describing 
apparatus,  which  is  not  adapted  to  such  an  outlook. 

The  problem  of  'observation*  enters.  Bohr  suggests,  and  rightly,  that  this 
vocabularly  is  strictly  connected  with  the  older  ‘causal*  vocabulary.  One  of 
the  main  points  of  the  present  work  is  to  draw  attention  to  the  multiordinal 
mechanism  and  terms  and  to  show  that  the  analysis  of  these  problems  cannot 
be  even  attempted  without  first  analysing  the  structure  of  our  languages,  of 
our  ‘knowledge’,  and  the  neurological  and  semantic  aspects  which  such  analysis 
involves. 

When  this  analysis  is  carried  through  we  see  that  the  problems  of  ‘con¬ 
tinuity*  and  ‘discontinuity’  lose  their  absolute  character.  They  become  verbal 
problems,  to  be  solved  through  the  ingenuity  of  some  one  who  will  suggest 
the  solutions. 

The  newer  quantum  mechanics  give  us  ample  material  for  work  on  these 
problems,  but  they  also  illustrate  a  much  more  general  and  important  problem, 
which  is  the  subject  matter  of  the  present  book;  namely,  that  all  ‘knowledge* 
is  structural ,  strictly  dependent  on  the  nervous  structure  and  functioning, 
and  the  language  we  use.  ‘Method’  is  that  aspect  of  the  search  for  structure 
which  deals  with  the  most  expedient  means  for  finding  structure.  Since  words 
are  not  the  things  we  speak  about,  the  study  of  linguistic  structure  becomes  a 

n 

■ - i 

VI I 

Fig.  3 

(From  The  New  Quantum  Mechanics ,  p.  115, 
by  George  Birtwistle) 

X.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  'MATTER' 

most  important  research  method.  The  more  languages  (theories)  we  have  for 
analysis  and  structural  comparison,  the  more  glimpses  do  we  get  at  the  structure 
of  the  world.  The  newer  quantum  mechanics  give  us  enormous  material  of  a 
linguistic,  structural,  and  semantic  character. 

It  is  natural  that  this  wisdom  can  come  only  from  the  study  of  the  structure 
of  the  highest  developed  languages  in  existence,  which  are  mathematical 
languages.  If  we  want  progress  in  any  line  of  human  endeavour,  this  progress 
is  always  dependent  on  the  languages  we  use,  since  what  we  call  'progress’  is 
a  co-operative  affair  and  therefore  dependent  on  means  of  communications 
and  languages. 

From  the  point  of  view  of  structure,  we  deal  with  a  world  of  absolute  in¬ 
dividuals  and  therefore  our  languages  must  be  such  as  to  reflect  such  individu¬ 
ality.  We  already  know  that  this  involves  an  extensional  attitude  and  methods, 
which  historically  have  produced  mathematics  as  the  only  language  which  as 
yet  reflects  in  structure  the  world  around  us. 

With  the  newer  quantum  mechanics,  the  old  ‘discontinuity’  resolves  itself 
into  an  essential  individuality ,  as  noticed  by  Bohr,  perfectly  foreign  to  the 
older  theories. 

History  proves  that  we  were  slow  in  arriving  at  that  point.  Our  tragedies 
began  when  the  ‘intensional’  biologist  Aristotle  took  the  lead  over  the  ‘ex- 
tensional’  mathematical  philosopher  Plato,  and  formulated  all  the  primitive 
identifications,  subject-predicativism  .  ,  into  an  imposing  system,  which  for 
more  than  two  thousand  years  we  were  not  allowed  to  revise  under  penalty  of 
persecution.  Mathematics  was  not  particularly  encouraged,  but  at  least,  not 
persecuted,  so  that  it  was  developed  into  the  present  day  great  linguistic  syste  m. 
The  theory  of  function  involves  semantic  factors  of  non-identification. 

The  invention  of  the  differential  and  the  integral  calculi,  represents  the 
two  great  structural  and  psycho-logical  aspects  of  analysis  and  differentiation, 
versus  synthesis  and  integration. 

The  application  of  these  methods  led  us  to  differential  geometries,  to 
methods  of  treating  ‘fulness’,  and  to  ‘contact’  methods.  ‘Fulness’  necessitated 
geometries  of  higher  dimensions,  impossible  in  ‘absolute  emptiness’,  and  so  the 
fusion  of  geometry  with  physics  became  possible.  The  four-dimensional  world 
of  Minkowski  and  the  theory  of  Einstein  finally  achieved  this  fusion.  The 
next  step  was  the  invention  of  the  new  quantum  mechanics,  where  all  these 
important,  nay,  all-important,  structural,  semantic,  and  linguistic  achievements 
find  their  culmination.  The  old  primitive  metaphysics  become  too  ‘materialistic’ 
for  an  enlightened  age. 

Without  legislating  about  the  ‘truth’  or  ‘falsehood’  of  the  newer  mechanics, 
as  a  matter  of  human  behaviour  these  theories  are  the  best  indications  and 
examples  of  the  structure  of  human  ‘knowledge’,  which  I  have  attempted  to 
formulate  in  this  work  as  a  general  theory. 

The  A  -system  was  strictly  interconnected  with  primitive-made  structural 
assumptions  or  metaphysics,  reflected  in  the  structure  of  the  older  languages 
and  in  the  el  notions  about  language,  ‘psychology’,  ‘logic’,  and  the  pre-scientific 

THE  NEWER  'MATTER* 

anthropomorphic  astronomy,  physics,  and  other  disciplines.  Of  late,  science 
has  developed  in  spite  of  all  handicaps  and  persecutions,  and  has  begun  to  de¬ 
part  structurally  and  semantically  from  the  path  of  aristotelianism  and  the 
dark  ages.  Every  science  has  had  to  build  its  own  language  and  this  fact  com¬ 
pletely  condemns  the  A  language,  which,  it  is  shocking  to  notice,  we  continue 
to  preserve  in  our  daily  life. 

Should  we  wonder  that  we  have  shown  hardly,  any  progress  at  all  in  our 
purely  human  affairs  and  notions?  We  should  wonder,  rather,  that  we  have 
been  able  to  survive  until  now — though  with  needless  difficulties  and  suffering. 
More  wars,  more  revolutions,  more  insanity,  more  morons,  more  struggle  and 
competition,  and  more  unhappiness  are  what  we  are  entitled  to  expect  and 
ptedict  as  the  outcome  of  this  structurally  and  semantically  impossible  situation. 

As  the  organism  works  as-a-whole,  such  things  as  ‘pure  intellect*  or  ‘pure 
emotions’  represent  structurally  el  fictions  and  scientists  should  realize  that 
