their  professed  detached  scientific  attitude  is  profoundly  and  fundamentally 
unjustified.  All  science  has  ‘emotional'  components,  which  play  most  important 
roles  in  life.  If  we  live  in  a  modern  world,  but  keep  the  ‘emotional  attitudes’  of 
primitive  bygone  days,  then  naturally  we  are  bound  to  be  semantically  un¬ 
balanced,  and  cannot  be  adjusted  to  a-  fundamentally  primitive  ‘civilization* 
in  the  midst  of  great  technical  achievements.*  When  scientists  understand  that, 
then  the  layman  will  have  a  different  attitude  toward  science.  He  will  under¬ 
stand  that  science  is  not  a  privilege  of  the  few,  something  without  effect  upon 
all  and  every  one.  He  will  realize  that  while  he  lives  in  a  modern  world,  made  so 
by  science,  structural  ignorance  of  the  fundamentals  as  discovered  by  science 
leaves  him  with  primitive  structural  assumptions  or  metaphysics,  which  by 
necessity  build  for  him  a  delusional  world  leading  to  semantic  unbalance  and 
ultimately  to  ‘mental’  and  nervous  ills. 

From  the  non-elementalistic  point  of  view,  the  only  escape  is  to  realize  that 
ignorance  in  an  adult  is,  and  must  be,  pathological,  because  ‘knowledge’  is  to 
be  considered  as  a  normal  characteristic  of  human  nervous  tissue. 

A  special  structural  and  methodological  brief  and  simplified  account  of 
scientific  achievements,  such  as  I  have  attempted  in  this  work,  must  be  a  part 
of  a  theory  of  sanity.  Sanity  means  adjustment  and  without  the  minimum  of 
the  best  structural  knowledge  of  each  date  concerning  this  world,  such  adjust¬ 
ment  is  impossible. 

It  is  not  necessary  that  the  reader  should  fully  understand  all  technical 
details  of  a  theory,  to  be  aware  (instinctive,  affective  .  ,)  of  the  existence  of  the 
structural  and  semantic  problems  and  to  realize  that  some  of  the  most  competent 
and  skilled  professionals  are  working  at  these  theories.  Such  awareness  has 
great  pacifying  semantic  influence;  it  eliminates  the  older  affective  tensions 
which  were  due  to  identifications,  absolutism,  dogmatism,  flights  into  mystic¬ 
ism,  and  other  similar  pathological  disturbances. 

*See  my  Manhood  of  Humanity. 

X.  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  'MATTER' 

A  non-aristotelian  system  must  deal  with  all  these  structural  and  semantic 
issues.  It  is  hoped  that  once  a  J[  -system  is  presented  to  the  public,  scientists 
and  laymen  will  become  more  interested  in  the  structural  and  semantic  issues 
emphasized  here,  and  that  new  and  wider  researches  will  be  undertaken. 

History  shows  that  such  hopes  are  not  illusory.  The  greatest  men  of 
science  have  always  had  wide  human  aims  and  interests.  From  the  non-ele- 
mentalistic  point  of  view,  they  probably  became  productive  geniuses  because  of 
this  broad  human  urge.  From  the  point  of  view  of  psychiatry,  it  is  well  known 
that  'mental’  ills  involve  usually  anti-social  affective  attitudes.  When  we  see 
men  with  distinctly  anti-social  tendencies,  no  matter  how  they  rationalize  them, 
they  are  invariably  ill  in  some  way.  A  fully  healthy  individual  is  never  anti¬ 
social. 

That  science  should  include  structural  and  semantic  factors  of  sanity  may 
be  a  startling  notion,  but  only  at  first!  In  the  present  analysis  this  turns  out 
to  be,  rather  unexpectedly,  a  necessity.  But  on  second  consideration  we  should 
rather  expect  it.  Science  and  mathematics  show  the  working  of  the  'human 
mind’  at  its  best.  Accordingly,  we  can  learn  from  science  and  mathematics  how 
this  ‘human  mind’  should  work,  to  be  at  its  best  Then  we  should  make  an 
analysis  of  science  and  mathematics  from  some  wider  structural  and  semantic 
point  of  view, — the  task  which  has  been  undertaken  in  the  present  work. 

At  this  early  stage  it  is,  of  course,  of  comparatively  little  importance  to 
what  extent  this  analysis  turns  out  to  be  satisfactory.  The  main  point  is  that 
it  has  been  originated .  If  the  present  author  fails,  others,  perhaps  even  because 
of  his  failure,  may  be  stimulated  to  do  it  better.  The  great  and  vital  thing  is 
that  it  should  be  done,  by  someone. 

SUPPLEMENT  I 

THE  LOGIC  OF  RELATIVITY 
by  R.  D.  Carmichael 

In  order  to  be  able  to  deal  with  such  quantities  as  are  involved  in  the 
measurement  of  motion,  time,  velocity,  etc.,  or  indeed  in  the  quantitative 
analysis  of  any  physical  phenomena,  it  is  necessary  to  have  some  system  or 
systems  of  reference  with  respect  to  which  measurements  can  be  made.  Let  us 
consider  any  set  of  things  consisting  of  objects  and  any  kind  of  physical  quanti¬ 
ties  whatever,  as  electric  charges  or  magnets  or  light-sources  or  telescopes  or 
other  objects  and  instruments,  each  of  which  is  at  rest  with  respect  to  each  of 
the  others.  Let  us  suppose  that  among  the  objects  are  clocks,  to  be  used  for 
measuring  time,  and  rods  or  rules  to  be  used  for  measuring  length,  and  that 
time  and  length  may  be  measured  at  any  desired  instant  and  any  assigned 
place.  Such  a  set  of  objects  and  quantities  and  instruments,  including  the 
equipment  for  measuring  time  and  length,  all  being  at  rest  relatively  to  each 
other,  we  shall  call  a  system  of  reference.  Such  a  system  we  shall  denote  by  S. 
In  case  we  have  to  deal  at  once  with  two  or  more  systems  of  reference  we  shall 
denote  them  by  S ,  S',  Si,  S2,  .  . . 

In  this  definition  of  systems  of  reference  nothing  specific  has  been  said 
about  the  units  of  length  and  of  time.  If  we  were  dealing  with  our  usual  prin¬ 
ciples  of  mechanics  we  might  pass  over  such  a  matter  without  any  feeling  of 
difficulty  about  it;  it  would  be  sufficient  to  proceed  in  accordance  with  our 
intuitive  conceptions  of  time  and  length.  But  in  the  theory  of  relativity  these 
appear  in  a  new  light.  We  can  not  proceed  with  confident  dependence  upon  our 
intuition.  On  the  other  hand  we  shall  not  attempt  to  give  explicit  definitions 
of  units  of  time  and  length.  We  shall  proceed  from  certain  principles  or  postu¬ 
lates,  presently  to  be  stated,  to  an  analysis  of  time  and  length  and  so  arrive  at 
a  suitable  precision  of  these  conceptions  by  means  of  certain  guiding  principles. 
It  will  be  seen  that  it  is  not  far  from  the  truth  to  say  that  our  fundamental 
terms  are  defined  implicitly  and  indirectly  by  means  of  the  statements  made 
about  them  and  accepted  initially  as  valid  and  that  they  may  mean  anything 
which  is  consistent  with  the  truth  of  these  fundamental  principles  and  postulates. 

The  restricted  principle  of  relativity  may  now  be  stated  in  the  following 
form: 

Restricted  Principle  of  Relativity.  If  Si  and  S%  are  two  systems  of 
reference  having  with  respect  to  each  other  a  uniform  unaccelerated  motion ,  then 
natural  phenomena  run  their  course  with  respect  to  in  accordance  with  precisely 
the  same  general  laws  as  with  respect  to  Si. 

This  principle  says  nothing  about  the  suitability  of  any  particular  system 
of  reference  for  the  convenient  expression  of  the  laws  of  nature;  but  it  does  say 

SUPPLEMENT  I 

that  if  either  Si  or  S2  is  suitable  the  other  is  equally  suitable,  the  relative  motion 
of  the  two  being  unaccelerated. 

In  order  to  bring  into  suitable  relations  the  measurements  made  on  one 
system  of  reference  and  those  made  on  another  it  is  necessary  to  have  some 
agreement  as  to  the  correspondence  of  units  on  the  two  systems.  Accordingly 
we  shall  make  the  following  assumption  concerning  the  correspondence  of  units: 

Principle  of  Correspondence  of  Units.  The  units  of  any  two  systems 
Si  and  S2  are  such  that  the  same  numerical  result  will  he  obtained  in  measuring 
with  the  units  of  S\  a  quantity  L\  and  with  the  units  of  Si  a  quantity ‘  L%  when  the 
relation  of  Li  to  Si  is  precisely  the  same  as  that  of  L2  to  Si. 

We  shall  agree  that  the  restricted  principle  of  relativity  is  to  be  understood 
in  a  sense  which  implies  this  assumption  concerning  the  correspondence  of  units; 
that  is,  the  latter  will  be  taken  as  a  more  precise  formulation  of  a  part  of  the 
content  of  the  former.  It'  is  clear  that  the  possibility  of  realizing  this  latter  is 
taken  for  granted  in  the  Galileo-Newtonian  mechanics;  it  is  often  passed  over 
without  remark  although  it  is  a  profound  fact  and  is  a  part  of  the  essential 
basis  of  any  theory  of  motion. 

It  is  a  grave  question  whether  the  restricted  principle  of  relativity  can  be 
maintained  in  the  interpretation  of  natural  phenomena.  Indeed  in  the  more 
general  theory  of  relativity,  to  be  taken  up  later,  it  is  treated  merely  as  a  sort 
of  approximation  to  a  more  comprehensive  principle — an  approximation  strictly 
valid  only  in  the  absence  of  a  gravitational  field  but  very  close  to  the  truth  for 
a  wide  variety  of  phenomena  including  most  of  those  which  are  purely  terrestrial. 

There  are  two  particular  characteristic  postulates,  or  ‘laws  of  nature’, 
lying  at  the  base  of  the  restricted  theory  of  relativity.  These  may  be  stated  as 
follows: 

Postulate  M.  The  unaccelerated  motion  of  a  system  of  reference  S  can  not 
be  detected  by  observations  made  on  S  alofie ,  the  units  of  measurement  being  those 
belonging  to  S, 

Postulate  R.  The  velocity  of  light ,  in  free  space ,  measured  on  an  unac¬ 
celerated  system  of  reference  S  by  means  of  units  belonging  to  St  is  independent  of 
the  velocity  of  S  and  of  the  unaccelerated  velocity  of  the  light-source . 

For  these  two  particular  postulates  there  is  the  strongest  possible  experi¬ 
mental  evidence.  Everything,  known  points  toward  their  truth,  and  there  is 
nothing  known  which  in  any  way  seems  to  be  in  disagreement  with  them.  It 
is  to  be  observed  that  they  apply  only  to  the  ideal  case,  that  is,  the  case  in  which 
there  is  supposed  to  be  no  gravitational  field. 

For  the  development  of  the  restricted  theory  of  relativity  there  are  three 
additional  necessary  postulates,  or  ‘laws  of  nature;’  those  that  theory  shares 
in  common  with  the  Galileo-Newtonian  mechanics.  Such  assumptions  in  some 
form  are  essential  to  the  initial  arguments  and  to  the  conclusions  which  are 
drawn  by  means  of  them.  To  the  present  writer  it  seems  to  be  preferable  to 
have  these  assumptions  explicitly  stated.  They  may  be  put  into  the  following 
form : 

THE  LOGIC  OF  RELATIVITY 

Postulate  V.  If  the  velocity  of  a  system  of  reference  Si  relative  to  a  system 
of  reference  Si  is  measured  by  means  of  the  units  belonging  to  Si  and  if  the  velocity 
of  Si  relative  to  S%  is  measured  by  means  of  the  units  belonging  to  S2  the  two  results 
will  agree  in  numerical  value . 

Postulate  T.  If  two  systems  of  reference  Si  and  S2  move  with  unaccelerated 
relative  velocity  and  if  a  body  moves  relatively  to  one  of  the  systems  in  a  straight 
line  with  unaccelerated  velocity  then  it  also  moves  in  a  straight  line  relatively  to  the 
other  and  with  unaccelerated  velocity. 

Postulate  L.  If  two  systems  of  reference  Si  and  S2  move  with  unaccelerated 
relative  velocity  and  if  a  line  segment  l  is  perpendicular  to  the  line  of  relative  motion 
of  Si  and  S%  and  is  fixed  to  one  of  these  systems,  then  the  length  of  l  measured  by 
means  of  the  units  belonging  to  Si  will  be  the  same  as  its  length  measured  by  means 
of  the  units  belonging  to  S2. 

We  now  have  before  us  the  logical  basis  upon  which  may  be  built  the  re¬ 
stricted  theory  of  relativity  in  all  its  details.  It  has  been  put  in  essentially  the 
same  form  as  that  employed  in  my  ‘Theory  of  Relativity”  (published  by  Wiley 
and  Sons,  New  York)  and  in  my  earlier  articles  in  “The  Physical  Review”. 
Reference  may  be  made  to  the  book  named  for  the  detailed  development  of  the 
theory.  Here  we  shall  attempt  to  sketch  only  the  progress  of  ideas  and  to 
indicate  the  main  conclusions. 

The  first  thing  to  be  done  in  developing  the  theory  on  this  basis  is  to 
consider  carefully  the  relation  between  the  time  units  of  the  two  systems.  The 
following  remarkable  conclusion  is  reached  by  a  process  of  reasoning  which  is 
fully  cogent  in  character: 

If  two  systems  of  reference  Si  and  S2  move  with  a  relative  velocity  v  and 
/ 3  is  the  ratio  v/c  of  v  to  the  velocity  c  of  light  as  measured  on  either  system, 
then  to  an  observer  on  Si  the  time  unit  of  5i  appears  to  be  in  the  ratio  Vl  —  /S2:l 
to  that  which  is  described  to  him  as  a  unit  by  an  observer  on  £2  while  to  an 
observer  on  £2  the  time  unit  of  S2  appears  to  be  in  the  ratio  a/  1  — /32:1  to  that 
which  is  described  to  him  as  a  unit  by  the  observer  on  St. 

Thus  we  have  the  extraordinary  conclusion  that  the  time  units  of  the 
two  systems  of  reference  Si  and  62,  not  at  rest  relatively  to  each  other,  are  of 
different  lengths  in  such  a  way  that  an  observer  on  either  system  thinks  that 
the  time  unit  of  the  other  system  is  greater  than  his  own.  It  is  evident  that 
no  simple  change  of  the  unit  on  either  system  (or  both)  will  bring  the  units 
into  agreement  for  observers  on  both  systems.  As  postulates  V  and  L  and  T 
are  generally  accepted  and  have  not  elsewhere  led  to  such  strange  conclusions 
it  is  natural  to  suppose  that  the  strangeness  here  is  not  due  to  them.  In  the 
argument  the  restricted  principle  of  relativity  needs  to  be  used  only  in  so  far 
as  it  is  involved  in  the  conclusion  that  the  units  of  any  two  systems  of  reference 
and  S2  are  such  that  the  same  numerical  result  is  obtained  in  measuring 
with  the  units  of  Si  a  quantity  Li  and  with  the  units  of  £2  a  quantity  when 
the  relation  of  Li  to  5i  is  precisely  the  same  as  the  relation  of  L2  to  62.  But 
this  principle  is  accepted  in  the  classical  mechanics  and  has  not  elsewhere 
led  to  strange  results.  The  conclusion  in  postulate  M  appears  to  be  demanded 

SUPPLEMENT  I 

by  the  strongest  experimental  evidence;  it  is  generally  accepted;  if  the  strange 
dement  in  the  result  concerning  units  of  time  is  due  to  this  postulate,  it  appears 
that  we  must  accept  it  as  being  required  by  such  experience  as  has  already 
been  tested  with  due  care.  Hence  the  condusion  seems  to  be  inevitable  that 
the  strangeness  in  our  result  is  due  prindpally  to  postulate  R. 

We  shall  presently  see  that  the  same  basis  of  postulates  leads  to  the  con- 
elusion  that  corresponding  units  of  length  in  the  two  systems  are  also  different 
when  talcen  in  certain  directions.  From  the  transformations  of  time  and  space 
which  result  from  the  conclusions  thus  obtained  the  whole  restricted  theory 
of  relativity  may  be  deduced  (as  is  shown  in  the  book  mentioned).  Therefore 
this  theory  depends  essentially  on  the  principle  of  correspondence  of  units  in 
two  systems  of  reference  and  on  the  propositions  set  forth  explidtly  in  the 
postulates;  and  all  of  these  are  dther  generalizations  from  experiment  or 
statements  of  laws  which  have  usually  been  accepted.  Hence  we  conclude: 
The  restricted  theory  of  relativity  may  he  developed  by  logical  processes  from  the 
generalized  results  of  certain  experiments  together  with  certain  laws  which  have 
jor  a  long  fame  been  accepted . 

•  r?ult  COr,Cerning  the  reIation  of  units  of  length  may  be  put 

in  the  following  form: 

If  two  systems  of  reference  S,  and  St  move  with  a  relative  velodty  t>  and 
if is  the  ratio  v/c  of  v  to  the  vdodty  c  of  light  as  measured  on  either  system 
then  to  an  observer  on  5i  the  unit  of  length  of  5!  along  the  line  of  relative 
motion  appears  to  be  in  the  ratio  VTZ^-.l  to  that  which  is  described  to 
m  as  a  unit  by  an  observer  on  S2  while  to  an  observer  on  St  the  unit  of  length 
of  St  along  the  line  of  relative  motion  appears  to  be  in  the  ratio  Vl  —B*:l  to 
that  which  is  described  to  him  as  a  unit  by  the  observer  on  Si, 

These  remarkable  conclusions  concerning  units  of  length  in  two  systems 

of  reference  rest  on  just  those  postulates  which  led  to  the  strange  results  as 
to  the  units  of  time. 

What  often  impresses  one  as  the  most  remarkable  conclusion  in  the  theory 
o  relativity  is  one  which  implies  that  the  notion  of  simultaneity  of  events 
happening  at  different  places  is  indefinite  in  meaning  until  some  convention 
is  adopted  as  to  how  simultaneity  is  to  be  determined.  In  fact,  there  is  no  such 
thing  as  absolute  simultaneity  of  events  happening  at  different  places.  With 
respect  to  the  measured  time  and  space  of  physics  we  must  conclude  that 
time  does  not  run  its  course  independently  of  space.  Measured  time  and  space 
are  indissolubly  bound  together.  The  theorem  which  sets  this  forth  most 
concretely  may  be  stated  in  the  following  way: 

Let  two  systems  of  reference  *  and  Ss  have  an  unaccelerated  relative 
velocity  v.  Let  an  observer  on  5,  place  two  clocks  in  the  line  of  relative  motion 
of  Si  and  St  and  adjust  them  so  that  they  appear  to  him  to  mark  simultaneously 
the  same  time.  Then  to  an  observer  on  5,  the  clock  on  St  which  is  forward 
m  point  of  motion  appears  to  be  behind  in  point  of  time  by  the  amount 

THE  LOGIC  OF  RELATIVITY 

H  d 

7*'VxZjp 

where  c  is  the  velocity  of  light,  0  =*v/ct  and  d  is  the  distance  between  the  two 
clocks  as  measured  by  the  observer  on  Su 

By  means  of  the  foregoing  theorems  we  may  readily  obtain  the  formulae 
for  the  celebrated  Lorentz  transformation  of  space  and  time  coordinates. 
(The  non-mathematical  reader  may  omit  the  remainder  of  this  paragraph.) 
Let  two  systems  of  reference  5  and  S'  have  the  relative  velocity  v  in  the  line  /. 
Let  systems  of  rectangular  coordinates  be  attached  to  the  systems  of  reference 
S  and  S'  in  such  a  way  that  the  x-axis  of  each  system  is  in  the  line  l  and  that 
the  two  ic-axes  have  the  same  positive  direction,  and  let  the  y-axis  and  the 
z-axis  of  one  system  be  parallel  to  the  y-axis  and  z-axis  respectively  of  the 
other  system  and  have  their  positive  senses  in  the  same  directions.  Let  these 
two  systems  of  axes  coincide  at  the  time  zero.  Furthermore,  for  the  sake  of 
distinction,  denote  the  space  and  time  coordinates  on  S  by  x,  y,  s,  t,  and  those 
on  S'  by  x',  y,  s',  t'.  Let  us  suppose  that  S'  moves  with  respect  to  5  in  the 
direction  of  increasing  values  of  x.  Then  it  turns  out  that  the  foregoing 
theorems  imply  the  following  relations  between  the  two  systems  of  coordinates; 

Vl-,31 

x' 

Vl  -0* 

(*-»/), 

Z-y, 

tf-s. 

where  /S  =t t/e  and  c  is  the  velocity  of  light. 

The  foregoing  theorems,  or  (in  more  compact  language)  the  foregoing 
equations  of  transformation,  furnish  the  effective  means  for  developing  the 
whole  of  the  restricted  theory  of  relativity.  Our  purpose  does  not  require  us 
to  follow  that  development  further  in  detail.  But  we  may  mention  a  few  of 
the  remarkable  conclusions  which  now  emerge  readily.  If  two  velocities,  each 
of  which  is  less  than  c,  are  combined  the  resultant  velocity  is  also  less  than  c. 
The  mass  of  a  body  increases  with  an  increase  in  its  velocity  relative  to  the 
system  on  which  the  mass  is  measured.  The  mass  of  a  body  at  rest  appears 
to  be  the  measure  of  its  internal  energy.  Mass  and  energy  in  general  appear 
to  be  essentially  convertible  terms.  The  velocity  of  light  is  a  maximum  which 
the  velocity  of  a  material  body  may  approach  but  can  never  equal  or  exceed. 

The  development  by  Einstein  in  1905  of  the  foregoing  restricted  theory 
of  relativity  led  to  a  fresh  analysis  of  the  whole  foundations  of  physics.  This 
was  made  inevitable  by  its  effective  attack  upon  such  fundamental  notions  as 
those  of  length  and  time  and  mass  and  velocity.  Einstein  himself  succeeded 
in  1915  in  greatly  extending  the  range  of  his  theory,  developing  what  has  since 

SUPPLEMENT  I 

been  called  the  general  theory  of  relativity.  We  shall  now  speak  briefly  con- 
cerning  the  foundations  underlying  the  latter.  7 

hi  ^Itreadyin  the  restricted  theory  time  and  space  had  become  essentially 
blended  so  that  we  could  no  longer  speak  of  a  three-dimensional  space  2 
separate  and  apart  from  the  one  dimension  of  time.  A  sort  of  combination  of  the 

7°  <'ame ,‘ntu  °Uf  C°nCepti0n  and  we  be*an  t0  realize  that  they  can  not  be 
disentangled  by  the  measurements  of  physics.  We  are  forced  to  consider  a 
four-dimensional  continuum  of  space  and  time.  It  is  with  this  space-time 
extension  of  four-dimensions  that  the  general  theory  of  relativity  has  essentially 
to  do,  and  its  problems  are  intimately  connected  with  the  relations  of  two 
systems  of  reference  of  the  generalized  sort  which  this  makes  necessary  The 
Lorentz  transformation  was  a  great  psychological  (and  even  logical)  aid  in 
the  formation  of  the  new  theory. 

.  ..  Lf, US  consider  a  four-dimensional  extension  in  which  space  and  time  are 
intimately  connected  and  blended  so  that  each  point  P  in  these  four  dimensions 
represents  a  definite  place  A  at  a  definite  time  t  at  which  A  is  to  be  considered 

^inJ  PU AM  1 111116  3  maIerkl  PartiC,e  is  repr™d  by  a  succession  of  these 
ff  f.  „  ‘hfe  P°ln'?  for  a  given  material  particle  lie  on  what  is  called  the 
world-line  of  that  particle;  and  this  world-line  represents  the  state  of  motion 
(or  eventually  the  state  of  rest)  of  the  material  particle.  If  two  objects  come 
into  coincidence  at  an  instant  their  world-lines  have  a  corresponding  inter¬ 
section.  The  things  which  the  physicist  deals  with  ultimately  are  these  inter- 
sections  of  world-lines. 

In  order  to  deal  with  them  he  finds  it  necessary  to  introduce  certain  ref¬ 
erence  numbers  which  we  may  call  the  coordinates  xlt  x2,  x3,  x4.  These  numbers 
change  m  such  a  way  that  their  variation  along  any  world-line  is  continuous 
and  thut  no  two  points  ever  have  the  same  ordered  set  of  four  numbers  assigned 
to  them.  This  gives  us  a  very  general  set  of  coordinates.  It  is  clear  that  co¬ 
ordinates  can  be  set  up  in  an  immense  variety  of  ways  so  as  to  have  these  few 
very  general  properties.  One  of  the  first  problems  in  the  general  theory  of 
relativity  is  that  of  the  character  of  the  transformation  by  means  of  which  we 
can  pass  from  a  given  choice  *2,  x3l  *4  of  coordinates  to  a  second  one  |2 
«-  f 4«  It  is  clear  that  we  must  have  relations  of  the  form 

£*•  =fi  (*i,  X2 ,  #3,  Xi),  i  =  1,  2,  3,  4, 

where  the  functions/,-  of  the  variables  *„  **,  *4  are  rather  general  functions 

of  these  four  arguments  and  are  indeed  to  a  large  extent  arbitrary.  Now  suppose 
that  the  laws  of  nature  are  expressed  in  terms  of  the  coordinates  *  and  also  in 
terms  of  the  coordinates  |;  the  question  arises  as  to  what  relation  one  ought  to 
expect  between  these  two  forms  of  the  law.  Now  there  are  no  coordinates  in 
nature.  These  have  been  inserted  by  us  for  our  convenience.  What  is  more 
natural,  then,  than  the  demand  that  we  shall  formulate  our  statements  of  these 
kws  so  that  they  shall  have  the  same  form  in  these  two  systems  of  reference, 
and  indeed  in  all  possible  systems  of  reference?  This  is  precisely  one  of  the 
fundamental  basic  requirements  upon  which  Einstein  insists.  The  corresponding 

THE  LOGIC  OF  RELATIVITY 

principle  lie  has  called  the  principle  of  covariance.  In  detailed  and  precise  form, 
It  may  be  stated  somewhat  as  follows: 

Principle  of  Covariance.  The  laws  of  nature  can  he  { and  are  to  he)  ex¬ 
pressed  in  such  mathematical  form  in  terms  of  the  space-and-time  coordinates  Xu 
Xj,  xj,  xa  that  they  shall  remain  invariant  under  every  transformation  of  the  form 
—f%  (^i)  x<Ly  x$}  Xa)}  i  —  1,  2,  3,  4, 
where  the  functions  f  are  subject  to  the  following  conditions: 

1)  They  are  {apart  from  exceptional  points  or  regions  of  fewer  than  four 
dimensions)  finite  and  continuous  and  indefinitely  differentiable; 

2)  They  are  such  that  the  transformation  is  uniquely  reversiblet  the  inverse 
transformation  having  the  properties  demanded  for  the  direct  transformation ; 

3)  They  are  such  that  in  both  the  transformation  and  its  inverse  the  fourth 
variable  has  the  character  of  a  time  variable  while  the  other  three  have  the  character 
of  space  variables. 

This  principle  demands  the  attainment  of  an  ideal  which  is  admittedly 
mathematical  in  its  character.  By  means  of  it  alone  one  could  not  come  to  grips 
with  phenomena.  One  needs  some  additional  hypotheses.  One  of  these  is  to 
the  effect  that  the  restricted  theory  of  relativity  is  valid  in  free  space,  that  is, 
in  space  free  of  a  gravitational  field.  The  other  is  the  celebrated  law  of  the 
equivalence  of  gravitational  forces  and  the  apparent  forces  due  to  acceleration. 
This  may  be  set  forth  as  follows: 

Principle  of  Equivalence.  For  an  indefinitely  small  region  of  the  world 
{that  is ,  a  region  so  small  that  the  variation  of  gravitation  in  it  in  both  time  and 
space  is  negligible)  there  exists  a  coordinate  system  So  {Xu  X2,  X3,  Xa)  with  respect 
to  which  gravitation  has  no  influence  either  upon  the  motions  of  mass  particles  or 
upon  any  other  physical  phenomena  whatsoever. 

Such  is  the  logical  basis  from  which  the  general  theory  of  relativity  proceeds. 
We  can  not  here  follow  it  in  its  high  enterprise  of  conquest  over  the  laws  of 
nature.  The  road  (at  present  and  perhaps  for  a  long  time  to  come)  can  be  fol¬ 
lowed  only  by  one  who  is  willing  to  give  serious  and  long-continued  attention 
to  the  study  of  certain  branches  of  mathematics.  In  the  earlier  parts  of  the 
argument  the  reasoning  is  rather  technical  and  abstruse  in  character  and  the 
general  steps  are  intelligible  only  to  those  who  have  a  considerable  acquaintance 
with  a  certain  range  of  mathematical  ideas.  After  a  time  the  exposition  comes 
down,  if  not  to  earth,  at  least  to  the  solar  system  and  cases  begin  to  appear  in 
which  it  is  possible  to  find  means  for  choosing  between  the  theory  of  Newton 
and  that  of  Einstein. 

Three  crucial  phenomena  have  been  brought  to  light  by  means  of  which  to 
test  between  the  two  theories.  We  shall  now  speak  briefly  of  each  of  these. 

For  a  long  time  astronomers  have  known  that  there  is  a  certain  forward 
advance  in  the  perihelion  position  of  the  planet  Mercury  which  can  not  be 
accounted  for  on  Newton’s  theory.  It  amounts  to  about  42  seconds  of  angular 
measure  per  century.  This  is  well  accounted  for  by  Einstein's  theory. 

Einstein  predicted,  on  the  basis  of  his  theory,  that  a  ray  of  light  from  a 
star  which  is  seen  apparently  close  to  the  edge  of  the  sun  would  be  found  to  be 

SUPPLEMENT  I 

beni  out  of  a  straight  path  and  that  the  deflection  thus  caused  would  turn  out 

SeC°n^  °f  T'f  n,eaSUre’  the  bendSn*  ^'"8  i"  ^ch  a  direction 
ttiat  Ae  star  could  actually  be  seen  when  just  behind  the  edge  of  the  sun.  The 

pred.ct.on  has  been  verified  with  a  good  degree  of  precision,  observations  having 
been  taken  at  two  eclipses  of  the  sun. 

A  third  crucial  phenomenon  is  associated  with  the  vibrations  of  an  atom 
m  a  gravitational  field.  Since  the  periods  of  an  atom  furnish  a  sort  of  natural 
clock  it  should  give  an  invariant  measure  of  an  interval  of  time.  Proceeding 
from  this  hypothesis  one  concludes  that  an  atom  vibrates  more  slowly  on  the 
sun  than  on  the  earth,  due  to  the  influence  of  the  larger  gravitational  field  of 
toe  sun.  Hence  the  lines  of  the  spectrum  should  be  displaced  towards  the  red. 

or  e  part  of  the  spectrum  usually  observed  this  amounts  to  about  .008 
tentt.-meters  (a  tenth-meter  -lO"”  meters).  For  a  long  time  there  was  grave 
doubt  whether  this  phenomenon  is  actually  existent;  but  the  evidence  for  its 
existence  now  (1933)  seems  to  be  conclusive. 

Moreover  m  recent  years  it  has  come  to  be  recognized  that  the  stars  known 
as  wh.te  dwarfs  have  masses  which  are  comparable  with  that  of  the  sun,  while 
their  radu  are  much  smaller.  The  companion  of  Sirius  is  a  star  whose  radius  is 
about  1/35  of  that  of  our  sun.  Computation  shows  that  the  shift  in  the  lines  of 
the  spectrum  produced  by  light  passing  near  this  star  should  be  about  .30 
tenth-meters.  This  matter  was  put  to  the  test  at  Mount  Wilson  Observatory 
and  an  actual  shift  of  .32  tenth-meters  was  found.  One  would  conclude  then 
that  it  is  now  hardly  possible  to  doubt  the  actual  existence  of  the  spectral  shift 
predicted  by  the  Einstein  theory. 

Whatever  may  be  the  final  verdict  concerning  the  validity  of  the  theory  of 
relativity  as  a  whole,  it  has  certainly  made  a  fundamental  and  permanent  con- 
tnbution  to  astronomy  in  developing  a  modification  of  Newton’s  law  of  gravi¬ 
tation.  It  has  been  checked  experimentally  in  three  very  different  ways  and  is 
thus  estabhshed  on  a  rather  secure  basis.  Three  such  conquests  as  those  just 
recorded  have  probably  never  before  been  made  so  nearly  simultaneously  by 
a  single  theory  developed  from  one  point  of  view  consistently  maintained 

SUPPLEMENT  II 

THE  THEORY  OF  TYPES1 
by  Paul  Weiss* 

It  would  seem  from  the  interpretation  that  Whitehead  and  Russell  put  on 
the  theory  of  types,  that  it  is  impossible  or  meaningless  to  state  propositions 
which  have  an  unrestricted  possible  range  of  values,  or  which,  in  any  sense, 
are  arguments  to  themselves.  Thus  on  the  acceptance  of  the  principle  that 
statements  about  all  propositions  are  meaningless,2  it  would  be  illegitimate  to 
say,  “all  propositions  are  representable  by  symbols,”  “all  propositions  involve 
judgment,”  “all  propositions  are  elementary  or  not  elementary,”  and  if  no 
statement  could  be  made  about  all  the  members  of  a  set,8  it  would  be  impossible 
to  say,  “all  meanings  are  limited  by  a  context,”  “all  ideas  are  psychologically 
conditioned,”  “all  significant  assertions  have  grammatical  structures,”  etc., 
