all  of  which  are  intended  to  apply  to  themselves  as  well.  The  theory  seems 
also  to  make  ineffective  a  familiar  form  of  refutation.  General  propositions 
are  frequently  denied  because  their  enunciation  or  acknowledgment  depends 
on  the  tacit  supposition  of  the  truth  of  a  contradictory  or  contrary  proposition. 
Such  refutations  assume  that  the  general  proposition  should  be  capable  of 
being  an  argument  of  the  same  type  and  to  the  same  function  as  its  own  argu¬ 
ments,  so  that  according  to  Whitehead  and  Russell,  they  fallaciously  refute 
“by  an  argument  which  involves  a  vicious  circle  fallacy”.4 

That  these  limitations  on  the  scope  of  assertions  or  on  the  validity  of 
refutations  are  rarely  heeded  is  apparent  even  from  a  cursory  examination 
of  philosophical  writings  since  1910.  Thus  Russell,  apropos  to  Bergson’s 
attempt  to  state  a  formula  for  the  comic  says,6  “it  would  seem  to  be  impossible 
to  find  any  such  formula  as  M.  Bergson  seeks.  Every  formula  treats  what  is 
living  as  if  it  were  mechanical,  and  is  therefore  by  his  own  rules  a  fitting  object 
of  laughter.”  The  characterisation  of  all  formulae,  even  though  it  refers  to  a 
totality,  seems  to  Mr.  Russell  to  be  of  the  same  type  as  the  formulae  characterised. 

x  Chap.  II.,  Principict  Mathematica. 

'[Reprinted  from  Mind:  a  Quarterly  Review  of  Psychology  and  Philosophy . 
Vol.  XXXVII ./  N.S.,  No .  147 ;  with  minor  corrections.] 

*P.  37,  ibid,  (second  edition).  aP.  37,  ibid,  4  P.  38,  ibid. 

•  “Prof.  Guide  to  Laughter,”  Cambridge  Review ,  Vol.  32,  1912,  and  Jour  dams 
Philosophy  of  Mr.  B'tr'nd  R*ss*ll,  pp.  86-7. 

SUPPLEMENT  II 

If  the  theory  were  without  any  embarrassments  of  its  own,  and  were 
indispensable  for  the  resolution  of  the  so-called  paradoxes1  (which  no  one 
seems  to  believe),  there  would  be  nothing  to  do  but  to  acknowledge  the  impos¬ 
sibility  of  cosmic  formulations,  as  well  as  the  inadequacy  of  philosophic 
criticisms,  and  to  pass  charitably  over  such  remarks  as  Russell's  as  mere 
accidents  in  a  busy  life.  However,  the  statement  of  the  theory  itself  involves 
the  following  difficulties  in  connection  with  (1)  its  scope,  (2)  its  applicability 
to  propositions  made  about  it,  and  (3)  its  description. 

1.  It  is  either  about  all  propositions  or  it  is  not. 

A.  If  it  were  about  all  propositions  it  would  violate  the  theory  of  types 

and  be  meaningless  or  self-contradictory. 

B.  If  it  were  not  about  all  propositions,  it  would  not  be  universally 

applicable.  To  state  it,  its  limitations  of  application  would  have  to 
be  specified.  One  cannot  say  that  there  is  a  different  theory  of  types 
for  each  order  of  the  hierarchy,  for  the  proposition  about  the  hier¬ 
archy  introduces  the  difficulty  over  again, 

2.  .Propositions  about  the  theory  of  types  (such  as  the  present  ones,  as 
well  as  those  in  the  Principia )  are  subject  to  the  theory  of  types,  or  they  are  not. 

A.  If  they  were,  the  theory  would  include  within  its  own  scope  propositions 
of  a  higher  order,  and  thus  be  an  argument  to  what,  is  an  argument 
to  it.2 

B.  If  they  were  not,  there  would  be  an  unlimited  number  of  propositions, 
not  subject  to  the  theory,  that  could  be  made  directly  or  indirectly 
about  it.  Among  these  propositions  there  might  be  some  which 
refer  to  a  totality  and  involve  functions  which  have  arguments 
presupposing  the  function. 

3.  The  statement  of  the  theory  of  types  is  either  a  proposition  of  a 
propositional  function,  neither  or  both. 

A.  If  it  were  a  proposition,  it  would  be  either  elementary,  first  order, 

general,  etc.,  have  a  definite  place  in  a  hierarchy  and  refer  only  to 
those  propositions  which  are  of  a  lower  order.  If  it  were  held  to  be 
a  proposition  of  the  last  order,  then  the  number  of  orders  would 
have  a  last  term,  and  there  could  not  be  meaningful  propositions 
made  about  the  theory.  The  Principia  should  not  be  able  to  say, 
on  that  basis,  just  what  the  purpose,  character  and  application  of 
the  theory  is. 

B.  Similarly,  if  it  were  a  propositional  function,  it  would  have  a  definite 

_ _ p^ace  in  a  hierarchy,  being  derived  from  a  proposition  by  generalisa- 

.  ,,  Paradoxes,  though  contrary  to  common  opinion,  may  be  and  frequently  are 
true.  Paranoumena,  violating  principles  of  logic  or  reason,  if  they  are  not  mean! 
mgless,  are  false,  and  it  is  only  they  which  are  capable  of  logical  analysis  and 
resolution  What  the  Pnnctpta  attempts  to  do  is  to  solve  apparent  paranoumena 
with  a  real  paranoumenon.  p*i«moumena 

*  P.  39,  Principia  Mathematica. 

THE  THEORY  OF  TYPES 

tkm.  It  could  not  refer  to  all  propositions  or  propositional  functions, 
but  only  to  those  of  a  lower  order. 

C.  If  it  were  neither  it  could  not  be  true  or  false,  nor  refer  to  anything 

that  was  true  or  false.  It  could  not  apply  to  propositions,  for  only 
propositions  or  propositional  functions,  in  a  logic,  refer  to  propositions. 

D.  If  both  at  once,  it  would  be  necessarily  self-reflexive. 

a.  If  as  function  it  had  itself  as  value,  it  would  refer  to  itself.  But 
the  theory  of  types  denies  that  a  function  can  have  itself  as  value. 

b.  If  as  function  it  had  something  else  as  value,  it  would  conform 
to  the  theory,  which  insists  that  functions  have  something  else 
as  values.  The  theory  then  applies  to  itself  and  is  self-reflexive, 
and  thus  does  not  apply  to  itself.  As,  by  hypothesis,  it  is  a  value 
of  some  other  function,  there  must  be  propositions  of  a  higher 
order  and  wider  range  than  the  theory  of  types. 

It  is  no  wonder  that  the  perpetrators  of  the  theory  have  not  been  altogether 
happy  about  it!  What  is  sound  in  it — and  there  is  much  that  is — is  best 
discovered  by  forgetting  their  statements  altogether,  and  by  endeavouring  to 
analyse  the  problems  it  was  designed  to  answer,  without  recourse  to  their 
machinery.  The  result  will  be  an  acknowledgment  of  a  theory  of  types  having 
a  limited  application,  and  a  formulation  of  a  principle  which  will  permit  certain 
kinds  of  unrestricted  general  propositions. 

To  do  this  we  shall  deal  in  detail  with  two  apparent  paranoumena  dealt 
with  in  the  Principia,  where  the  difficulty  is  largely  methodological.  We  shall 
then  treat  of  Weyl’s  “heterological-autological”  problem,  where  the  difficulty 
is  due  to  a  confusion  in  meanings .  Those  problems  which  cannot  be  dealt  with 
under  either  heading  will  be  those  which  need  a  theory  of  types  for  their 
resolution. 

1.  Epimenides .  The  proposition  “All  Cretans  are  liars  must  be  false  if  it 
applies  to  Epimenides  as  well,  for  it  cannot  be  true,  and  only  as  false  has  it 
meaning.  If  it  were  true,  it  would  involve  its  own  falsity.  When  taken  as  false, 
no  contradiction,  or  even  paradox,  is  involved,  for  the  truth  would  then  be 
“ some  Cretans  tell  the  truth”.  (The  truth  could  not  be  “all  Cretans  tell  the 
truth”  for  Epimenides  must  be  a  liar  for  that  to  be  true  and  by  that  token  it 
must  be  false).  Epimenides  himself  would  be  one  of  the  lying  Cretans,  and  one 
of  the  lies  that  the  Cretans  were  wont  to  make  would  be  “all  Cretans  are  liars”. 
Thus  if  Epimenides  meant  to  include  all  his  own  remarks  within  the  scope 
of  the  assertion,  he  would  contradict  himself  or  state  a  falsehood.  If  it  be 
denied  that  a  contradictory  assertion  can  have  meaning,  he  must  be  saying 
something  false  if  he  is  saying  anything  significant.  Had  he  meant  to  refer  to 
all  other  Cretans  there  is,  of  course,  no  difficulty,  for  he  then  invokes  a  kind 
of  theory  of  types  by  which  he  makes  a  remark  not  intended  to  apply  to  himself. 
All  difficulty  disappears  when  it  is  recognised  that  the  formal  implication,  all 
Cretanic  statements  are  lies”  can  as  a  particular  statement  be  taken  as  one  of 
the  values  of  the  terms  of  this  implication.  Letting  Ep  !  p  represent  “Epimenides 
once  asserted  p"\  <t>  represent  “Cretanic”  and  p  represent  a  statement  or 

SUPPLEMENT  II 

proposition,  then  for  “All  Cretanic  statements  are  false  (or  lies),”  we  have: 

1.  <f>P  •  3  p  •  ^  P- 

And  as  Epimenides  is  a  Cretan,  for  any  assertion  he  makes  we  have : 

2.  Ep  !  p  .  ^  p  .  4>p. 

As  No.  1  is  an  argument  to  the  above— it  being  Epimenides’  present  remark— 
we  get: 

3.  Ep  !  {<pp  .  3  p  .  ^  p\  .  ^  .  <t>[<j>p  p\ 

No.  1,  as  a  Cretanic  statement,  is  an  argument  to  No.  1  as  a  formal  implication 
or  principle  about  Cretanic  statements,  so  that: 

3A.  <p{<t>p  .  p  ^  p\  .  ^  ^  [<f>p  •:D  P  p] 

No.  3  and  No.  3A  by  the  syllogism  yield: 

3B.  Ep  !  {<f>p  .  ^  p  .  ^  p\  .  ^  ^  {<pp  .  ^  p  .  ^ 
so  that  in  this  instance  Epimenides  lied. 

It  is  important  to  note  that  No.  1  states  a  formal  implication,  and  that 
No.  3,  No.  3A  and  No.  3B  employ  No.  1  as  a  particular  assertion  or  specific 
argument  to  their  functions.  No.  3A  is  an  instance  of  the  implication  expressed 
by  No.  1,  and  is  this  instance  because  of  the  particular  argument  it  does  have. 
It  states  the  fact  that  “  ‘all  Cretanic  statements  are  false’  is  a  Cretanic  State¬ 
ment,”  implies  that  “  ‘all  Cretanic  statements  are  false*  is  false”.  Substitution 
of  another  argument  would  give  a  different  instance;  though  of  course  of  the 
same  implication.  The  implication  contained  in  its  argument  does  not  have 
instances.  “  ‘Some  Cretanic  statements  are  false’  is  a  Cretanic  statement” 
or  “  ‘This  Cretanic  statement  is  false*  is  a  Cretanic  statement**  are  not 
instances  of  “  ‘All  Cretanic  statements  are  false*  is  a  Cretanic  statement,” 
but  of  “P  is  a  Cretanic  statement”.  These  three  propositions  have  different 
subjects;  they  are  different  values  of  the  same  propositional  function.  That 
these  subjects  have  relations  to  one  another  is  of  no  moment.  “My  wife  loves 
me”  and  “my  mother-in-law  is  old  (or  loves  me)”  are  two  distinct  and  logically 
independent  propositions,  even  though  there  is  a  relationship  between  the 
two  subjects. 

It  is  because  any  considered  general  proposition  is  at  once  an  individual 
fact,  and  a  formal  implication  or  principle,  with  many  possible  arguments,  that 
it  is  capable  of  being  taken  as  an  argument  to  itself.  All  propositions  about 
words,  logic,  truth,  meaning,  ideas,  etc.,  take  arguments  which  fall  in  these 
same  categories,  and  in  so  far  as  such  a  general  proposition  is  stated  in  words, 
determined  by  logic,  etc.,  it  should,  as  such  a  fact,  be  an  argument  to  itself 
as  a  formal  implication.  The  principle  must  be  false  if  this  cannot  be  done, 
for  it  is  sufficient,  in  order  to  overthrow  a  proposition  of  this  kind,  to  produce 
one  argument  for  which  it  does  not  hold.  One  may  limit  the  principle  by 
asserting  that  it  holds  for  “all  but . . .”,  in  which  case  it  is  a  restricted  general 
proposition.  Nominalism,  association  of  ideas,  scepticism,  the  theory  of  universal 
tautology,  the  denial  of  logic  are  defended  in  propositions  which  cannot  take 
themselves  as  arguments,  and  which  as  facts  are  arguments  to  contradictory 
principles.  Their  contradictory  principles  therefore  hold  sometimes  at  least, 

THE  THEORY  OF  TYPES 

•o  that  these  doctrines  must  be  false  if  they  are  put  forward  without  restriction, 
and  cannot  be  universally  true,  if,  in  Bradley's  words,  they  “appear". 

2.  “I  am  lying" — if  it  be  taken  in  isolation  from  all  fact — is  a  meaningless 
statement.  There  must  be  some  objective  truth  that  is  distorted,  and  unless 
it  is  provided  the  assertion  has  no  significance.  This  proposition  means  either, 
“I  am  lying  about  X";  “I  always  lie,"  or  “I  have  always  lied".  The  first 
Can  be  either  true  or  false  without  giving  rise  to  any  problem,  except  where 
“all  my  assertions"  is  made  an  argument  to  X,  in  which  case  it  is  equivalent 
to  either  the  second  or  third  formulation.  “I  always  lie"  involves  the  same 
situation  as  with  Epimenides,  and  the  proposition  is  false.  The  supposition 
of  its  truth  would  involve  a  contradiction;  the  supposition  of  its  falsity  means 
simply  that  I  sometimes  lie  and  sometimes  tell  the  truth.  If  what  is  meant  is 
that  “I  have  always  lied"  that  does  not  involve  a  contradiction,  for  what  is 
intended  is  a  restricted  proposition,  applying  to  all  but  the  present  one.  It  can 
be  true  because  it  does  not  apply  to  all  propositions;  if  it  were  false,  then  some¬ 
times  I  lied  and  sometimes  I  did  not.  In  short,  there  is  nothing  like  a  self- 
reflective  universal  liar,  which  is  an  interesting  moral  conclusion  to  derive 
from  a  logical  analysis.  Similarly,  there  cannot  be  a  thorough  scepticism  held 
by  the  sceptic  to  be  valid. 

Prof.  Whitehead  (to  whom  I  am  also  indebted  for  the  notation)  has  pointed 
out  to  me  that  wherever  a  conjunction  of  propositions  results  in  a  reductio 
ad  absurdutn ,  there  is  no  way  of  determining  on  logical  grounds  alone  which 
of  the  antecedents  fails,  or  is  false  (though  one  at  least  must  be).  Thus  in  the 
case  of  Epimenides  we  have : 

4.  {<pp  .  =>  p  .^p]  .  [Ep  !  p  .  =>  p  .  4>p\  .Ep\  {<t>p  *  p] 

(A)  (B)  (C) 

.  ^ ^  \4>p  ■ 3  P  •  ^  p\ 

(D) 

It  is  because  B  and  C  are  in  that  case  assumed  to  hold,  that  we  can  say 
that  A  must  fail.  If  the  truth  of  all  these  antecedents  were  undetermined,  we 
should  have  merely  the  general  rule:  a  reductio  ad  absurdum  has  as  a  necessary 
condition  the  conjunction  of  one  or  more  false  propositions.  Transposition — 

4'.  \<pp  .  =>  p  .  ^  p]  .  =>  .  ^  {<w> .  3  p  .  ^  p} 

(D)  (A) 

.  v  .  {Ep  !  p  .  ji .  <pp}  .  v  .  ^  Ep  !  ( <t>p  .  3  P  ■  p\ 

(B)  (C) 

makes  it  apparent  that  to  deny  the  conclusion  of  a  reductio  ad  absurdum  is  to 
imply  that  at  least  one  of  the  antecedents  is  false. 

In  connection  with  the  reductio  ad  absurdum  involved  in  the  assertions, 
“I  always  lie"  and  “I  always  doubt,"  No.  4B  reduces  to  the  tautologies:  “If  I 
assert  p ,  p  is  my  assertion,"  and  “If  I  doubt,  the  doubt  is  mine".  In  these 
cases,  the  only  alternatives  left  are  the  denial  of  the  fact  of  the  assertion  (No, 
4C),  or  the  truth  of  the  principle  itself  (No.  4A). 

SUPPLEMENT  II 

3.  Weyl’s  heterological-autological  contradiction1  is  the  result  of  a  material 
fallacy  of  amphiboly  in  connection  with  the  employment  of  adjectives.  The 
simplest  form  of  such  a  fallacy  is  due  to  a  failure  to  distinguish  between  an 
adjective  as  substantive  and  an  adjective  as  attribute.  Thus  if  we  treat  both 
the  subject  and  attribute  in  “large  is  small’'  and  “small  is  large"  as  attributes 
united  by  a  copula  expressing  identity  (instead  of  reading  it  as  “large  is  a  small 
word,"  “small  is  a  large  word")  we  could  say  “whatever  is  small  is  large,  and 
whatever  is  large  is  small”.  No  one,  I  believe,  since  the  Megarics,  has  been 
troubled  by  this  particular  confusion. 

The  present  problem  is  the  result  of  a  confusion,  not  between  substantive 
and  adjective,  but  between  an  adjective  which  expresses  a  property,  and  an 
adjective  which  expresses  a  relation  between  this  property  and  the  substantive. 
All  words  can  be  described  in  terms  of  a  property — they  are  long,  short,  beau¬ 
tiful,  melodious,  etc.,  words.  They  can  be  classified  in  accordance  with  these 
properties,  giving  us  the  class  of  long  words,  short  words,  etc.  They  can  also 
be  classified  as  either  “autological”  or  “heterological,"  depending  on  whether 
or  not  the  same  word  is  at  once  substantive  and  property-adjective;  the  terms 
‘autological"  and  “heterological"  expressing  relationships  between  the  sub¬ 
stantive  and  adjective. 

The  autological  class  is  made  up  of  words,  each  of  which  expresses  a  property 
which  it  possesses;  though  all  of  them  have  unique  properties.  If  “short”  be 
short,  and  if  “melodious”  be  melodious,  they  would  both  be  members  of  the 
autological  class;  though  in  addition,  “short”  would  be  a  member  of  the  class 
of  short  words,  and  “melodious”  would  be  a  member  of  the  class  of  melodious 
words. 

The  heterological  class  is  made  up  of  words,  each  of  which  expresses  a 
property  which  it  does  not  possess.  If  “long”  be  short,  and  if  “fat"  be  thin, 
they  would  both  be  members  of  the  heterological  class;  although  here  also 
“long”  would  be  a  member  of  the  class  of  short  words,  and  “fat"  would  be  a 
member  of  the  class  of  thin  words.  Though  when  classified  according  to  the 
relationship  of  the  adjective  to  the  substantive,  “short"  would  be  an  autological 
word  and  “long"  a  heterological  word,  they  would  both  be  members  of  that 
class  which  was  defined  in  terms  of  the  properties  of  words — being  in  this 
case,  members  of  the  class  of  short  words. 

Now  if  heterologicality  were  a  property  that  a  word  could  have,  and  if  the 
word  “heterological”  had  that  property,  it  would  be  a  member  of  the  auto¬ 
logical  class,  for  it  would  then  possess  a  property  that  it  expressed.  But  it  would 
also  be  a  member  of  a  class  of  words  which  had  the  property  of  heterologicality. 
This  class  is  determined  by  taking  the  properties  of  words,  and  if  it  be  called 

“Briefly  stated  it  is:  all  words  which  express  a  property  they  possess  are 
autological  ;  all  words  which  express  a  property  they  do  not  possess  are  hetero¬ 
logical.  If  *heterologicar  is  heterological  it  expresses  a  property  it  possesses  and 
is  thus  autological ;  if  it  is  autological,  it  expresses  a  property  it  does  not  possess 
and  is  therefore  heterological.  Dos  Kontinuum,  p.  2. 

THE  THEORY  OF  TYPES 

"heterological,”  must  be  distinguished  from  that  class  which  was  determined 
not  by  properties,  but  by  the  relationship  between  properties  and  substantives. 

If  there  were  a  property  like  autologicality  and  if  “heterological”  had  that 
property,1  it  would  be  a  member  of  the  heterological  class,  for  it  would  express 
a  property  which  it  did  not  possess.  But  it  would  also  be  a  member  of  the  class 
of  words  which  possessed  autologicality  and  could  thus  be  classified. 

Thus  if  “heterologicar*  had  the  property  of  autologicality,  it  would  be  in 
the  heterological  class  owing  to  the  relation  which  held  between  the  property 
and  substantive  (or  between  a  property  it  possessed  and  the  property  it  ex¬ 
pressed);  but  it  would  be  in  the  class  of  autological  words,  owing  to  a  property 
it  possessed.  If  it  had  the  property  of  heterologicality,  it  would  be  in  the  auto¬ 
logical  class  on  the  basis  of  the  relation,  and  in  the  class  of  heterological  words 
on  the  basis  of  property  classification.  There  is  no  difficulty  in  considering  some¬ 
thing  as  a  member  of  two  distinct  classes,  owing  to  the  employment  of  different 
methods  of  classification.  There  is  no  contradiction  in  saying:  “  ‘heterological* 
expresses  the  property  heterologicality,  possesses  the  property  autologicality, 
and  the  relation  between  these  properties  is  heterological,  or  that  it  expresses 
and  possesses  the  property  heterologicality  and  the  relation  between  them  is 
autological.’*  Similarly,  Richard’s  contradiction,  Berry’s  contradiction,  and 
that  involving  the  least  indefinable  ordinal,  are  resolvable  by  recognising  that 
“nameable”  and  “indefinable”  are  used  in  two  sharply  distinguishable  senses. 
They  do  not  require  a  hierarchy,  but  a  discrimination  in  the  methods  of 
description. 

When  a  distinction  is  made  between  a  class  and  its  membership  (the  dis¬ 
tinction  between  a  number  of  numbers  and  a  number  is  a  particular  case  of 
this),  and  between  a  relation  of  objects  and  a  relation  of  relations,  the  require¬ 
ments  for  the  solution  of  the  other  mathematical  problems  are  provided.  A 
class  is  other  than  its  members,  and  a  relation,  like  all  universals,  transcends 
any  given  instance  or  totality  of  instances.  As  they  have  characters  of  their 
own,  universals  can  be  described  in  terms  of  other  universals,  which  in  turn 
transcend  them.  Arguments  are  of  a  different  “type”  than  functions,  just  so 
far  as  they  have  different  logical  characteristics,  i.e.  are  different  kinds  of  logical 
facts.  The  class  which  is  an  argument  to  a  function  about  classes  has,  as  argu¬ 
ment,  a  different  logical  import  than  the  function,  and  its  arguments  have  a 
different  import  from  it.  This  is  true  of  all  functions,  restricted  and  unrestricted 
alike,  for  it  means  simply  that  they  are  discriminable  from  their  arguments. 
They  can,  despite  this  difference,  have  characteristics  in  common  with  their 
arguments,  and  are  to  that  extent  unrestricted.  Thus  in  the  case  of  “the  class 
of  those  classes  which  are  identical  with  themselves,”  the  class  of  classes  can  be 

1 ‘Heterological,’  in  fact,  has  the  properties  of  being  long,  polysyllabic,  etc., 
and  it  is  questionable  whether  there  are  properties  like  autologicality  and  hetero¬ 
logicality  possessed  by  words.  If  there  be  no  such  properties,  “heterological’*  is  a 
member  of  the  class  of  long  words,  polysyllabic  words,  etc.  In  addition  it  would 
be  one  of  the  terms  related  by  the  heterological  relation,  which  fact  would  not 
make  it  have  the  property  of  heterologicality. 

SUPPLEMENT  II 

taken  simply  as  a  class,  without  logical  embarrassment.  Yet  a  class  of  classes 
differs  from  a  class,  and  must  therefore  be  capable  of  a  different  characterisation, 
and  thusabobean  argument  toa  function  of  adifferent  type.  With  some  classes. 

Srrr  P°  t0  CTider  them  “  arguments  to  their  own  functions, 
Without  uncovering  a  contradiction.  In  such  cases  (e.S.  the  class  of  those  classes 

hv  n°t  ™^mbers  °f  themselves,  and  the  relations  which  are  connected 

by  their  contradictories),  ,t  is  the  difference  between  the  function  and  the 
argument  that  is  of  moment.  That  some  functions  cannot  take  themselves  as 

SXwX  not  lndlcate  that  M  functions  are  restricted  in  scope,  but 
simply  that  they  are  non-restruted.  Some  classes  and  functions  are  restricted 

arE  ^  T°  Say  that  a”  are  restricted  because  some  are  is  an  obvious 

Whenever,  as  individual,  a  general  proposition  is  in  the  class  of  those  ob- 

eiSer°l7hlCh  U  bUt  Cann°t  136  Considered  as  an  argument  to  itself,  it  is 

sntdfiS  T"  d  “  SCOpe‘  If  the  second’ its  ran£e  °f  arguments  must  be 
specified.  Accordingly,  we  can  state  as  a  necessary  condition  for  the  truth  of  a 

general  proposition,  whose  scope  is  unspecified,  that  when  it  has  a  character 

to  iiff  Tho°  7  R  CharaCte.rS  abou*  »Wch  h  sPeaks-  it  must  be  an  argument 
be  In  lie  t  f  frgS°n  ad^uate'y  described  the  comic,  his  formula  should 
it  h  mV  °  tVT,’  and  lf  1116  theory  of  types  is  universal  in  application, 

di cates  that  T  t  5  SUbjeCt.  ?  ^  Conformity  to  this  condition  in¬ 
dicates  that  the  unrestricted  proposition  is  possibly  true;  not  that  it  is  neces- 

7a  ,rUe'  °.  demonstrate  that  such  a  proposition  was  necessarily  true,  it 

would  be  essential  to  show  that  the  supposition  of  its  falsity  assumes  its  truth. 

That  there  is  danger  in  applying  this  rule  can  be  seen  from  the  consideration 

l!sde^LSUC-?i  Pr°PT°n  ar,  “EvCrything  is  made  «P  of  language  elements”. 
thlt tX  ^  C  UP  °f  language  elements’  and  would  seem  to  demonstrate 
that  the  proposition  was  necessarily  true.  Supposition  of  the  falsity  of  a  propo- 

toe°realmWon'  “  T^'  ^  “  S°  ^  **  the  ProPOsition  applies  to 

die  realm  of  language.  If  it  applies  to  everything,  supposition  of  its  falsity 

involves  the  positing  of  the  objects  of  assertions;  not  the  assertions.  A  neces¬ 
sary  unrestricted  proposition  about  everything  can  be  supported  only  by  a 
demonstration  that  the  supposition  of  an  argument  for  which  it  does  not  hold 

lovir  f  ;C0,intradir°ry'  If,  thC  proP°sition  has  to  do  with  grammar,  meaning, 
logic,  judgment,  etc.,  the  conditions  for  a  necessarily  true  and  unrestricted 

dP3^0n”'"db':  >■  2.r„ylS; 

den  al  is  an  argument  to  it.  That  “any  possible  denial”  rather  than  “any  given 

tinn,  “AneqW,  ' 18  aPParent  fr°m  tbe  consideration  of  the  following  proposi- 

e  X  woto,-'  V  r  6  UP  °f  Cight  WOrds'"  “N°  sentence  is  made  uV  of 

ght  words  .  Each  of  these  contains  eight  words.  It  is  because  of  the  fact 

that  we  can  formulate  propositions  such  as,  “It  is  false  that  every  proposition 

s  e  ma  e  up  of  eight  words,”  that  the  condition  is  seen  not  to  have  been  met. 

An  unrestricted  proposition  applies  to  every  member  of  the  category,  and 

has  some  aspect  of  itself  as  value.  It  is  in  some  sense  then  a  determinated  the 

category  which  it  determines.  If  the  proposition  refers  to  some  other  category 

THE  THEORY  OF  TYPES 

than  the  one  to  which  it  as  fact,  or  some  aspect  of  it  as  fact,  belongs,  it  is  re¬ 
stricted.  Thus  “all  men  are  mortal”  is  neither  man  nor  mortal,  and  as  condition 
does  not  determine  itself  as  fact.  Any  proposition  referring  to  that  statement 
would  be  of  a  different  type,  and  would  deal  with  its  truth,  falsity,  constituents, 
historical  place,  logical  structure,  etc.  Though  the  unrestricted  propositions 
have  no  limitations,  the  category  to  which  they  refer  may  have.  Epimenides’ 
remark,  for  example,  referred  only  to  Cretans.  As  his  assertion  was  a  deter¬ 
minate  in  the  category,  and  as  his  statement  of  the  supposed  conditions  imposed 
on  the  members  of  that  category  was  not  a  possible  argument  to  the  general 
proposition,  the  general  proposition  was  seen  to  be  false  or  restricted.  Had  he 
said,  “All  Cretans  tell  the  truth,”  he  would  have  stated  an  unrestricted  propo¬ 
sition  which  was  possibly  true.  It  could  not  be  said  to  be  necessarily  true  unless 
Cretans  and  lie,  against  the  evidence  of  history,  were  actually  contradictories. 

Accordingly,  we  shall  say:  All  true  unrestricted  propositions  are  arguments 
to  themselves;  or  by  transposition ,  those  propositions  which  are  not  arguments  to 
themselves  are  either  restricted  or  false .  As  this  proposition  can  take  itself  as 
argument  it  is  possibly  true.  Unless  no  proposition  is  possible  which  does  not 
conform  to  it,,  it  cannot  be  said  to  be  necessarily  true.  I  have  not  been  able  to 
demonstrate  this  and  therefore  accept  it  as  a  definition  or  “methodological 
principle  of  validation”.  The  theory  of  types,  in  its  most  general  form,  may  be 
stated  as:  A  proposition  or  function  of  order  n,  which  cannot  be  an  argument  to 
itself ,  is,  as  fact,  an  argument  of  a  proposition  or  function  of  order  n- f  1. 

In  accordance  with  the  scheme  of  the  criticism  of  the  theory  of  types,  we 
can  describe  our  principle  as  (1)  applying  to  all  propositions,  including  (2)  those 
which  refer  to  it.  (3)  It  is  a  formal  implication  with  itself  as  one  of  its  argu¬ 
ments.  The  theory  of  types,  on  the  other  hand,  (1)  does  not  apply  to  all  propo¬ 
sitions,  but  only  to  those  which  are  restricted,  (2)  may  apply  to  those  proposi¬ 
tions  which  refer  to  it,  and  (3)  is  a  formal  implication  which  cannot  take  itself 
as  argument. 

The  theory  of  types  cannot  be  an  unrestricted  proposition  about  all  re¬ 
stricted  propositions.  As  an  unrestricted  proposition  it  must  take  itself  as 
argument;  but  its  arguments  are  only  those  propositions  which  are  not  argu¬ 
ments  to  themselves.  It  cannot  therefore  be  unrestricted  without  being  re¬ 
stricted.  Nor  can  it  be  a  restricted  proposition  about  all  restricted  propositions 
for  it  would  then  be  one  of  the  restricted  propositions,  and  would  have  to  take 
itself  as  argument — in  which  case  it  would  be  unrestricted.  Hence  it  cannot 
be  restricted  without  being  unrestricted.  Three  possible  solutions  may  be  ad¬ 
vanced.  The  first  is  that  the  theory  of  types  is  restricted  and  does  not  apply 
to  all  restricted  propositions,  but  only  to  some  of  them.  It  is  not  an  argument 
to  itself  but  to  some  other  proposition  about  restricted  propositions.  This  in 
turn  will  have  to  be  restricted  and  refer  only  to  some  propositions,  and  so  on, 
giving  us  theories  of  types  of  various  orders.  The  proposition  made  about  the 
totality  of  these  orders  would  be  of  a  still  higher  order  and  would  in  turn  pre¬ 
suppose  a  higher  order  ad  infinitum.  The  theory  of  types  thus  depends  on 
theories  of  types  of  theories  of  types  without  end.  This  seems  probable  on  the 

SUPPLEMENT  II 

ground  that  the  theory  is  based  on  the  recognition  that  no  proposition  can  be 
made  about  all  restricted  propositions,  so  that  it  must  by  that  very  fact  admit 
that  it  cannot  apply  to  all  of  them.  Instead,  therefore,  of  the  theory  of  types 
applying  to  all  propositions,  and  determining  them  in  various  orders,  it  does  not 
