even  apply  to  all  of  a  given  class  of  them.  This  interpretation  would  not  affect 
unrestricted  propositions,  and  would  merely  show  that  the  determination  of 
restricted  propositions  is  subject  to  determinations  without  end. 

The  second  possibility  is  suggested  by  the  consideration  of  a  proposition 
such  as:  “all  truths  are  but  partially  true”.  If  that  were  absolutely  true,  it 
would  contradict  itself,  and  if  it  were  not,  could  apply  only  to  some  truths. 
Considered  as  referring  to  the  necessary  limitations  which  any  finite  statement 
must  have,  it  would  take  itself  as  argument  in  so  far  as  it  was  finite,  thus  indi¬ 
cating  that  it  was  absolutely  true  about  finite  propositions,  and  yet  not  abso¬ 
lutely  true  as  regards  all  truths.  By  pointing  out  the  limitations  of  a  finite 
statement  it  indicates  that  there  is  an  absolute  truth  in  terms  of  which  it  is 
relatively  true.  On  this  interpretation,  any  condition  which  imposes  universal 
limitations  is  unlimited  in  terms  of  what  it  limits,  but  limited  in  turn  by  some 
other  condition.  One  might  hold,  therefore,  that  the  theory  would  be  unre¬ 
stricted  as  regards  restricted  propositions,  and  restricted  as  regards  all  propo¬ 
sitions,  and  would  point  to  a  higher  principle  which  limits  it. 

The  third  possibility  is  to  allow  for  “intensive”  propositions  which  are 
neither  restricted  nor  unrestricted,  being  incapable  of  any  arguments.  The 
theory  of  types  could  be  viewed  as  such  an  intensive  proposition,  and  what  we 
have  called  its  arguments,  would  merely  “conform”  to  it.  This  interpretation 
means  the  downfall  of  a  completely  extensional  logic,  and  a  determination  of  an 
extensional  logic  as  subordinate  to  an  intensional  one. 

There  are  difficulties  in  each  of  these  interpretations.  The  last  seems  to  me 
to  be  best.  In  any  of  these  cases,  however,  a  restricted  proposition  which  refers 
to  some  other  than  the  restricted  aspect  of  the  theory  would  be  subject  to  the 
theory  and  the  principle  we  have  laid  down  about  unrestricted  propositions 
could  still  hold.  Those  restricted  propositions  which  refer  to  the  restricted 
character  of  the  theory  would  not  be  an  argument  to  it  on  the  first,  would  be 
an  argument  to  it  on  the  second,  and  would  neither  be  nor  not  be  an  argument 
to  it  on  the  third  solution. 

To  briefly  summarise:  The  theory  of  types  must  be  limited  in  application. 
Not  all  the  problems  it  was  designed  to  answer  require  it;  another  principle  of 
greater  logical  import  is  desirable;  while  for  the  resolution  of  the  problems  in 
which  it  is  itself  involved,  very  drastic  remedies  are  necessary.  No  matter  how 
the  theory  fares,  the  possibility  of  the  methodological  principle  and  the  pos¬ 
sibility  of  other  solutions  for  the  so-called  paradoxes,  indicate  that  it  is  at  least 
not  as  significant  an  instrument  as  it  was  originally  thought  to  be. 

SUPPLEMENT  III 

A  NON-ARISTOTELIAN  SYSTEM  AND  ITS  NECESSITY  FOR 
RIGOUR  IN  MATHEMATICS  AND  PHYSICS* 

by  Alfred  Korzybski 

We  are  here  dealing  with  a  concrete  mathematical  problem  which  is  not 
trivial,  but  at  the  same  time  is  solvable,  and  I  cannot  imagine  that  any 
mathematician  can  find  the  courage  to  elude  its  honest  solution  by  means 
of  a  metaphysical  dogma,  (549)  Hermann  weyl 

I  protest  against  the  use  of  infinite  magnitude  as  something  completed, 
which  in  mathematics  is  never  permissible.  Infinity  is  merely  a  fag  on  de 
parler t  the  real  meaning  being  a  limit  which  certain  ratios  approach  in¬ 
definitely  near,  while  others  are  permitted  to  increase  without  restrictions. 

<74>  K.  F.  GAUSS 

A  very  extensive  literature  shows  that  the  problems  of  ‘infinity*  pervade 
human  psycho-logical  reactions,  starting  from  the  lowest  stage  of  human  de¬ 
velopment  up  to  the  present  and  that  without  some  theory  of  ‘infinity*,  modern 
mathematics  would  be  impossible.  Up  to  date,  no  satisfactory  theory  of  in¬ 
finity,  oti  which  all  mathematicians  could  agree,  has  been  produced.  The  results 
are  rather  bewildering  because  what  appears  to  some  prominent  mathematicians 
as  perfectly  sound  mathematics  is  evaluated  by  other  equally  prominent  scien¬ 
tists  as  a  ‘mental*  disease  (Poincare);  or  we  find  opinions  that  a  large  portion 
of  mathematics  is  devoid  of  proof  and  has  to  be  accepted  on  faith;  or  that  some 
parts  of  mathematics  must  be  treated  as  non-sense  (Kronecker,  Brouwer, 
Weyl  .  ,).  ‘There  are  eminent  scholars  on  both  sides  and  the  chance  of  reaching 
an  agreement  within  a  finite  period  is  practically  excluded’,  says  Brouwer,  and 
certainly  such  a  state  of  affairs  does  not  allow  us  to  have  any  satisfactory  modern 
standards  of  proof  and  rigour;  the  last  thing  we  should  expect  in  mathematics. 

The  majority  of  those  mathematicians  who  take  interest  in  the  soundness 
of  their  science  seem  to  believe  that  the  main  difficulty  centres  around  the 
validity  of  the  ‘law  of  excluded  third’  (‘A  is  B,  or  not  B’)  of  the  accepted,  sharply 
two-valued,  chrisippian  form  of  A  ‘logic*.  They  disregard  the  fact  that  we  are 
born,  bred,  educated,  speak  a  language,  live  under  conditions,  institutions  .  , 
which  still  remain  desperately  A  or  even  pre-aristotelian.  If  we  attempt  to  re¬ 
ject  one  of  the  two-valued  ‘laws  of  thought’  or  postulates  of  the  ,4 -system,  but 
retain  A  or  pre-aristotelian  elementalistic  ‘psychologies’,  ‘logic*,  and  s.r ,  no 
agreement  in  ‘a  finite  period'  can  be  expected,  and  the  present  mathematical 
chaos  would  continue. 

♦Paper  presented  before  the  American  Mathematical  Society  at  the  New 
Orleans,  Louisiana,  Meeting  of  the  A.A.A.S.  December  28,  1931.  I  continue  to  use 
the  abbreviations  introduced  in  this  book. 

SUPPLEMENT  III 

Among  the  more  important  schools  we  may  distinguish  roughly:1 

1)  The  logistic  school  represented  by  Peano,  Russell,  and  Whitehead,  who 
accept  the  chrisippian,  two-valued,  restricted  form  of  the  el  'logic*  and  so  may 
be  called  the  chrisippian  school . 

2)  The  axiomatic  school,  represented  by  Hilbert  and  his  followers,  which 
may  be  called  the  aristotelian  school . 

.  Th*  *'ntuitionar  school  represented  by  Brouwer  and  Weyl  who  question 
the  law  of  excluded  third’,  and  so  may  be  called  the  non-ckrisippian  school. 

4)  The  Polish  school  of:  (a)  ‘intuitional’  formalism  with  Lukasiewicz, 
iarski,  Lesmewski  as  representatives,  which  may  be  called  the  non-aristotelian 
school.  Lukasiewicz  generalized  the  A  'logic'  to  three-valued  ‘logic’  which 
TS  ,?10d^'t,y'  ,l“kfsiewicz  and  Tarski  finally  produced  a  general  many- 
"T  (of  twhlch  the  two-valued  represents  only  a  limiting  case.  LeSniewsW 

4  ^  m°?  genera‘  ‘l0giCa1’ SyStem’ by  introducing  variable 
funk  tors ,  .  (6)  The  restricted  semantic  school  represented  by  Chwistek  and 

his  pupils,  which  is  characterized  mosdy  by  the  semantic  approach,  and  bv 
faying  special  attention  to  the  number  of  values,  establishing  the  thesis  that 
the  older  freedom  from  contradictions’  depends  on  one-valued  formulations  as 
discovered  by  Skarzenski  and  quoted  by  Chwistek.  This  school  has  already 
produced  new  foundations  (still  elementalistic)  for  ‘logic’  and  mathematics,  and 
leads  to  generalized  arithmetics  and  analysis. 

f,  average  prevalent  mathematical  technician,  who  does  not  realize 

that  he  belongs  to  the  numerically  large  class  which  may  be  called  the  ‘Christian 
science  school  of  mathematics,  which  proceeds  by  faith  and  disregards  entirely 

any  problems  of  the  epistemological  foundations  of  their  supposed  ‘scientific’ 
activities* 

It  should  be  noticed  that  all  existing  mathematical  schools  accept  implicitly 
at  least,  A  dementahsm  and  do  not  challenge  identity,  a  principle  which  happens 
to  be  mvambly  false  to  facts  and  which  therefore  should  be  entirely  abolished. 

J,  .e  above  classification  suggests  that,  in  spite  of  great  achievements  in 
the  field  of  mathematical  foundations,  no  school  can  expect  to  be  convincing 
or  accepted  by  other  schools  as  long  as  we  all  flounder  in  the  A  and  el  ambigu¬ 
ities  which  prevent  any  possibility  of  agreement.  It  becomes  obvious  also  that 
when  a  A  and  non-el  system  is  formulated  it  will  necessitate  a  new  paradox-free 

oundation  for  mathematics  and  so  a  new  school  of  mathematics  will  arise  which 
may  be  called : 

6)  The  general  semantic,  non-aristotelian,  non-ekmentalistic  school  of  mathe¬ 
matics.  It  is  premature  to  give  the  names  of  the  leading  pioneers  in  this  field 
at  present. 

described  by  the  term  non-aristotelian,  yet  still  elementalistic  'logic’. 

b?vv-raiu^u  uCv 

‘logic’  is  better 

A  PHYSICO-MATHEMATICAL  RIGOUR 

In  a  ^-system,  the  ‘logical1  problems  of  freedom  from  contradiction  become 
also  semantic  problems  of  one-valued  meanings  made  possible  only  under  oo- 
valued,  A,  non-el  general  semantics,  and  the  recognition  of  the  A  muUiordinality 
of  terms  , .  A  A -system  introduces  some  fundamental  innovations,  such  as  com¬ 
pletely  rejecting  identity,  elementalism  .  ,  and  becomes  based  on  tn.o  structure 
and  order,  ard  so  ultimately  becomes  non-el.  The  A,  (3 +1) -dimensional  el, 
(in  the  main)  intensional  system  becomes  a  four-dimensional,  non-el ,  (in  the 
main)  extensional  system.  In  such  a  system  we  cannot  use  the  formulations  of 
elementaUstic  ‘logics’  and  ‘psychologies’,  but  must  have  A,  non-el  general 
semantics ,  which  when  generalized  become  an  entirely  general  discipline  ap¬ 
plicable  to  all  life,  as  well  as  to  generalized  mathematics.  For  the  above  reasons 
I  shall  use  the  word  ‘logic’,  in  its  el  sense,  with  quotation  marks;  and  use  the 
term  general  semantics  for  a  non-el,  A  discipline  corresponding  to  the  el,  A 
or  A  ‘logics’. 

Investigations  show  that  the  primitive  man  (and  the  ‘mentally’  ill)  use 
one-valued  semantics  which  have  left  more  or  less  marked  traces  in  all  of  us, 
reflected  even  in  science  and  mathematics.  The  elimination  of  these  primitive 
traces  clears  the  foundation  for  an  adult  civilization,  a  theory  of  sanity,  and  the 
elimination  of  the  scientific  and  mathematical  paradoxes. 

To  assume  that  because  a  many-valued  ‘logic’  has  been  produced,  all  the 
problems  of  mathematical  infinity,  irrational  numbers,  continuity,  mathematical 
induction,  validity  of  mathematical  proof,  mathematical  existence  .  ,  have  been 
solved,  would  be  a  mistake.  The  aim  of  the  present  paper  is  to  analyse  some  of 
the  fundamental  complexities  produced  by  the  unconscious  operation  of  the 
one-valued  semantic  identification  concealed  in  the  formulation  of  the  ‘law  of 
identity’,  which  have  escaped  notice  until  now,  and  which  would  make  the 
application  of  a  many-valued  'logic'  or  oo-valued  semantics  and  agreement 
impossible.  Here,  as  in  the  E  and  $  systems,  only  the  most  general  formula¬ 
tions  help  us  to  discriminate  between  the  particular  cases,  and  so  to  eliminate 
the  undesirable  traces  of  one-valued  semantics  by  building  a  ^-system,  of 
which  the  A  and  pre-A  represent  only  particular  cases. 

Let  me  recall  the  ‘philosophical  grammar’  of  our  language  which  we 
solemnly  call  the  ‘laws  of  thought',  as  given  by  Jevons:2 

1)  The  law  of  identity.  Whatever  is,  is. 

2)  The  law  of  contradiction.  Nothing  can  both  be,  and  not  be. 

3)  The  law  of  excluded  third.  Everything  must  either  be,  or  not  be. 

These  ‘laws’  have  different  ‘philosophical’  interpretations  which  help  very 

little  and  for  my  purpose  it  is  enough  to  emphasize  that:  (1)  The  second  ‘law’ 
represents  a  negative  statement  of  the  first,  and  the  third  represents  a  corollary 
of  the  former  two;  namely,  no  third  possible  between  two  contradictories. 
(2)  The  verb  ‘to  be’,  or  *is\  and  ‘identity’  play  a  most  fundamental  role  in 
these  formulations.  We  should  not  be  surprised  to  find  that  the  investigation 
of  these  terms  may  give  us  a  long  sought  solution.  Such  an  investigation  is 
very  laborious  and  difficult.  ‘The  complete  attempt  to  deal  with  the  term  is 
would  go  to  the  form  and  matter  of  everything  in  existence,  at  least,  if  not  to 

SUPPLEMENT  III 

the  possible  form  and  matter  of  all  that  does  not  exist,  but  might.  As  far  as 
it  could  be  done,  it  would  give  the  grand  Cyclopaedia,  and  its  yearly  supplement 
would  be  the  history  of  the  human  race  for  the  time’,  said  Augustus  de  Morgan 
in  his  Formal  Logic,  and  this  opinion  I  found  fully  justified. 

So  I  must  be  brief,  and  state  but  roughly,  that  in  the  Indo-european 
languages  the  verb  ‘to  be’  has  at  least  four  entirely  different  uses:  (1)  as  an 
auxiliary  verb,  ‘Smith  is  coming’;  (2)  as  the  ‘is’  of  predication,  ‘the  apple  is 
red’;  (3)  as  the  ‘is’  of  ‘existence’,  ‘I  am’;  (4)  as  the  ‘is’  of  identity,  ‘the  apple 
is  a  fruit.  The  fact  that  four  semantically  entirely  different  words  should 
have  one  sound  and  spelling  appears  as  a  genuine  tragedy  of  the  race;  the 
more  so  since  the  discrimination  between  their  uses  is  not  always  easy. 

The  researches  of  the  present  writer  have  shown  that  the  problems  involved 
are  very  complicated  and  cannot  be  solved  except  by  a  joint  study  of  mathe¬ 
matics,  mathematical  foundations,  history  of  mathematics,  ‘logic’,  ‘psychology’, 
anthropology,  psychiatry,  linguistics,  epistemology,  physics  and  its  history,’ 
colloidal  chemistry,  physiology,  and  neurology;  this  study  resulting  in  the 
discovery  of  a  general  semantic  mechanism  underlying  human  behaviour, 
many  new  interrelations  and  formulations,  culminating  in  a  ^[-system.  This 
semantic  mechanism  appears  as  a  general  psychophysiological  mechanism  based 
on  four-dimensional  order,  present  and  abused  in  all  of  us,  the  primitive  man, 
the  infant,  the  ‘mentally’  ill,  and  the  genius  not  excluded.  It  gives  us  an  ex¬ 
tremely  simple  means  of  training  our  s.r,  which  can  be  applied  even  in  elementary 
education. 

The  scientific  problems  in¬ 

(a) 

volved  are  very  extensive  and 

Paris 

Dresden 

Warsaw 

can  be  dealt  with  only  in  a  large 

* 

* 

* 

volume.  Here  I  am  able  to  give 

(b) 

only  a  very  sketchy  summary 

Dresden 

Paris 

Warsaw 

without  empirical  data,  omit¬ 

* 

* 

* 

ting  niceties  and  technicalities. 

If  we  consider  an  actual  territory  (a)  say,  Paris,  Dresden,  Warsaw,  and 
build  up  a  map  (b)  in  which  the  order  of  these  cities  would  be  represented  as 
Dresden,  Paris,  Warsaw;  to  travel  by  such  a  map  would  be  misguiding,  wasteful 
of  effort ,  .  In  case  of  emergencies,  it  might  be  seriously  harmful ,  .  We  could 
say  that  such  a  map  was  ‘not  true’.  ,  or  that  the  map  had  a  structure  not  similar 
to  the  territory,  structure  to  be  defined  in  terms  of  relations  and  multi¬ 
dimensional  order.  We  should  notice  that: 

A)  A  map  may  have  a  structure  similar  or  dissimilar  to  the  structure 

of  the  territory.  ^ 

B)  Two  similar  structures  have  similar  ‘logical’  characteristics.  Thus,  if 

in  a  correct  map,  Dresden  is  given  as  between  Paris  and  Warsaw,  a  similar 
relation  is  found  in  the  actual  territory.  ^2) 

C)  A  map  is  not  the  territory.  p) 

A  PHYSICO-MATHEMATICAL  RIGOUR 

75 1 

D)  An  ideal  map  would  contain  the  map  of  the  map,  the  map  of  the  map 
of  the  map  .  ,  endlessly.  This  characteristic  was  first  discovered  by  Royce. 
We  may  call  it  self-reflexiveness.  (4) 

Languages  share  with  the  map  the  above  four  characteristics. 

A)  Languages  have  structure,  thus  we  may  have  languages  of  elementalistic 

structure  such  as  ‘space’  and  ‘time’,  ‘observer’  and  ‘observed’,  ‘body’  and  ‘soul’, 
‘senses’  and  ‘mind’,  ‘intellect’  and  ‘emotions’,  ‘thinking’  and  ‘feeling’,  ‘thought’ 
and  ‘intuition’.  ,  which  allow  verbal  division  or  separation.  Or  we  may  have 
languages  of  non-elementalistic  structure  such  as,  ‘space- time’,  the  new  quantum 
languages,  ‘time-binding’,  ‘different  order  abstractions’,  ‘semantic  reactions’.  , 
which  do  not  involve  verbal*  division  or  separation  .  ;  also  mathematical 
languages  of  ‘order’,  ‘relation’,  ‘structure’,  ‘function’,  ‘variable’,  ‘invariant’, 
‘difference’,  ‘addition’,  ‘division’.  ,  which  apply  to  ‘senses’  and  ‘mind’,  that  is, 
can  be  ‘seen’  and  ‘thought  of’,  .  (5) 

B)  If  we  use  languages  of  a  structure  non-similar  to  the  world  and  our 

nervous  system,  our  verbal  predictions  are  not  verified  empirically,  we  cannot 
be  ‘rational’  or  adjusted  , .  We  would  have  to  copy  the  animals  in  their  wasteful 
and  painful  ‘trial  and  error’  performances,  as  we  have  done  all  through  human 
history.  In  science  we  would  be  handicapped  by  semantic  blockages,  lack  of 
creativeness,  lack  of  understanding,  lack  of  vision,  disturbed  by  inconsistencies, 
paradoxes  ,  .  (6) 

C)  Words  are  not  the  things  they  represent.  (7) 

D)  Language  also  has  self-reflexive  characteristics.  We  use  language  to 

speak  about  language,  which  fact  introduces  serious  verbal  and  semantic 
difficulties,  solved  by  the  theory  of  multiordinality.  (8) 

The  above  unusually  simple  considerations  lead  to  unexpectedly  far- 
reaching  consequences. 

A)  From  (7)— it  follows  that  the  objective  levels  which  include  the  events, 

ordinary  objects,  objective  actions,  processes,  immediate  feelings,  ‘instincts’, 
‘ideas’,  s,r  in  general .  ,  represent  un-speakable  levels,  are  not  words .  (9) 

B)  From  (9) — that  the  use  of  the  ‘is’  of  identity ,  as  applied  to  objective, 

un-speakable  levels,  appears  invariably  structurally  false  to  facts  and  must  be 
entirely  abandoned.  Whatever  we  might  say  a  happening  ‘is’,  it  is  not:  (10) 

C)  From  (10) — structure  appears  as  the  only  possible  link  between  the 

obj ecti ve,  un-speakable,  and  the  verbal  levels.  (11) 

D)  From  (11) — the  only  possible  ‘content  of  knowledge’  becomes 

exclusively  structural .  (12) 

E)  From  (12) — the  only  aim  of  ‘knowledge’  and  science  appears  as  the 

empirical  search  for,  and  verbal  formulation  of,  structure.  (13) 

F)  The  only  method  for  acquiring  ‘knowledge’  is  found  in  an  empirical 
investigation  of  the  potentially  unknown  structure  of  the  world,  ourselves 
included,  only  afterwards  adjusting  the  structure  of  languages  so  that  they 
would  be  similar,  and  so  of  maximum  usefulness;  instead  of  the  delusional 

SUPPLEMENT  III 

reversed  order  of  ascribing  to  the  world  the  structure  of  an  inherited  primitive 
language.  (Uj 

G)  The  investigation  of  the  potentially  known  structure  of  languages  in 
which  we  predict  and  then  verify  the  predictions  empirically,  appears  as  an 
important  method  for  the  discovery  of  the  structure  of  the  world.  (15) 

H)  Investigations  disclose  that  all  A ,  el  languages  and  disciplines  built 
on  them  (older  'psychologies',  'logics'.,  and,  based  on  them,  economics, 
sociology,  politics,  ‘ethics’.  ,  reflected  in  turn  in  our  institutions,  systems . , ) 
are  not  structurally  similar  to  the  world  and  our  nervous  system,  as  they 
verbally  divide  what  empirically  cannot  be  divided.  Under  such  conditions 
neither  a  higher  grade  civilization,  nor  general  sanity,  nor  paradox-free  science 
and  mathematics  are  possible.  In  el  languages,  our  verbal  predictions  are  not 
verified  empirically,  and  not  being  able  to  foresee  we  must  proceed  by  animal* 
istic  ‘trial  and  error’. 

I)  Mathematics  appears  as  a  very  limited  but  the  only  language  in 
existence,  in  the  main  similar  in  structure  to  the  world  around  us  and  the 

nervous  system. 

J)  From  the  study  of  mathematics,  mathematical  physics,  and  physics, 

we  learn,  and  will  continue  to  learn,  the  fundamentals  of  m.o  structure.  It  is 
no  mystery  that  all  chemistry  has  become  a  branch  of  physics,  all  physics  can 
be  made  a  branch  of  geometry,  all  geometry  a  part  of  analysis,  and  all  analysis 
a  part  of  general  semantics.  The  present  work  shows  that  the  analysis  of  all 
human  problems  of  daily  life  or  science  becomes  dependent  on  general  semantics 
which  on  the  verbal  levels  becomes  generalized  mathematics.  Thus  mathe¬ 
matics,  mathematical  physics,  and  physics  become  the  most  important 
disciplines  from  which  we  learn  most  about  structure, — the  only  ‘content  of 
knowledge*.  ^g^ 

K)  The  older  el  ‘psychologies’  and  ‘logics’  for  their  maximum  usefulness 
must  be  transformed  into  unified  non-el  psycho-logics  and  general  semantics, 
possible  only  after  studying  all  forms  of  human  behaviour,  mathematics 
included. 

L)  The  study  of  mathematics  as  a  form  of  human  behaviour,  appears 
necessary  prior  to  the  possibility  of  formulating  any  laws  of  semantics.  (20) 

M)  The  problem  of  mathematical  foundations  do  not  belong  to  mathe¬ 

matics  but  to  psycho-logics  which  would  not  disregard  anthropology,  and 
would  not  be  vitiated  by  our  persistence  in  the  use  of  structurally  inappropriate 
el  ‘psychologies’,  'logics’,  and  an  innocence  of  mathematics.  (21) 

N)  The  intuitional’  and  the  'intuitional’  formalist  schools  of  mathematics 

must  be  considered  as  a  legitimate,  yet  not  properly  formulated,  protest 
against  the  older  elementalism.  (22) 

O)  The  general  semantic  school  will  represent  the  non-el  and  A  school 

of  mathematics.  (23) 

P)  The  present  crisis  of  mathematics  ultimately  depends  on  the  meanings 
and  use  of  a  few  terms  such  as  ‘all’,  ‘there  is',  ‘infinite’.  ,  which  solution  depends 
on  a  non-el  theory  of  meanings,  which  ultimately  can  be  solved  by  transforming 

A  PHYSICO-MATHEMATICAL  RIGOUR 

what  might  be  called  the  (3  +  l)-dimensional  el ,  ^-system,  which  divides 
‘space*  and  ‘time*.  ,  (an  attitude  which  is  carried  all  through  the  system), 
into  a  four-dimensional  non-elf  A  -system  (an  attitude  which  is  also  carried  all 
through  the  system).  (24) 

Q)  From  (8) — it  follows  that  statements  about  statements  represent 

results  of  new  neurological  processes,  that  their  content  varies,  and  that  we 
must  discriminate  and  not  identify  these  different  meanings.  In  other  words, 
only  through  consciousness  of  abstracting  which  represents  the  most  general 
s.r  of  discrimination,  or  the  elimination  of  identification,  can  we  assign  single 
values  to  words  which  have  an  essentially  many- valued  character.  Identification 
confuses  these  many  meanings  into  one.  (25) 

R)  We  must  differentiate  between  descriptive  and  inferential  words  and 

phrases,  and  never  use  inferential  terms  as  descriptive,  without  realizing  that 
we  are  doing  so.  (26) 

S)  Certain  words  or  phrases  used  to  speak  about  languages,  such  as  ‘all 
statements',  ‘proposition  about  all  propositions’.  ,  lead  to  self-contradictions. 
We  cannot  speak  about  ‘all’  propositions  without  some  limitations,  if  we 
proceed  introducing  new  propositions.  Even  St.  Paul  felt  the  necessity  for 
limiting  the  values  of  ‘all’.*  We  are  compelled  to  introduce  some  equivalents 
to  the  biblical  ‘illegitimate  totalities’  or  the  theory  of  types  of  Russell.  (27) 

T)  Analysis  finds  that  certain  of  the  most  important  terms  we  use;  such 
as,  ‘yes’,  ‘no’,  ‘true’,  ‘false’,  ‘all’,  ‘fact’,  ‘reality’,  ‘existence’,  ‘definition’,  ‘rela¬ 
tion’,  ‘structure’,  ‘order’,  ‘number’,  ‘is’,  ‘has’,  ‘there  is’,  ‘variable’,  ‘infinite’, 
‘abstraction’,  ‘property’,  ‘meaning’,  ‘value’,  ‘love’,  ‘hate’,  ‘knowing’,  ‘doubt’.  ,  .  , 
may  apply  to  all  verbal  levels  and  in  each  particular  case  may  have  a  different 
content  or  meanings  and  so  in  general  no  single  content  or  meaning .  I  call  such 
terms  multiordinal  terms  (m.o).  The  definition  of  such  terms  is  always  given 
in  other  m.o  terms  preserving  their  fundamental  multiordinality.  In  other 
words,  a  m.o  term  represents  a  many-valued  term.  If  the  many  values  are 
identified,  or  disregarded,  or  confused,  we  treat  a  fundamentally  many- valued 
term  as  one-valued,  and  we  must  have  every  kind  of  paradox  through  such  an 
identification.  All  known  paradoxes  in  mathematics  and  life  can  be  manu¬ 
factured  by  the  disregard  of  this  fundamental  multiordinality.  Vice  versa,  by 
formulating  the  general  semantic  problem  of  multiordinality  we  gain  means 
to  discriminate  between  the  many  meanings  and  so  assign  a  single  meaning 
in  a  given  context.  A  m.o  term  represents  a  variable  in  general,  and  becomes 
constant  or  one-valued  in  a  given  context,  its  value  being  given  by  that  context. 
Here  we  find  the  main  importance  of  the  semantic  fact  established  by 
Skarzenski,**  that  the  ‘logical’  freedom  from  contradiction  becomes  a  semantic 

♦Professor  Cassius  J.  Keyser  drew  my  attention  to  a  passage  in  the  first  letter 
of  St.  Paul  to  the  Corinthians,  Chapter  15,  line  27.  ‘For  he  hath  put  all  things 
under  his  feet.  But  when  he  saith  all  things  are  put  under  him,  it  is  manifest  that 
he  is  excepted,  which  did  put  all  things  under  him.’  Italics  are  mine. 

♦♦Quoted  by  Chwistek  in  his  Neue  Grundlagen  der  Logic  und  Mathematik . 

SUPPLEMENT  III 

problem  of  one-value.  But  for  application  we  must  have  a  four-dimensional, 
non-elr  At  extensional  system,  based  on  structure  .  ,  and  the  complete  elimina¬ 
tion  of  identity.  (28) 

U)  That  the  disregard  of  multiordinality,  orders  of  abstractions,  may  lead 

to  identification  and  therefore  false  evaluation  resulting  in  disagreement  and 
maladjustment.  (29) 

V)  From  (25-29) — it  follows  that  identification  or  confusion  of  higher 

order  abstractions  must  be  eliminated.  Because  of  (7,  9,  10,  25-29)— all 
identification  must  be  eliminated.  (30) 

W)  The  elimination  of  identification  on  all  levels,  or  a  complete  and 
