
unconscious  discrimination  between  different  orders  of  abstractions,  including 
as  a  special  important  case  the  multiordinality  of  terms,  results  in  general 
consciousness  of  abstracting  which  in  turn,  solves  the  paradoxes  of  life  and 
mathematics  and  leads  to  generalized  mathematics  along  the  lines  suggested 
by  Chwistek.  (31) 

X)  The  realization  of  the  inherent  multiordinality  of  some  of  the  most 

important  terms  we  have,  gives  us  an  enormous  flexibility  of  language.  It 
makes  the  number  of  our  words  indefinitely  great.  When  both  the  writer  and 
the  reader  recognize  this  multiordinality,  and  look  for  the  meaning  in  the 
context  and  discriminate  between  the  orders  of  abstractions,  indicated  by  the 
context,  confusion  becomes  impossible.  (32) 

Y)  The  test  for  multiordinality  is  simple.  We  take  any  statement  and 

test  it  to  see  whether  a  given  term  applies  to  it.  Then  we  make  a  statement 
about  this  statement  and  again  test  if  this  term  applies  to  the  new  higher  order 
statement.  If  it  does,  the  given  term  must  be  considered  multiordinal,  because 
this  procedure  may  be  repeated  indefinitely.  (33) 

Z)  The  complete  elimination  of  identification  does  not  allow  us  to  use  the 

term  ‘is’  of  identity,  and  so  we  must  use  operational,  functional,  actional, 
behaviouristic  .  ,  languages,  requiring  new  attitudes  and  new  s.r,  impossible 
without  the  formulation  of  a  ^-system.  (34) 

Zi)  The  s.r  of  those  who  produced  the  general  theory  of  relativity,  the 
unified  field  theory,  the  new  quantum  mechanics,  the  new  revision  of  the 
foundation  of  mathematics  .  ,  depend  on  new  At  non-el ,  and  non-identity, 
operational,  actional .  ,  attitudes.  (35) 

Z2)  As  the  A -system  is  based  on  the  general  elimination  of  the  ‘is’  of 
identity,  or  on  ‘is  not’,  it  is  impossible  to  reject  these  premises  without  pro¬ 
ducing  impossible  data,  and  a  theory  of  agreement  ‘in  a  finite  period’  then 
becomes  a  possibility.  (36) 

Z3)  The  old  ‘unknowable’  becomes  abolished  and  limited  to  the  simple 
and  natural  fact  that  the  objective  levels  are  not  words.  (37) 

Observation  and  experience,  scientific  and  otherwise,  show  that  in  nature 
we  find  a  definite  order,  which  establishes  a  natural  order;  namely,  that  the 
sub-microscopic  process,  called  the  event  or  the  scientific  object,  came  first; 
only  later  abstracting  organisms  happened  and  objects  which  represent  the 
results  of  abstracting  by  amoebas  or  men,  came  next.  In  the  process  of  evolution 

A  PHYSICO-MATHEMATICAL  RIGOUR 

we  find  object  first,  label  next.  Descriptions  first,  inferences  next.  The  above 
natural  order  establishes  also  a  natural  order  of  evaluation.  Proper  evaluation 
becomes  the  foundation  for  survival,  non-el  s.r;  the  more  so  since  evaluation 
requires  asymmetrical  relations  of  ‘more’  or  ‘less*.  ,  impossible  to  handle 
properly  in  an  A  -system.  Thus  the  most  important  level  is  represented  by 
the  sub-microscopic  processes.  What  the  organism  needs  is  not  the  three- 
dimensional  shadow  of  a  four-dimensional  event,  not  the  abstraction  of  low 
order  produced  by  our  nervous  systems,  called  the  object,  but  the  sub- 
microscopic  dynamic  processes  without  which  the  desired  end-results  would 
not  happen.  The  animal,  the  primitive,  the  infant,  the  ignorant  man  identify 
the  two;  live  in  a  delusional  world.  Similarly  the  objective  levels  are  more 
important  than  the  verbal  levels,  and  descriptions  are  more  important  than 
inferences.  If  we  identify  any  orders  while  the  natural  order  is  established  by 
the  asymmetrical  relation  of  ‘more’,  the  semantic  process  of  evaluation  is 
reversed  and  appears  pathological  in  different  degrees.  If  n>6  and  we  make 
them  delusionally  equal  in  value  (identify),  then,  in  the  false-to-fact  relation 
a=  b  we  have  either  over-evaluated  the  right-hand  side  or  under-evaluated  the 
left-hand  side;  in  both  cases  reversing  the  natural  order  of  evaluation.  It  is 
important  to  notice  that  by  basing  our  s.r  on  a  natural  order  of  evaluation, 
general  semantics  become  a  generalized  science  of  order  and  values,  a  very 
secure  guide  in  life,  indispensable  for  sanity,  as  experiments  have  shown,  and 
include  also  generalized  mathematics. 

Another  very  serious  mechanism  of  identification  is  found  in  language. 

A)  Thus  we  have  only  one  name ,  say  ‘apple’  for  the:  (a)  un-speakable, 

un-eatable  event  or  scientific  process;  (6)  the  un-speakable  but  eatable  abstrac¬ 
tion  of  low  order,  the  object;  (c)  the  un-speakable  and  un-eatable  ‘mental’ 
picture,  or  higher  order  abstraction,  on  semantic  levels;  (d)  and  for  a  definition 
on  verbal  levels.  (38) 

B)  The  multiordinality  of  terms  was  not  discovered  until  1925  and  is  still 

generally  unknown.  It  presents  a  serious  difficulty  facilitating,  perhaps  even 
necessitating,  identification  unless  prevented  by  special  formulations  and 
training.  Multiordinal  terms  sound  and  look  alike  on  all  levels;  experience 
has  shown  how  easy  it  is  to  confuse  their  orders  and  identify  the  many  values 
into  one.  (39) 

C)  The  differentiation  between  descriptions  and  inferences,  and  particu¬ 

larly  between  descriptive  and  inferential  words  as  such,  is  also  novel,  and  was, 
until  the  present  Z -system  was  formulated,  largely  disregarded,  which  again 
led  to  identifications  and  false  evaluations.  (40) 

Investigations  show,  that  in  all  known  primitive  peoples  and  in  the 
‘mentally*  ill,  we  find  literal  identification  of  different  orders  of  abstractions, 
which  accounts  for  these  semantic  states.  Even  their  ‘perceptions’  are  different 
from  those  of  the  so-called  ‘normal’,  ‘civilized’  man,  because  higher  order 
abstractions  are  projected  and  identified  with  lower  order  abstractions.  They 
identify  or  ascribe  one  value  to  essentially  many-valued  different  orders  of 

SUPPLEMENT  III 

abstractions  and  so  become  impervious  to  contradictions  with  'reality*  and 
impervious  also  to  higher  order  experience. 

The  infant,  and  the  rest  of  us,  identify  a  great  deal  because  of  the  reasons 
given  above.  Investigations  show  that  most  of  human  difficulties,  public, 
private,  or  scientific  are  due  to  this  A  s.r,  which  accounts  for  the  infantile  state 
of  our  commercial  so-called  civilization.  Identification  abolishes  the  natural 
order  of  evaluation,  but  so  does  also  an  unconscious  assumption  of  an  ‘infinite 
velocity*  of  a  process.  The  A  trilogy  involved  some  fanciful  'infinity*  assump¬ 
tions.  Thus  in  the  ^-system  the  velocity  of  nerve  currents,  which  is  known 
to  be  126  metres  per  second  in  the  human  nervous  system,  is  at  present  assumed 
unconsciously  as  'infinite*,  made  evident  by  the  elementalism  of  'intellect*  or 
‘emotions’.  ,  as  something  'by  themselves*  and  detached.  In  the  jE-system 
the  length  of  a  line,  the  space  constant,  and  the  natural  unit  of  length  were 
assumed  'infinite*.  In  the  JV-system  the  velocity  of  light,  known  to  be  finite, 
was  unconsciously  assumed  to  be  ‘infinite*.  In  the  A  trilogy  these  unjustified 
or  meaningless  'infinities*  have  been  eliminated.  'Infinite  velocity'  of  a  process 
has  no  meaning .  It  represents  only  a  play  upon  symbols.  Velocity  is  defined 
as  v—s/t.  If  we  assume  /— 0  and  write  v=s/0~oot  this  ‘velocity*  lacks  one  of 
the  fundamental  factors  of  its  definition;  namely,  t,  and  so  such  an  expression 
ceases  to  define  anything  at  all  and  has  no  meaning,  although  it  may  be  a 
symbol  for  a  semantic  disturbance.  But  the  results  of  such  delusional  s.r  are 
far  reaching,  no  matter  how  mild  they  might  be  in  degree.  In  a  process  propa¬ 
gated  with  'infinite*  velocity  there  would  be  no  transition  or  delay  in  action, 
and  therefore  such  a  process  would  not  be  ordered .  Vice  versa,  the  disregard  of 
order  in  our  observations  must  introduce  some  mythological  'infinities*  some¬ 
where.  So  we  see  that  the  semantic  process  of  identification  is  intimately 
connected  with  'infinity*  assumptions,  both  abolishing  order.  Training  in  natural 
order  trains  s.r  away  from  delusional  evaluation,  abolishes  pathological  identi¬ 
fication  of  different  degrees  and  fanciful  'infinities’. 

Thus  we  see  that  the  problems  of  mathematical  'infinity*  are  extremely 
complex  and  involve  many  fundamental  considerations  never  analysed  before 
in  connection  with  the  semantic  process  of  identification.  Once  these  problems 
are  analysed  and  formulated  from  a  A,  non-elr  structural  point  of  view  the 
problems  of  'excluded  third*  become  secondary  in  importance,  easily  managed 
under  the  creative  freedom  of  the  coveted  ‘consciousness  of  abstracting*. 

Let  me  recall  for  continuity,  that  the  mathematicians  recognize  at  present, 
two  kinds  of  'infinities*.  One  with  which  we  are  familiar  from  our  school  days, 
symbolized  by  oo,  Cantor  calls  ‘potential*  infinity  and  defines  as  a  variable 
finite,  the  misunderstanding  of  which  introduces  paradoxes  even  in  high  schools; 
the  other,  the  'actual*  infinity,  which  introduces  paradoxes  in  universities. 
All  these  paradoxes  are  due,  as  the  present  enquiry  shows,  to  fundamental 
fallacies  in  connection  with  semantic  processes  of  identification  which  we  learn 
at  home  and  in  elementary  schools. 

The  process  of  identification  of  different  orders  of  abstractions  may  be 
due  to  pathological  conditions,  to  ignorance,  to  ‘thoughtlessness’,  to  lack  of 

A  PHYSICO-MATHEMATICAL  RIGOUR 

observation,  to  unconscious  false  assumptions,  to  hastiness,  to  superficiality, 
to  habits  of  speech,  to  the  structure  of  language  used  ,  .  In  fact,  under  the 
A -system  it  is  practically  impossible  to  avoid  it,  as  we  can  witness  it  in  such  a 
comparatively  advanced  field  as  mathematics.  The  label  ‘identification’  is 
applied  to  the  semantic  process  of  wrong  evaluation  going  on  inside  of  our 
skins  on  the  un-speakable  objective  levels,  when  we  are  not  aware  of  the 
differences  between  different  orders  of  abstractions.  When  making  it  conscious, 
we  may  speak  of  the  confusion  of  the  orders  of  abstractions.  To  make  such  a 
process  conscious,  we  must  train  in  the  differentiation  or  discrimination  between 
different  orders  of  abstractions,  and  distinguish  the  different  orders  by  actually 
learning  how  to  order  them.  Such  training  results  in  general  consciousness  of 
abstracting  which  is  not  inborn,  nor  fully  acquired,  even  in  university  training, 
but  which  requires  special  training.  Experiments  in  this  field  are  extremely 
encouraging;  in  a  number  of  cases,  pathological  individuals  have  become 
‘normal’  and  the  ‘unchangeable’  human  nature  has  been  actually  changed. 
Infantile  reactions  in  adults  are  abolished ,  and  this  training  becomes  a  general 
and  simple  method  for  prevention  of  future  semantic  disturbances  of  false 
evaluation  which  must  result  in  maladjustment. 

To  stop  identification  we  must  discriminate  or  differentiate  to  the  limit 
between  what  appears  always  as  four-dimensional,  absolute  individual  stages 
of  processes  and  situations  on  all  levels,  verbal  included.  Let  us  follow  briefly 
such  an  actual  performance.  If  we  realize  (7) — we  accept  (11-15) — and  on 
structural  grounds  reject  the  elementalism  of  the  A  trilogy  as  expressed  in  its 
‘psychology’,  ‘logic’,  the  division  of  ‘space’  and  ‘time’,  .  We  accept  the  non- 
elementalism  of  the  A  trilogy  as  expressed  in  the  new  terms  in  the  present 
work  and  accept  also  ‘space-time’, .  The  difference  is  very  serious  in  all  fields, 
when  carried  consistently  all  through  the  system.  As  we  actually  deal  with 
four-dimensional  dynamic  processes  which  must  be  considered  continually 
different,  and  with  world  conditions  changing  also  continually,  statements 
about  such  structural  conditions,  in  an  extensional  sense,  must  be  considered 
as  involving  variables,  generating  propositional  functions,  doctrinal  or  system- 
functions,  funktors  ,  .  But  propositional  functions*  which  involve  variables, 
are  neither  ‘true’  nor  ‘false*,  but  ambiguous,  and  to  have  a  proposition  we 
must  assign  a  value  to  the  variable  by  at  least  permanently,  in  principle, 
assigning  a  date  to  it.  We  must  also  introduce,  in  principle,  and  as  a  semantic 
attitude,  numerical  subscripts  to  our  words.  Thus  ‘apple’  in  the  A  -system 
represents  a  name  attached  to  an  intensional  definition ,  and  space-time  con¬ 
siderations  do  not  enter.  The  term  is  applied  to  a  definition  which  might  be 
considered  as  one-valued  and  permanent.  Now  obviously  such  a  language  and 
s.r  are  structurally  non-similar  to  the  world  and  our  nervous  system. 

If  we  try  to  identify  a  name  for  a  definition,  implying  permanence,  with 
the  objective  level  which  is  made  up  of  absolute  individuals,  and  represents 
ever-changing  processes,  we  must  live  in  a  delusional  world  in  which  we  should 
expect  every  kind  of  paradoxes  and  psycho-logical  shocks. 

SUPPLEMENT  III 

In  a  ^-system,  for  structural  reasons,  we  must  retain  the  general  implica¬ 
tions  of  the  term ‘apple’,  so  we  retain  the  word.  We  must  make  our  language 
extensional  in  principle,  and  the  name  ‘apple’  an  individual  name ,  by  calling 
it  applei ,  apple2  ,  .  The  combination  of  letters  ‘a-p-p-l-e’  implying  similarities, 
the  subscripts  1,  2  .  ,  implying  individual  differences,  which  automatically 
prevent  identification.  But  this  is  not  enough.  Our  ‘applei’  represents  a  name 
applied  to  an  object  and  a  process;  its  meaning  becomes  only  one-valued  when 
we  assign  to  it  at  least  a  definite  date.  Thus  the  objective  ‘apple!  {D  j  193l  ’ 
may  be  a  very  appetizing  affair,  and  ‘applei  (Jan.  1932,’  an  un-edible  wet  splash, 
it  should  be  noticed  that  the  fundamental  difference  between  the  A  and  A 
systems  turns  out  to  be  a  difference  of  semantic  attitudes.  The  scientific  facts 
are  not  changed.  The  ‘apple’  of  ‘Adam’  or  our  own  did  not  differ  in  essential 
characteristics  under  discussion.  In  both  the  A  and  A  systems  we  actually 
deal,  in  principle,  with  many-valued  processes.  The  important  problem  is  to 
adjust  the  structure  of  our  verbal  processes  to  the  structure  of  the  world; 
hence  a  ^-system  must  be  made  extensional,  non-el ,  four-dimensional,.’ 
Here  once  more,  as  in  general  semantics,  the  ascribing  of  one  value  (or  at  least 
limited  to  a  small  range  of  values  in  practice),  in  a  given  situation  (context), 
e  immates  paradoxes  and  contradictions  on  the  older  ‘logical’  grounds.  We 
should  notice  that  the  multiordinal  terms  must  be  considered  as  names  for 
many-valued  s.r ,  depending  upon  the  order  of  abstractions;  hence  the  name 
multzordznal .  Names  for  happenings  on  the  objective  levels  apply  to  many¬ 
valued  processes  but  should  not  be  considered  multiordinal.  All  the  psycho¬ 
logies  of  the  differential  calculus,  ‘space-time’,  enter  here,  yet  the  whole  field 
is  covered  semantically  if  we  entirely  abandon  the  ‘is’  of  identity.  Instead  of 
training  in  ‘allness’  and  ‘isness’— ‘this  is  this’,  we  shall  train  in  non-allness, 
and  non-isness— ‘this  zs  not  this’,  in  connection  with  a  special  diagram  called 
the  Structural  Differential. 

.  ExPerience  and  experiments  show  that  the  above  seems  essential  for 
sanity.  It  is  interesting  to  notice  that  mathematics  has  produced  a  language 
similar  in  structure  to  the  human  nervous  system.  Roughly  the  central  part 
of  the  brain  which  we  call  the  thalamus  is  directly  connected  with  the  dynamic 
world  through  our  ‘senses'  and  with  those  semantic  manifestations  which  we 
usually  call  ‘affective’,  ‘emotions’.  ,  all  of  which  manifest  themselves  as  dynamic. 
The  cortex  which  gives  us  the  static  verbal  reactions  and  definitions,  is  not 
connected  with  the  outside  world  directly  but  receives  all  impulses  through 
the  thalamus.  On  semantic  levels  the  thalamus  can  only  deal  with  dynamic 
material,  the  cortex  with  static.  Obviously  for  the  optimum  working  of  the 
human  nervous  system,  which  represents  a  cyclic  chain,  where  the  lower  centres 
supply  the  material  for  the  higher  centres  and  the  higher  centres  should  influence 
the  lower,  we  must  have  means  to  translate  the  static  into  dynamic  and  the 
dynamic  into  static;  a  method  supplied  exclusively  by  mathematics. 

With  the  above  considerations  we  must  discriminate  between  our  semantic 
capacities  for  infinite  divisibility  of  finites,  and  for  the  generation  of  infinite 
postulated  processes  which  by  definition  cannot  be  exhausted .  If  we  use  a  three- 

A  PHYSICO-MATHEMATICAL  RIGOUR 

dimensional  A  language  and  apply  such  an  ‘all’  to  such  an  infinite  process  then 
we  simply  produce  a  self-contradiction.  If  we  apply  to  such  a  semantic  process 
a  four-dimensional  ‘all  with  a  date’,  then  we  have  arrested,  for  the  ‘time’  being, 
the  process,  or  taken  a  static  cross  section  of  the  infinite  process  at  that  date; 
but  then  we  deal  with  a  finite.  Once  we  are  constantly  conscious  of  abstracting 
in  different  orders,  these  subtle  differences  become  quite  clear  and  the  solutions 
of  the  problems  of  infinity  follow  a  similar  path  as  the  older  problems  of  the 
‘infinitesimal’,  which  also  was  self-contradictory,  unnecessary  for  mathematics. 
When  treated  as  a  variable  finite  it  was  satisfactory  and  sufficient,  and  has 
proven  to  be  a  most  creative  notion  in  mathematics.  In  the  problems  of  the 
irrational,  continuity .  ,  similar  subtle  identifications  or  non-discriminations 
of  el ,  At  three-dimensional  terms  with  At  non-el ,  four-dimensional  terms 
occur,  which  once  eliminated,  clear  up  not  only  the  paradoxes,  but  some  self¬ 
contradictory,  often  unconscious,  postulates  of  some  parts  of  mathematics. 

Lack  of  space  does  not  allow  me  to  go  into  further  details,  except  to  suggest 
how  some  subtle  discriminations  may  help  to  eliminate  identification.  In  my 
A -system  the  differentiation  between  orders  of  abstractions  on  physiological 
grounds,  the  introduction  of  multiordinality  of  terms,  four-dimensional  con¬ 
siderations  .  ,  as  a  structural  necessity  for  all  languages,  makes  the  theory  of 
types  unnecessary. 

For  a  better  understanding  of  the  present  work  we  must  at  least 
differentiate: 

A)  Between  numerical  experience  and  mathematics. 

B)  Between  languages  with  content  and  languages  without  content. 

C)  Between  creative  building  of  verbal  schemes  which,  for  the  sake  of 
generality,  have  no  content,  called  pure  mathematics,  and  the  application  of 
these  schemes  to  actual  problems,  with  content,  called  applied  mathematics. 

D)  Between  the  contentless  mathematics  and  the  investigation  of  the 
foundation  of  mathematics  which  represents  the  investigation  of  the  s.r  of 
mathematicians  and  belongs  to  a  future  non-el  psycho-logics  with  content. 

E)  Between  different  forms  of  complex  adjustment  which  we  have  in 
common  with  the  primitive  man,  and  even  the  higher  animals,  and  reasoning 
which  starts  with  conscious  observations,  passing  to  descriptions  and  in¬ 
ferences  ,  . 

F)  Between  the  dynamic  process  of  relating  (‘thinking’)  on  the  un¬ 
speakable  semantic  levels,  and  the  verbal  expression  of  ‘relations’. 

G)  Between  the  use  of  negative  terms,  disagreement,  contradiction;  and 
self-contradiction.  In  a  A -system  contradictions  take  the  form  of  self- 
contradictions. 

H)  Between  el  ‘logics’  expressed  in  terms  of  ‘true’,  ‘false’,  and  modality, 
and  the  investigations  of  one-,  two-,  three-,  and  oo-valued  s.r ,  which  become 
a  general  theory  of  values ,  and  which  may  some  day  include  all  human  interests. 

I)  Between  the  inherent  circularity  of  ‘human  knowledge’,  which  must 
start  with  sets  of  undefined  terms,  and  so  start  with  some  knowledge,  and 
circular  definitions  or  explanations  which  define  or  explain  nothing. 

SUPPLEMENT  III 

This  list  of  suggestions  is  not  exhaustive,  and  in  principle  appears  as 
inexhaustible.  I  selected  only  a  few  topics  of  immediate  need. 

We  should  also  notice  that  because  on  objective  levels  we  deal  structurally 
with  absolutely  individual  stages  of  processes  and  situations  and  by  necessity 
we  speak  in  higher  order  abstractions  and  generalities  and  use  many  multi¬ 
ordinal  terms  (without  the  use  of  which  no  speaking  is  possible),  so  any  positive 
statement  about  the  objective  levels  must  be  only  probable  in  different  degrees, 
which  introduces  a  fundamental  and  entirely  general  A  principle  of  uncertainty. 
Heisenberg’s  restricted  principle  in  physics  appears  only  as  a  special  case. 
For  structural  reasons  we  must  preserve  determinism  but  because  of  (11-15)“ 
the  older  two-valued  determinism  must  be  reformulated  into  the  oo-valued 
determinism  of  the  maximum  probability.  The  einsteinian  introduction  of 
non-elementalism  in  physics  has  resulted  in  the  automatic  elimination  of  some 
semantic  blockages  in  the  younger  physicists.  Some  of  the  semantic  results 
and  triumphs  of  science,  besides  the  new  quantum  mechanics,  can  be  found  in 
the  latest  (free  from  identification  of  the  term  'time’  with  some  objectivity) 
new  entropy  of  Tolman.3 

To  sum  up,  we  find  that  although  the  primitive  man  or  the  'mentally*  ill 
may  have  some  reactions  of  orientation,  or  capacity  for  relating,  which  we  have 
in  common  with  the  higher  animals,  yet  these  do  not  involve  'reasoning*  in 
the  sense  defined  before.  Thus  a  boxer,  football  player .  ,  does  a  great  deal  of 
reflexive  relating  and  wins  his  match,  but  this  cannot  be  considered  as  reasoning 
in  the  strict  sense  as  used  in  a  A -system.  If  we  attempt  to  discuss  something 
with  a  primitive  or  'mentally'  ill  individual  and  write  down  his  processes  of 
relating,  we  would  have  to  conclude  that  he  uses  one-valued  semantics  of  identi¬ 
fication  of  many  values  into  one,  or  a  semantics  of  inclusion  by  which  'everything 
is  everything  else’.  The  ‘law  of  contradiction',  or  any  'excluded*  ‘third’,  or 
*n- th’,  practically  never  appears  in  our  sense,  yet  it  is  complicated  by  the  use 
of  positive  and  negative  terms,  to  which  any  meanings  connected  with  some 
identifications  of  higher  orders  may  be  ascribed.  Although  his  prevailing 
semantic  processes  appear  as  a  complete  and  literal  identification ,  yet  because 
of  the  general  orienting  and  relating  capacities  of  organisms  and  the  character 
of  terms  used,  it  would  not  be  easy  or  profitable  to  attempt  an  el  formulation 
of  his  'laws  of  thought*.  But  a  semantic  formulation,  as  given  above,  is  very 
instructive  and  comparatively  simple. 

Our  existing  el  ‘logic’,  besides  the  two-valued  type  of  formulation,  involves 
many  different  'philosophical*  elucidations,  which  instead  of  clarifying  the 
status  of  ‘logic’,  in  general,  tends  only  to  conceal  the  important  issues  involved 
in  non-elementalism.  The  role  that  identification  plays  in  a  given  individual 
appears  always  as  a  deciding  factor  in  his  adjustment.  Unfortunately,  at 
present,  the  sinister  identification  is  not  counteracted  but  fostered  or  even 
induced  by  the  structure  of  the  languages  we  use,  different  mythologies  .  , 
and  our  whole  educational,  economic,  social  .  ,  systems. 

The  two- valued  At  el,  three-dimensional  'logic*  does  not  apply  to  the 
world  of  events,  to  the  objective  levels  .  ,  and,  for  the  reasons  already  explained, 

A  PHYSICO-MATHEMATICAL  RIGOUR 

does  not  apply  to  the  study  of  the  foundations  of  mathematics.  It  applies  to 
a  large  extent  to  contentless  technical  mathematics,  including  so-called  ‘formal 
logic*  of  that  system. 

Formalism  when  free  from  identification  becomes  a  unique  comparative 
tool  in  search  for  structure;  formalism  with  identification  of  different  orders 
of  abstractions,  a  symptom  of  semantic  disturbances,  often  of  a  morbid 
character.  It  should  be  realized  that  we  may  have  one-,  two-,  three-.  ,  many-, 
and  oo-valued  orientations,  which  with  the  exception  of  one-valued,  we  should 
utilize  when  conditions  warrant  a  particular  use  iri  a  particular  case.  Thus  in 
mathematics,  for  the  sake  of  having  mathematics  as  a  standard  of  evaluation, 
we  select  a  sharply  two- valued  orientation  by  which  in  the  old  language  * A  is  B 
or  not  B’,  to  allow  sharp  statements  that  for  instance,  1  +  1=2.  If  we  would 
deliberately  postulate  that  1+1  may  sometimes  be  equal  to  2  and  sometimes 
not  equal  to  2,  we  would  have  forms  of  representation  which  would  apply 
perhaps  more  readily  to  science  and  life,  hut  mathematics  as  such  would  be 
impossible,  and  we  would  be  deprived  of  this  sharp  tool  for  evaluation. 

It  is  interesting  to  notice  that  mathematicians,  by  the  use  of  two-valued 
semantics ,  (not  ‘logic*,  because  an  el  discipline  cannot  be  ‘lived  through*  at  all 
by  non-heavily  pathological  individuals),  have  produced  the  most  important 
disciplines.  Thus  we  have,  for  instance,  the  theory  of  ‘variance’  (the  theory 
of  function),  the  theory  of  invariance,  the  differential  calculus,  the  1,  2,  3, 
4,  and  ^-dimensional  systems,  and  a  host  of  other  verbal  structures  similar 
not  only  to  the  world,  but  to  the  human  nervous  system.  These  results  give  us 
means  not  only  to  enlarge  our  mastery  of  the  external  world,  but  when 
generalized  into  a  non-el ,  ^-system,  give  us  the  means  for  the  mastery  of  the 
inner  world,  leading  toward  sanity. 

It  is  amusing  to  discover,  in  the  twentieth  century,  that  the  quarrels 
between  two  lovers,  two  mathematicians,  two  nations,  two  economic  systems  .  , 
usually  assumed  insoluble  in  a  ‘finite  period’  should  exhibit  one  mechanism — 
the  semantic  mechanism  of  identification — the  discovery  of  which  makes 
universal  agreement  possible,  in  mathematics  and  in  life. 
